WT01-B32-1IA031-000652-B044-74http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131320 text/html 137985HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:13:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:09:35 GMTContent-length: 137766 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Drugs and Their Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER I The Drugs and Their Effects by James V. DeLong A Primer on Psychopharmacology Drugs of Abuse A PRIMER ON PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY Psychopharmacology, as the term is used here, refers to thestudy of the interactions of drugs with the central nervoussystem (CNS), including physical, behavioral, and subjectiveeffects. The term is not always used so broadly; we have chosen acomprehensive definition because this brief paper is neitherdetailed enough nor sophisticated enough to require the finedivisions implied by more exact categorization into suchsubspecialties as neurophysiology, neurochemistry,neuropharmacology, psychopharmacology, neuropsychology, and soforth. As will become obvious, there are many areas in which basicknowledge about the mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugsdoes not exist. Our purpose here is to describe for laymen theframework within which such knowledge must be sought, and thedifficulties involved.* * Since this paper was written by a layman for laymen,technical terms and discussion have been avoided as much aspossible. In most cases where extended discussion would have tobe highly technical, the conclusions of experts on the presentstate of knowledge are set forth with a citation to thediscussion leading to these conclusions. Drs. Avram Goldstein,Norman Zinberg, Andrew Weil, Frederick DiCarlo, and Alan Greenall read earlier drafts of this paper. They prevented someembarrassing errors, but they are not to blame for any thatremain. THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I The nervous system is composed of millions of nerve cells(neurons) that are by no means homogeneous in structure. Some arevery long, even up to several feet; some are bushy, with -manyfibers reaching out to connect with other nerves; some are smalland simple. The cells do not interlock with each other at theends, where the impulse is transmitted from one to another. Thereare, instead, microscopic gaps, called synapses, between them,which must be bridged by the impulse. There are several ways to categorize the parts of the nervoussystem, each useful for different purposes. One division isbetween the CNS-the brain and spinal cord-and the peripheralnervous system, which is everything else. The peripheral systemis composed of nerve fibers extending out from cell bodiescontained within the CNS and, to some extent, of cell bodiesclumped outside of it but, of course, still connected. While theperipheral system has groups of fibers (nerves) and groups ofcell bodies (ganglia), it is simple compared to the CNS, whichconsists of millions of tightly packed neurons, fiber groups(tracts), and clumps of cell bodies (nuclei) with billions ofsynapses. The psychoactive component of the effect of drugs is due totheir effects on the CNS rather than on the peripheral system,and it is the CNS with which we are concerned. The peripheralsystem is relevant only insofar as research into the mechanismsof peripheral action casts light on the workings of the CNS. Another way of dividing the nervous system is by function. Thesomatic system includes both the central and the peripheralneurons that convey impulses from the sense organs, organize themin the brain, and deliver motor impulses to the skeletal muscles.The autonomic system governs the smooth muscles of theintestines, urogenital tract, and blood vessels; the heartmuscles; and the endocrine glands. In short, the somatic systemcontrols the body's response to the external environment; theautonomic system governs the internal environment. The autonomic system is further subdivided into two parts. Thesympathetic system generally mobilizes bodily resources foraction-it constricts visceral blood vessels so that more blood isdirected to muscles and brain, accelerates the heart beat,inhibits intestinal and gastric activity, widens the pupils ofthe eye, and secretes adrenaline The parasympathetic system isthe antagonist of these effects. It acts to conserve bodilyresources, usually by having effects that are the reverse ofthose of the sympathetic system. The parasympathetic system ismore specific than the sympathetic, however. While the lattertends to act diffusely, causing all the effects at once, theparasympathetic system can act independently on different organs. The differentiation between autonomic and somatic systems isclearest at the periphery of the nervous system. As one tracesthe systems toward the CNS, the distinction becomes more vague.In the main trunks of peripheral nerves, for example, the fibersof the different systems are bound together and can be separatedonly by tracing them to their terminations or on the basis ofsome differences in fiber types. Within the CNS centers, divisionof functions is always a matter of degree rather than of completespecialization. While some centers are concerned primarily withsomatic or with autonomic functions, the two are always closelycoordinated, and the separation is not complete. The CNS itself is not, of course, a random melange ofheterogeneous neurons. There are many different and identifiableparts to it-medulla, pons, cerebellum, midbrain, reticularformation, thalamus, optic tract, cerebral hemispheres, basalganglia, and so forth. For some of these, the functions arefairly well established; for others, they are not. To try todescribe these would be far beyond the scope of this appendix.For our purposes, it is enough to state the followingpropositions: There is much specialization within the CNS, in that a particular part will have a specific and identifiable function. (For example, the thalamus is a relay station, with impulses arriving from lower centers and being passed on to higher ones; the hypothalamus has the primary control over autonomic functions; the cerebral cortex contains the more complex psychological functions; and so on.) Each part consists of packed nerve cells with many connections to each other and to different parts of the brain. Many, if not all, functions involve more than one CNS center. It is easier to study motor or sensory functions, where CNS activity can be correlated with an output, than to study pure cognitive functions, where it cannot. PROBLEMS IN STUDYING THE CNS The study of the CNS is extraordinarily difficult. As KennethMoore states, "The human brain contains a complex ofmillions of nerve cells that are anatomically independent butfunctionally interconnected. An impulse starting in one neuroncan propagate throughout the nervous system over a variety ofpathways. The route taken is determined by the inbornorganization of the brain and by ongoing events that, because ofneural plasticity, can establish new circuits."' Obviously,the number of permutations possible in such a system would makestudy difficult, even if no other problems existed. Moore,however, goes on to list some of the major impediments toresearch on the CNS: Many ideas about neural functioning derive from study of the peripheral system, where most synapses are well defined in that only one synapse exists at a particular point. In the CNS, the cell bodies are covered with synapses. They are also closely packed among other cells (the glia), which may perform some neural functions even though they are not neurons. In each peripheral synapse only one chemical transmitter is thought to act. Each CNS nerve cell may be affected by several different transmitters. [Transmitters are discussed on pp.67-68.] Neural reactions occur in milliseconds and are hard to find and measure. The biochemical processes involved in peripheral systems can be studied in test tubes (in vitro) where tissue slices can be made to react. This is not true for studies of the brain, because brain neurons in vitro are in a resting state, disconnected from the other neurons that ordinarily determine their activities. While artificial stimulation can be applied, there is no way of knowing whether this corresponds to actions in the body. In particular, it is difficult to relate any in vitro reactions to such higher functions as thought or emotion. Because the different units of the CNS have different functions and anatomies, the biochemical reactions of any particular part are probably not the same as those of any other part. There is a unique blood-brain barrier between the blood and the brain that makes chemical manipulation of the CNS via injection into the bloodstream more difficult than is manipulation of other tissues. [The capillaries in the brain are somewhat less permeable than the capillaries elsewhere in the body.] The synapses are so densely packed that chemical manipulation by administration directly to the brain is much more difficult. Some brain structures are not accessible in a live subject because they are surrounded by other structures. If it is not useful to study them in vitro, and one cannot study them in situ, it is rather difficult to study them at all. When experiments are carried out in a live subject it is often necessary to stop a chemical reaction quickly so as to preserve the tissue at a particular point in the process. This is usually done by rapid excision and immersion in a low-temperature liquid. Since the entire CNS is surrounded by bone, it is difficult to perform this operation quickly enough. Some chemicals present in vivo may never be identified because they are destroyed too quickly.' This represents a formidable list of difficulties. And, sincepsychoactive drugs are usually fairly specific to the CNS-in thatthey affect the CNS without having much effect on other bodysystems-it is easy to see why knowledge of their sites andmechanisms of action is less than complete, despite intensivestudy during the past several decades. THEORIES OF PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS The present theory about the manner in which psychoactivedrugs operate is that they affect the transmission of the nerveimpulses across the synapses. This hypothesis is based upon moregeneral theories concerning the chemical nature of thistransmission. Researchers know that in a peripheral systemcertain chemical substances (acetylcholine in the somatic systemand norepinephrine in the autonomic) are associated with thestimulation of nerve impulses. These substances can also be foundin the CNS and appear to be correlated with activity levelsthere. Because nerve impulses are thought to be electrical in nature,the theory of their effect is as follows: A nerve impulse thatreaches the synapse of a particular neuron stimulates the releaseof a particular transmitter substance. This substance affects thereceptors of the adjoining nerve cell (the postsynaptic neuron),changes its electrical potential, and triggers an impulse withinit. Most of the transmitter substance is taken back into theneuron from which it came, although some of it is destroyed byenzymes or diffused by the blood. The postsynaptic nerve thenreturns to its original state. Psychoactive drugs may affect this sequence by stimulating orinhibiting the production of the transmitter substance, bycausing its release from storage, by affecting the process bywhich it is taken back into the neuron, or by stimulating orinhibiting its destruction. These processes have an effect on thelevel and type of activity in the CNS and a consequent effect onthe perceptions and activities of the body. Beyond this, it is difficult to say anything with muchcertainty. Some psychoactive drugs are associated with increasedCNS levels of particular substances that are thought to betransmitters, but the causation is not firmly established.Mandell and Spooner have pointed out that the evidence fortransmitter theory is in many ways startlingly indirect.' Theirfinal comment is: "Even on a neurochernical level, we musttalk about empirical correlates of behavioral states. Rigorousestablishment of the transmitter or modulator role of brainsubstances appears to remain for the future." The strongest evidence that a particular substance hastransmitter functions concerns acetlycholine Wh). Neuronssensitive to this substance are distributed throughout the brain,so that it can have excitatory or inhibiting functions, dependingon the region. ACh is difficult to study, because it does notpass the blood-brain barrier easily and is destroyed rapidlyafter artificial administration. Its effects on certain cells inthe spinal cord have been studied, but not much is known abouteffects at other synapses in the CNS. There is also fairly goodevidence that two catecholamines-norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine(D)-perform transmitter functions. Again, however, much of whatis thought about their action is derived from research with theperipheral system, and conclusions must be approached warily. NEand D, together with their degrading enzymes, are also located invarious regions of the brain.-' Some researchers believe that 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-11T),often called serotonin, is also a transmitter, but the evidenceis not as strong as for the substances already discussed. AsMoore states, "Despite years of active investigation, thefunctional significance of this amine remains obscure."' Thesubstance may excite, depress, or have no effect on neurons, butthe reasons for the differences are not known. It has nofunctions in the peripheral system and is thus even moredifficult to study than the other possibilities. A number of other substances may be transmitters, but theevidence is ambiguous. For example, the brain contains arelatively high concentration of free amino acids, some of whichmay have transmitter functions. And there are a number of otherpossibilities, such as histamine, substance P, Prostaglandins,and ergothioneine. MECHANISMS OF DRUG ACTION Even if the transmitter theory were certain and a connectionbetween transmitters and psychoactive drugs proved, there wouldbe the problem of understanding the mechanisms by which the drugsaffect the transmitters. This problem relates to the more generalpharmacological question of the manner in which drugs affectcells and to the basic pharmacological concept of receptor sites: . . . most drugs are thought to produce their effects bycombining with enzymes, cell membranes, or other specializedfunctional components of cells. Drug-cell interaction is presumedto alter the function of the cell component and thereby initiatethe series of biochemical and physiological changes that arecharacteristic of the drug.... The cell component directly involved in the initial action ofthe drug is usually termed ... its receptor., In its simplest form, the receptor-site theory is that, at thebasic site of action of any drug, there are cells or cellsurfaces that form molecular bonds with the drug molecules.Current theory is that these sites are stereospecific-it is notonly the chemical composition of the drug that determines whetherthe receptor can bond with it but its three-dimensional geometricshape as well. A cell surface might have, for example, three orfour different points of contact where different molecular bondscould be formed. A drug molecule must have a geometric shape thatallows proper subgroups of the molecule to come in contact withthese points for the formation of a firm bond. This theory of stereospecificity explains why drugs that arediverse in chemical structure may have similar effects (e.g.,morphine, methadone, and meperidine). Even though chemicalstructures are different, geometric structures can be similar. Incontrast, variations of the same substance with similar chemicalstructures but different geometric structures may not havesimilar effects.' The classic assumptions of receptor-site theory are: (1) Onemolecule of drug combines with one receptor site, (2) anegligible fraction of the total drug is combined, and (3) theresponse of the body to the drug is directly related to theproportion of available receptor sites that are occupied. The interaction between drugs and cells is governed by the lawof mass action. The molecules of a drug are constantlyassociating with and dissociating from receptor sites. At somepoint, for any given drug concentration, an equilibrium isreached where association and dissociation balance. Thedrug-receptor interaction, therefore, is dynamic, not static.Since most drug-toreceptor bonds are thought to be relativelyweak ionic bonds that are readily reversible, this concept ofdynamic interaction becomes important in understanding theprocess of antagonistic effects, blockade, and reversibility ofdrug action. All are based on theories about differences in thestrength of bonds formed by different drugs and on competitionfor receptor sites. Since these basic assumptions do not, however, explain all theobserved phenomena of drug action in many cases, including theaction of narcotic analgesics, various departures from the basicoccupancy assumption have been suggested. The most important are(1) that not only occupation of the receptor sites matters butalso the intrinsic "efficacy" of the drug; (2) that itis not the occupancy of the site that matters but the act ofoccupying, and that drug effect depends on the relative rates ofassociation and dissociation, and (3) that there are sparereceptors that may be occupied, although at a lower level ofefficiency, when the primary receptors are already occupied.These explain some of the otherwise unexplained phenomena, butthey leave other, different mysteries of their own.' Nor arethese questions likely to be settled soon. There are two ways to gain information about a receptor. Thefirst and only really satisfactory approach is to identify andisolate it. Then the investigation can follow establishedbiochemical and physicochemical procedures. Sequence analysis canestablish the primary structure of the macromolecules. Techniqueslike x-ray crystallography, high-resolution electron micrography,spectrophotometry, and analytical ultracentrifugation can yielddata from which the secondary and tertiary structure may bededuced. In the case of proteins, recent years have seen theelucidation of complete primary structures at an ever-increasingrate.... The second way of obtaining information about receptors isindirect. It has dominated pharmacologic research in the past.The approach is to draw inferences about a receptor from thebiologic end results caused by drugs. A powerful tool employedtoward this end has been the study of structure-activityrelationships (abbreviated SAR). A suitable biologic effect of adrug is chosen for study. A prototype drug, which elicits thecharacteristic effect, is then modified systematically in itsmolecular structure. Substituents are added or subtracted atvarious positions and in different steric configurations. Aseries of such chemically related drugs is known as congenericseries. By testing the members of a series and observing howbiologic potency is affected by each molecular modification, onemay ultimately draw conclusions about the precise mode ofcombination of a drug with its receptor surface.10 Unfortunately, the study of psychoactive drugs belongs in thesecond category. No one has found the receptor sites or knowswhich cells might be involved. Concerning narcotic analgesics,Goldstein says, "It must be remembered . . . that thereceptor, whose structural features are inferred from the SARstudies . . . is entirely hypothetical."11 Finally, theories of action at the receptor site say nothingabout the biochemical events in the CNS that constitute theeventual product of the interaction of the drug and the receptorsite. "Investigations of the mechanism of tolerance and ofthe mechanism of narcotic action have been hampered by the samedifficulty-that the biochemical alterations produced by the drugin the whole brain are unlikely to have much to do with thespecific biochemical changes that are responsible for the drugeffects at the sites of drug action."12 Jaffe makes a similar point. After reviewing the varioustheories and experiments on the effect of opiates on cerebralneural action, cerebral metabolism, and neurotransmitters, hesays: ... Unfortunately, knowledge of the functional role of theseveral postulated neurobumoral transmitter agents in the CNS isstill so limited and controversial that the demonstration of aneffect of morphine on them has not yet contributed significantlyto an understanding of either the neurophysiological andbehavioral effects of the drug or its mechanism of action .13 DRUGS OF ABUSE OPIATES The Drugs." Opium is a natural substance derived from onevariety of the poppy plant. It contains over twenty differentalkaloids with varying properties, constituting 25 per cent ofopium by weight. A few of these-primarily morphine and codeineare medically useful. In discussing opiate abuse, the specific drugs of concern arethe following: Morphine is a natural alkaloid constituting 10 per centby weight of the raw opium. Heroin. Because heroin is produced by chemicaltreatment of morphine with acetic acid, the technical name for itis diacetylmorphine. In terms of analgesic effect, heroin is alittle over three times as potent as morphine-for example, ittakes three milligrams of heroin to produce the same analgesiceffect as 10 milligrams of morphine. Although heroin is the principal opiate of abuse in the UnitedStates, most research has been done with the more readilyavailable morphine. In the opinion of experts, such research isapplicable to heroin if the dosage difference is considered,because heroin rapidly breaks down into morphine in the body.Thus, its subsequent pharmacological action is the same. Methadone is a synthetic opiate of approximately thesame strength as morphine. Meperidine is another synthetic opiate that is about 10to 20 per cent as potent as morphine. It is better known underits trade name, Demerol. While all four drugs are analgesic, euphorigenic, and in manyways fungible, there are some differences among them,particularly in maximal effect and duration of action. Throughoutthis paper, morphine is the primary subject. Importantdifferences in the characteristics of the other opiates arediscussed where relevant. Because of lack of information, two topics are not discussed.First, it should not be assumed that the effects andcharacteristics of raw opium are the same as those of morphine.It has been suggested that the mixture of many differentalkaloids in opium may have substantially modifying effects onthe action of any individual alkaloid, such as morphine.15 Thisis unproved; but-since the medical use of crude opium ended inthe Western world soon after 1850-there are no data either way.Secondly, it is possible to produce drugs from crude opium thatare stronger than morphine. For example, some derivatives ofthebaine, a nonanalgesic opium alkaloid, may be one thousandtimes more potent.16 The effects of such superpotent opiates havenot been studied and might differ qualitatively from those ofmorphine. Medical Uses. In the late nineteenth century, opium andmorphine were sometimes referred to by physicians as"GOM," "God's Own Medicine." They were usedfor asthma, dysentery, alcoholism, and a wide variety of otherdiseases-including the simple cough." In fact, the opiatesare effective cough suppressants, constipants, and tranquilizers,and, in an era lacking other drugs, their heavy use was natural. Today, however, since there are drugs without the addictivepotential of opiates that are equally, or nearly as, effectivefor most of these purposes, the medical use of opiates has becomeless common. Yet, the opiates are still the most effectivepain-killing drugs known to medicine, and large quantities ofmorphine and meperidine are used as such every year. Althoughthere is a continuing search for equally effective nonaddictivepain relievers, none has been found, and it may be that none willbe. For a time, some of the narcotic antagonists were believed tohave the desired properties; more recently, pentazocine wasthought promising. But the latest evidence indicates that theanalgesic qualities of these drugs are due to properties thatalso cause addiction. Physical Effects and Toxicity. The exact method bywhich morphine blocks pain is unclear. It does not appear toblock the transmission of the pain impulse through the nerves (asdo local anesthetics), because sensation and feeling are notaffected. For example, someone heavily dosed with morphine willstill be able to feel a touch or other relatively slightsensations. In addition, experiments have shown that a patient,even after being given morphine as a pain reliever, canaccurately determine the amount of pain he would be sufferingwithout the drug. What seems to change is the relationship of thesubject to the pain. Although he feels the pain and can tell howgreat it would be without the drug, he is not"bothered" by it. For these reasons, it is thought thatthe drug acts in the part of the brain that interprets the nervemessage." For a nontolerant individual, morphine is highly toxic. A doseof 100 to 200 mg. would be sufficient to cause a fatalrespiratory depression. This, like the analgesic effect, is aconsequence of the effects of the drug on the CNS rather than onother parts of the nervous system-morphine reduces theresponsiveness of brainstem respiratory centers to concentrationsof carbon dioxide." Tolerance to the respiratory effect increases rapidly, and noresearcher has yet found an absolute limit to the quantity ofmorphine that can be taken by a tolerant individual withoutcausing death. Some persons have been known to take as much asfour grams of morphine without adverse effect." No one has discovered long-term organic damage caused bymorphine. In autopsy, neither gross nor microscopic examinationof tissues shows evidence of such effects." Various studieshave followed the medical history of addicts over a substantialperiod of time, and, according to one of the studies, "whilethere is ample evidence that the aberrant way of life followed bymost heroin abusers has both acute and chronic medicalconsequences . . . there is insufficient scientific basis formaintaining that long-term use of opiates-in and of itself-isrelated to any major medical condition."" Addicts do, however, suffer from a variety of conditionsancillary to their general life-style and frequently die of viralhepatitis, bacterial infections, or other diseases. The deathrate of the addict population is not known, but it is usuallyestimated as about 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent per year."Malaria used to be common among addicts, until dope sellers beganusing quinine to cut heroin. Other deaths are often attributed toan overdose of heroin sufficient to cause respiratory depression.The possibility of an overdose is always present, because thequality of street heroin so varies that an addict may not knowhow much pure heroin he is getting in any purchase or even howmuch he is used to taking. Nevertheless, several experts have stated that overdose anddisease do not explain all addict deaths." In many cases,the dead addict did not receive more heroin than he was used toor should have been able to take, given his pre-existing level oftolerance. It is possible that some people have a specialsensitivity to heroin that takes the form of an idiosyncraticresponse to a single dose or that is analogous to an allergicreaction triggered by repeated use. However, there are no reportsin medical annals of persons having this reaction after receivingmorphine in a medical setting. Since morphine is used extensivelyin medicine, it would be expected that such a serious effectwould have been observed by this time. But there are also somereports of an unusually high death rate in England, where addictsreceive pure heroin. The English data on this are incomplete,however, and the causative factors have not been adequatelyanalyzed. Morphine does cause some physical effects, of uncertainsignificance. There are changes in excretion of epinephrine andnorepinephrine. Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is depressed.Stabilized addicts become hypochondriacal, apathetic, and boredwith other people and have fitful sleep." Whether theseresponses signify permanent change or damage, however, is notclear. In all animal species, including man, morphine has anexcitatory effect as well as an analgesic one. This pattern isnot unique to morphine; it is also true, for example, ofbarbiturates and alcohol. The reasons are not well understood.The effect could be due to be a difference in the speed withwhich the drug affects different CNS centers, with certaininhibiting centers being affected first. Or some CNS centersexcited by the drug may react first, with the responsesubsequently suppressed by later-reacting centers. Various animalspecies, however, react to morphine in different fashions. Thepredominant effects in monkeys, dogs, rabbits, and rats, as wellas in man, are sedative, while in horses, cats, and mice they areexcitatory. Man is considerably more sensitive to the effects of morphinethan are most other animals. For example, the effective analgesicdose for a man is about 0.2 mg. of morphine per kilogramof body weight. In a dog it is at least ten times as high."This raises a number of questions about the meaning of animalexperimentsspecifically, about the relative importance of directphysical (as opposed to psychological or psychoactive)consequences of taking the drug. The opiates vary in several ways affecting consumerpreferences, abuse potential, and the ability of an addict tostabilize his dosage and lead a relatively normal existence. Themajor elements of variance are as follows: Peak effect. This is usually calculated as the maximumanalgesic effect that can be obtained from a given dose of thedrug as measured by the ability to relieve pain. Sometimeseuphoric effect is measured directly through the observation ofphysical correlates of drug taking or through verbal responses totests designed to determine the degree of euphoria. It isgenerally assumed, although not indisputably proved, that thepeak of analgesic effect and the peak of euphoric effect are thesame. Duration of action. This is a more diffuse concept,because it could mean the duration of relief of a given amount ofpain or the duration of the peak effect. Generally, as used inthe sources, it seems to mean the length of time afteradministration before the drug user begins to feel withdrawalsymptoms. Sometimes, however, the phrase "duration ofanalgesic action" is used. The exact meaning of this term isnot clear, since it would seem to depend on the level of pain tobe relieved. Empirically, it seems to be about the same as thegenerally accepted "duration of action" to withdrawal. Method of administration. All opiates can be takenorally, subcutaneously (by injection under the skin),intravenously (by injection into the vein), intramuscularly (byinjection into the muscle), or through the nasal passages. Theeffects will differ somewhat, depending on the method used. Inaddition, the effect of different methods of administrationvaries with the drugs. For example, when taken orally, methadoneretains its efficacy more than morphine. Potency and power. The power of a drug is defined bythe upper limit of the absolute effects it can produce. Thepotency of a drug relates to the dosage that is necessary toproduce a given effect. Thus, heroin is not more powerful thanmorphine, because both can produce the same effects; but it ismore potent, because it produces equivalent effects at lowerdoses. Viewed narrowly, potency might seem of little significancemedically, because one could always give more of the less potentdrug. Few drugs, however, are so specific that they have only oneeffect, and the differences in potency may not be uniform for alleffects. For example, morphine is an analgesic producing a sideeffect of nausea. Heroin is a more potent analgesic, but thisdoes not mean, necessarily, that it would be more potent incausing nausea. As stated above, potency of an opiate is measured in terms ofanalgesic effects, and this is thought-and only thought to equaleuphoric effect. But, given the lack of knowledge about themechanisms by which opiates work, it is not impossible that thevarious drugs affect different CNS centers in various ways, andthat therefore qualitative variations occur in psychoactiveexperiences. Also, superpotent opiates, such as the thebainederivatives, might have distinct effects that have not shown upin comparisons of existing drugs. Although the basic facts about the opiates are not entirelyclear, the following facts are known: " Morphine, taken subcutaneously, has its peak effect inone half to one hour. Its duration of analgesic action is four tosix hours, and the decline from the peak is rapid. When it istaken intravenously, the peak effect is reached sooner and issomewhat greater. Morphine is effective when taken orally, butthe peak effect is much lower-perhaps only 20 per cent to 30 percent of the subcutaneous peak. The duration of action of oralmorphine is at least twelve hours and may be as long astwenty-four. Heroin is generally thought to act about the same asmorphine. Some animal experiments, however, indicate that heroincrosses the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine. Ifthis is true for humans, its peak would come more rapidly thanthe morphine peak. Addicts sometimes cannot distinguish betweenheroin and morphine when they are injected subcutaneously; mostare able to do so, however, when the drugs are takenintravenously. Methadone, taken subcutaneously, has a peak effect inthree hours and a duration of analgesic action of about twelvehours. When methadone is taken orally, the peak is about 70 percent as great and occurs after four hours. Duration of actionafter oral administration is around twenty-four hours, and thedecline from the peak is slow. Intravenously injected methadonepeaks almost immediately, and the duration of action is lessenedaccordingly. Subcutaneous meperidine has a duration of analgesicaction of only two to four hours, and the peak is reached in lessthan an hour. With oral administration, the peak is about 50 percent as high. Intravenous administration lessens the time neededto reach the peak effect. Addicted medical personnel, who haveready access to meperidine, tend to prefer that drug to the otheropiates, possibly because of its fast action and relatively highpotency when taken orally. The dosages of the different drugsrequired to produce the same peak effect when administeredsubcutaneously are: morphine-10 mg.; heroin-3 mg.; methadone-10mg.; and meperidine-80 to 100 mg. Addiction. Three aspects of opiate use are particularlyimportant to an understanding of addiction and its consequences:(1) the nature of the euphoric psychoactive effect; (2) thedevelopment of tolerance to the drugs; and (3) the development ofphysical dependence, with physical withdrawal symptoms, when thedrug is removed. Psychoactive Eflects. Opiates cause a mental cloudingcharacterized by drowsiness, an inability to concentrate,lethargy, and reduced visual acuity. As was mentioned before,stabilized addicts may be hypochondriacal, withdrawn, bored withother people, and less motivated. Opiates, however, do not causeslurred speech or significant motor incoordination." In somepersons, they produce a very pleasant euphoria, but this reactionis not universal. Many people find that dysphoria, consisting ofmild anxiety and fear, results instead and may be accompanied bysuch unpleasant effects as nausea and vomiting. Dysphoria isextremely common at first use, even among those who eventuallybecome addicted; indeed, to attain euphoric effects at first maybe an atypical response. In some subjects, the initial responseis a desire to engage in increased activity." Goldstein states: It is well known . . . that most people react with extreme displeasure to an initial dose of an opiate narcotic, both nausea and dysphoria being common responses. It was once supposed that administration of opiates in legitimate medical practice might "create" addicts. There is no valid evidence of this claim, although it is true that the incidence of addiction is high in the health professions, where there is easy access to addicting drugs. It is quite obvious, however, that of the many millions of patients who receive morphine, an insignificantly small fraction ever seek to take the drug again. Likewise, in the population as a whole, very few of those who could obtain morphine or heroin illegally, if they wished, become addicts.30 Despite this, people start taking opiates because they like orexpect to like the effect. It is not known whether those whobecome addicts have a different response to the initial use,experiencing some atypical internal metabolic change, or whetherthey simply have more persistence. For those who find that they have an affinity for the drug,the euphoric effect is very powerful, although its exact natureis almost indescribable. This effect can be divided into twoparts. The first part is the "rush"-the initial impactof the drug on the nervous system. This appears to occur onlywhen the drug is taken intravenously, and not when it is takenorally or subcutaneously. Sexual images are frequently used todescribe this effect: "It was like a huge orgasm";"It was like coming from every pore." The second partis the follow-up sensation of being "high." Describingthis is more difficult, however, for there is no commonexperience from which a pattern can be drawn. Basically, theeffect appears to be that of an emotional analgesic, suppressinganxiety and care, although the analgesia is not a mere deadeningof emotion. On the contrary, it can be a profoundly heightenedsense of well-being. Whether everyone who persisted in opiate usewould attain this euphoric state, or whether such a state is aselective reaction based on psychological factors, remains anunanswered question. There is no model of the addict personalityas such that satisfactorily distinguishes between users andnonusers; nor is the psychic explanation the only one available.Some researchers believe that opiate addiction has aphysiological basis, and that the attempt to find psychologicalvariables is therefore pointless. The varying theories on thissubject are discussed in the last part of this section. Tolerance. A person can become accustomed to a drug'seffects and thus require steadily larger doses to produce aconstant effect. This phenomenon is common with many drugs inpharmacology, not just drugs of abuse. Tolerance is not the sameas physical dependence and often occurs without it. It is animportant aspect of opiate addiction, because the addict's needto take steadily larger doses to achieve a euphoric effectelevates the cost of his habit, causing increased criminalactivity and presumably increasing any long-term toxic effectsthat may exist. Tolerance does not always develop uniformly to all aspects ofa drug's action. For example, while tolerance in time develops tothe sedative effects of barbiturates, the amount needed for alethal dose remains constant. On the other hand, tolerance seemsto develop to all the major effects of narcotics. It "ischaracterized by a shortened duration and decreased intensity ofthe analgesic, sedative, and other CNS depressant effects as wellas by a marked elevation in the average lethal dose.""As observed in the section on toxicity, limits on tolerance havenot yet been determined. Tolerance takes two forms. First, the body to some extent mayincrease its ability to metabolize or excrete the drug. Whilethis has not been shown to be directly the case for the opiates,it has been shown that brain morphine levels become lower intolerant than in nontolerant animals eight hours after drugadministration. Secondly, constant brain levels of morphine willproduce less effect in tolerant than in nontolerant animals,indicating that there must be some form of adaptation within theCNS at the cellular level. These two forms of tolerance arecalled "drug disposition" and "metabolictolerance," respectively. Several theories have beendeveloped to explain them-they are too complex to discusshere-only to come to the same conclusion, namely, that "theprecise mechanisms underlying these two forms of tolerance tonarcotics are not known."" In a study of drug addiction as a social problem, an importantissue is the speed with which tolerance develops. If, forexample, tolerance develops rapidly, then whenever an addictincreases his dose for a few days-or possibly even for a day-hewill become tolerant to the increased dose and must thereforemaintain at least that level of habit from then on to avoidwithdrawal symptoms. Experimental evidence indicates thattolerance does develop rapidly. Human subjects have been broughtto a level of 500 mg. of morphine within ten days. Tolerance tomorphine begins with the first dose administered and buildsrapidly; tolerance to heroin lags for a few days, then followsthe same course. In animal experiments, it has been found that adog, when given morphine continuously for eight hours, will beginto recover from behavioral depression by the end of that time,indicating a rapid development of tolerance to a givenconcentration of morphine in the body." It is not clear whether tolerance increases arithmetically orgeometrically. For example, although a nonaddict might find 100mg. of morphine fatal, none of the sources indicates whether adose of 200 mg. would be fatal to an addict who was alreadytaking 100 mg. per day, or whether a dose of 600 mg. would befatal to an addict on 500 mg. Another important question is how long tolerance lasts afteran individual has been abstinent for a time. Generally, it isbelieved that tolerance disappears when the drug taking stops.There are numerous street stories to the effect that addicts willvoluntarily detoxify themselves to the point where their habitbecomes such as to be economically supportable. Yet, in oneclassic experiment rats were found to retain substantialtolerance to morphine for almost a year after the lastadministration of the drug." The final important aspect of tolerance is the phenomenon ofcross@tolerance between drugs. Morphine, heroin, methadone, andmeperidine are at least partial substitutes for one another, andtolerance to one confers tolerance to equipotent doses of theothers. Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. The term"physical dependence" or "physical addiction"means that an organism requires a drug for "normal"physical functioning. Abstinence will result in physical symptomsof varying types and severity until the body adapts to the newstate. The term "addiction," however, is eschewed byexperts in the drug-abuse field. Since drug abuse is dependent onan intermixture of physical and psychic variables, and sincedrugs of abuse are often used in such low doses that the degreeof actual physical addiction is questionable, experts feel thatit is more correct to use the terminology "drug dependenceof the morphine type" or "drug dependence of thebarbiturate type."" Even the withdrawal symptomsdeveloped by abstinent users may be psychogenic in origin. Inaddition, users of drugs that are not powerfully addictivephysically (e.g., tobacco) sometimes have a more difficult timein abstaining from use than do users of addictive drugs. Forthese reasons, it makes some sense to blur the distinctionbetween physical and psychological dependence when discussingdrug abuse as a social problem. This should not induce the belief, however, that there is nosuch thing as physical addiction or physical dependence. Clearly,an opiate user becomes physically dependent in the sense thatabstinence will cause severe and well-documented physicalsymptoms. These include restlessness and drug craving, followedby yawning, lacrimation, runny nose, perspiration, fever, chills,vomiting, panting respiration, loss of appetite, insomnia,hypertension, general aches and pains, and loss of weight. Theintensity can be "nearly unbearable" if the dosage ishigh enough." Several researchers have commented that withdrawal fromopiates-as well as from barbiturates and other hypnotics-ischaracterized by rebound hyperexcitability; that is,during withdrawal, the physiological systems that were depressedby the drug are in a state of increased excitability. It is notclear, however, whether all withdrawal symptoms are reboundeffects, or whether this is a general,rule applicable to otherdrugs as well." Withdrawal from the various opiates has been studiedscientifically. As a general rule, the intensity and duration ofthe withdrawal symptoms are related to the intensity and durationof the drug's action. Thus, morphine withdrawal starts within afew hours (four to ten, depending on the user's tolerance level),peaks rapidly (around the second day of abstinence), thendeclines sharply. Most of the obvious symptoms disappear withinseven to ten days. Meperidine withdrawal reaches its peak inabout twelve hours and lasts only four or five days. In someways, however, its peak intensity is greater than that ofmorphine withdrawal. Withdrawal from methadone follows a slowercourse. No symptoms appear until about the third day. After this,they increase steadily until between the sixth and the ninth day,when they peak at a level less than two-thirds as intense as thepeak for morphine withdrawal. Thereafter, they decline slowly,not disappearing until after about two weeks. The maximumintensity of methadone withdrawal is always tolerable, but itsduration may be the factor that causes some addicts to regard thewithdrawal from methadone as nastier than the withdrawal frommorphine." The disappearance of the gross symptoms does not mean,however, that the withdrawal is complete. Increasingly,researchers are finding some effects that persist for many weekslonger, and empirical observations show that the relapsevulnerability is greatest immediately after withdrawal. Dr.William Martin divides the abstinence syndrome into early andprotracted abstinence. In human experiments, subjects werestabilized on 240 mg. of morphine, then withdrawn slowly over aperiod of three weeks. They showed the general withdrawalsymptoms discussed above, although in milder degree than occursafter sudden withdrawal. The symptoms persisted to some extentfor six to nine weeks. After this, the protracted abstinencesyndrome emerged, characterized by minor physical differencesthat persisted through the twenty-sixth week of withdrawal. Theclinical significance of this is not clear, for it has not beenproved that protracted abstinence contributes to readdiction. Butcareful experiments with rats have shown that postaddict ratshave a greater liking for narcotics than do rats that have neverbeen addicted. This preference lasts four to six months afterwithdrawal." While no limit on the development of tolerance to opiates hasbeen found, there does seem to be a limit on the degree ofphysical dependence that can be developed, as measured by theintensity of the withdrawal symptoms. For morphine, this maximumis reached at dosages of around 400-500 mg. per day; higher dosesdo not result in more intense withdrawal symptoms." This points up the fact that tolerance to, and physicaldependence on, a drug are not the same thing. The body can evendevelop a tolerance to drugs on which it does not becomephysically dependent. But tolerance is always present whenphysical dependence develops. In the case of the opiates, the speed with which physicaldependence develops seems to lag only slightly behind the speedof the development of tolerance. A patient receiving therapeuticdoses of morphine for a week or two will not have recognizablewithdrawal symptoms spontaneously after discontinuance, but thesecan be precipitated by an antagonist after only two or three dayson morphine. By similar means, withdrawal has been caused in adog after an eight-hour infusion of morphine. Goldstein believesthat physical dependence is probably initiated with the firstdose of the drug." At that stage, of course, withdrawalwould be so mild as to be unnoticeable, but it seems possiblethat a single dose could create a craving for the drug, eventhough the physical genesis of this feeling would be unknown tothe user. As might be expected, there are no definitive explanations forthe phenomenon of physical dependence. Its existence is simplydefined by the presence or absence of withdrawal symptoms. Jaffestates: At present no single model is able to account for all the complex phenomena that are seen with the many classes of drugs producing tolerance and physical dependence. It is likely that multiple mechanisms are involved, and that each model may reflect a facet of the truth. For the present the most heuristic models are the best ones .42 Goldstein also observes that, although "the mechanism ofthe development of tolerance and physical dependence is stillunknown.... there has been no dearth of theoreticalspeculation."" It appears that dependence is due to"drug-induced alterations at the cellular level, with themost prominent changes occurring in the CNS . . . these changesare not limited to any one part of the CNS but occur throughoutthe entire neuraxis."" The sources are silent, however, on two important questionsabout physical dependence and tolerance. The first of theseconcerns stabilization dosages. It is well known, for example,that an addict can be stabilized on a drug, since taking a givenamount will result in neither withdrawal nor euphoria. But thereis little information on how much latitude there is in thestabilization dose. That is, if a morphine addict is used to 100mg., can he take anywhere between 90 and 100 mg. without becomingaware of the difference; or is his tolerance of deviation fromhis normal dose less than this? Also, are there variationsbetween the opiates, depending on peak intensity and duration ofaction? Generally, experts believe that it is harder to stabilizeon such short-acting drugs as morphine and heroin than onmethadone. The short, sharp peak and rapid decay characteristicof the morphine effect may mean that a dose insufficient toproduce euphoria soon results in bodily concentrations too low toprevent withdrawal. Another important question is whether the euphoric effectdisappears at high levels of opiate tolerance. That is, will anaddict who is used to 500 mg. of morphine achieve euphoria if hetakes 550 or 600 mg.? The fact that the severity of withdrawallevels off at around this dose might indicate an upper limit onthe ability to obtain a euphoric effect. None of the sourcesfound, however, presents evidence to support either possibility. Finally, it is well known that physical dependence on a givenopiate can be satisfied by any other opiate. This is thepbenomenon of cross-dependence, described by Jaffe as follows: Cross-dependence may be partial or complete, and the degree is more closely related to pharmacological effects than to chemical similarities. A broad-spectrum drug such as methadone, which depresses the entire range of functions that are similarly affected by morphine, can completely substitute for morphine or meperidine. However, meperidine, which has a narrower spectrum with less autonomic and sedative effects, does not entirely prevent the autonomic manifestations of withdrawal from morphine. In general, any potent narcotic analgesic, regardless of chemical class, will show cross-dependence with other narcotic analgesics . . . . 45 METHADONE MAINTENANCE A successful method of treating heroin addicts is to maintainthem on daily doses of methadone. More detail about the programsusing this technique is contained in Staff Paper 3. The pharmacological basis of methadone maintenance has beencovered in preceding sections, albeit implicitly. The significantcharacteristics are as follows: Methadone is a synthetic opiate. Its administration to a heroin addict will either prevent the withdrawal symptoms caused by abstinence from heroin or end them if they have already developed. Methadone and the other opiates exhibit cross-tolerance. A person tolerant to one of them is tolerant to equipotent doses of another. The action of oral methadone lasts about twenty-four hours. A methadone program can administer the drug once a day, rather than three or four times, as would be necessary if morphine or heroin were used. High doses of methadone (e.g., about 80 mg. or more) will prevent withdrawal, block the euphoric effect from an injection of heroin, and prevent the "drug hunger" (defined by Dr. Jerome Jaffe as "a felt sense of physical abnormality") felt by addicts who have become abstinent. Lower doses of methadone (e.g., 50 mg.) will prevent withdrawal and the drug hunger. They will not block the euphoric effect of an injection of heroin, although presumably some minimum quantity of heroin is required. The success rate for programs using low doses is approximately the same as the rate for those using high doses for addicts in treatment six months. Experts believe that blocking the euphoria is not so important as preventing the drug hunger. No significantly harmful side effects of methadone have been discovered. The effects of methadone on the heroin addict have beendescribed diagrammatically by Dr. Vincent Dole."' Fig. 1. Diagrammatic summary of the functional state of atypical "mainline" heroin user. Arrow shows therepetitive injection of heroin in uncertain dose, usually 10 to30 mg but sometimes much more. Note that the addict is hardlyever in a state of normal function ("straight"). Fig. 2. Stabilization of the patient in a state of normalfunction by blockade treatment. A single, daily, oral dose ofmethadone prevents him from feeling symptoms of abstinence("sick") or euphoria ("high"), even if hetakes a shot of heroin. Dotted line indicates the course ifmethadone is omitted. Fig. 3. The induction of narcotic tolerance by the gradualincrease of methadone dosage. Two typical patients are shown: onestarting with tolerance (from previous use of heroin) and theother with little or no tolerance (e.g., recently in hospital orjail). The right-hand ordinate shows the total daily dose ofmethadone (given in divided portions during the first months);the left-hand ordinate indicates the degree of narcotic blockadeon an arbitrary scale (O to ****). Some important questions about the nature of methadonetreatment remain unanswered. Because methadone and heroin can besubstituted for each other in so many ways, it would seem logicalthat their effects would be cumulative, and that the addict onmethadone would be able to achieve the euphoric state with asmaller dose of heroin than he normally used. Certainly, otherdrugs, such as alcohol and the barbiturates, have cumulativeeffects. Yet, many of the discussions about methadone treatmentevidently assume, with actually saying so, that their effects arenot cumulative. The explanation may lie in the pharmacological principle thatthe body's response to many drugs is logarithmic, not linear.That is, as the dosage is increased, steadily larger incrementaldoses are required to produce a constant increment of response.Heroin and methadone may be cumulative in their effects, but theadministration of methadone elevates the recipient to a point onthe dose-response curve where only very large additional amountsof heroin have discernible impact." In this context, it is important to remember the suggestionmade earlier that there may be a limit of 120-150 mg. per day ofheroin (the equivalent of 400-500 mg. of morphine) above whichadditional amounts of the drug have no euphoric effect. If thislimit is roughly true, even with substantial individualvariations, then many methadone programs may simply boost theaddict to the point where he cannot attain euphoria. Either hereaches this limit, which would be true at about 180 mg. per dayof methadone, or he reaches a dosage that leaves too small amargin between his tolerance level and this limit for a euphoricdose. Lower doses (e.g., 50 mg.) would not approach the euphoriclimit, but they might shift an addict to a point on thedoseresponse curve where the heroin dose he is used to takingwould not have any euphoric effect. Physiological Factors Underlying Addiction. It iscommonly assumed that the causes of addiction are psychological,and that there is no inherent physical predisposition toaddiction. There is, however, no experimental evidence that wouldrule out the possibility that drug addiction, or at leastvulnerability to drug addiction, has a physiological basis. AsGoldstein says: Certainly socioenvironmental reasons can be found, ex postfacto, to explain each case of addiction to heroin, thebarbiturates, or alcohol, or of habituation to lysergic aciddiethylamide [LSD], marijuana, nicotine, or amphetamine. But mostpeople afflicted by the same adverse environmental circumstancesdo not seek escape through drug abuse. Despite the presentpaucity of evidence, therefore, the possibility should beentertained that the characteristic effects of psychotropic drugsupon mood, which underlie the development of drug abuse, may beat least in part genetically determined. Investigation in this field has not yet transcended thedifficulties of designing experiments free of self-selection orother kinds of bias, and of working out methods suitable forquantitation of subjective responses. It has been found, forexample, that housewives who drink large amounts of coffeeresponded entirely differently to a test dose of caffeine in aplacebo-controlled experiment than did housewives who never drinkcoffee. The coffee drinkers felt more alert and had a sense ofwell-being after caffeine, as compared with placebo. Thenon-drinkers obtained significantly fewer effects of this kind;on the other hand, caffeine made them feel nervous and"jittery." But it is not known if the group habituatedto coffee would have reacted in the same way at an earlier age,before their first exposure to caffeine. Large individualdifferences are observed in the sensitivity of people to thesleep-disturbing actions of caffeine, but again it is not clearwhether or not these are innate differences, independent of anyprior exposure to caffeine. One investigation on the coffeedrinking and smoking habits of monozygotic and dizygotic twinssuggests that these two kinds of drug-seeking behavior aresubject to genetic influences.411 Dole has suggested that an addict may have an underlyingneurological vulnerability to addiction that is triggered byopiate use." More recently, he has indicated that opiate usemay induce a metabolic change that will cause the body to craveopiates thereafter." But he is not optimistic about thepotential of research on the question, given the present lack oftestable hypotheses that might explain it." Another theory concerning physiological propensity toaddiction is more complex. Martin has suggested that an addicthas a particular physiological vulnerability to stress eitherbefore he takes his first narcotic drug or after he starts takingit. In Martin's view, this vulnerability is not lost afterwithdrawal from the drug, and stress situations will trigger aphysiological reaction that results in a craving for the drug.Martin believes that there is some experimental evidence for thisview and is more optimistic than Dole about possibleresearch." THE HALLUCINOGENS The Drugs." LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) is a synthetic drugdiscovered in 1938. It is closely related to the ergot family,and ergotamine tartate, used in treatment of migraine headaches,can be used as raw material in the manufacture of LSD. Mescaline, an alkaloid of the peyote cactus, wasisolated in 1896. It is about .025 per cent as potent as LSD inproducing an altered state of consciousness. But it is probablyjust as powerful. Psilocybin and psilocin are the active alkaloidsof the Mexican magic mushroom and are about 1 per cent as potentas LSD. DOM (also called STP) and MDA are other hallucinogenschemically related to both mescaline and amphetamine. DMT (dimethyl tryptamine) is a short-acting hallucinogen. Medical Uses." Although there are no recognizedmedical uses for the hallucinogens at present, some of them havebeen, and are being, used experimentally for a variety ofresearch and therapeutic purposes. LSD and mescaline, forinstance, have been used for research on mental illness and inpsychotherapy. Since certain effects of these drugs mimic thesymptoms of schizophrenia in some ways, it has long been thoughtthat study of these effects will yield insights into the natureand causes of psychotic states. A few experiments have beenconducted in which terminal-cancer patients are given LSD inorder to make the "waiting for death" period moremeaningful. Through the LSD experience, the patient learns tolive in the "here and now," taking each day as it comesrather than dwelling on his past. Alcoholics and drug addictshave also been given LSD as part of more comprehensive courses oftreatment. Physical Eflects and Toxicity. LSD is effective whentaken orally, which is the usual method of administration. Someusers claim to have taken it nasally or by injection and statethat injected LSD produces a powerful rush. It produces somesomatic effects that are sympathomimetic, such as pupillarydilation, increased blood pressure, tremor, nausea, muscularweakness, and increased body temperature, but these effects areusually minor. The major effects are almost entirely on theCNS." The effective dosage is quite small. Perceptual changes, themost dramatic result, can be produced by as little as 251 mcg.(micrograms). (I gram = 1,000 milligrams = 1,000,000micrograms.)" The standard dose taken by LSD users isprobably around 200 mcg., although the variability of streetdrugs makes it difficult to be accurate. Although no human deaths as a result of the pharmacologicalaction of LSD have been reported, animal deaths due torespiratory failure have occurred in response to massive doses.At present, it is not clear whether there is a fatal dose forhumans, but it is clear that the ratio of the lethal dose (ifthere is one) to the therapeutic dose is very high. It isdifficult to determine the significance of animal experiments forhumans, because different species have markedly differentreactions. Some animals, for example, have been found to beresistant to LSD; mice, in particular, detoxify the drug quickly,and the half-life (the period within which half the drug ismetabolized) in a mouse is only seven minutes. In a human, thehalf-life is approximately three to three-and-a-half hours; thetotal duration of action of the drug is about twelve hours .57 Despite claims to the contrary, there is no reliable evidencethat LSD causes birth defects. The early studies on this havebeen discredited, and no definitive work has been donesince." One exhaustive study concluded that pure LSD, inmoderate doses, "does not produce chromosome damagedetectable by available methods."" This problem isdifficult to study, because that part of the population that usesLSD heavily is also likely to be malnourished, careless abouthygiene and prenatal care, and prone to a variety of physicalproblems. Since LSD seems to be a relatively specific drug, inthat it acts primarily on the CNS and has few peripheral effects,it is not particularly logical to expect that it will producebirth defects. It would be more sensible to study the largenumber of legal drugs that have massive effects on various bodysystems, because they would be more likely to affect thereproductive system as well. The stress on birth defects as apossible result of LSD appears to be motivated more by the desireto prevent its use than by the desire to prevent birth defects. Psychoactive Eflects." The hallucinogens do notproduce hallucinations in the classic sense-it is rare for a userto see things that are not there. Rather, perception is altered:Afterimages are prolonged and overlap with present perceptions;objects seem to move in a wavelike fashion or melt; and sensoryimpressions become overwhelming. Synesthesia-a state where colorsare "heard" and sound is "seen"-is common. Perhaps more important to the user than these perceptualeffects are the subjective effects. Time may seem to pass veryslowly; self-boundaries appear to disintegrate; and the user sooncomes to feel a sense of oneness with the universe. There mayalso be a sense of unusual clarity, and one's thoughts may beginto assume extraordinary importance. Moods may change radically,from gaiety to depression, from elation to fear, or vice versa. Many users attach great meaning to their experiences. Someregard the use of LSD as a form of psychotherapy, since theybelieve it increases one's self-knowledge andself-awareness, largely through the recall of old and hithertoburied memories. Others may go further and emphasize the mysticaland religious aspects of their drug-induced feelings. Some of the possible, long-term psychological reactions wereexamined in an experiment in which LSD was administered topreviously naive subjects. The subjects were given a number ofpsychological tests-before taking LSD, immediately after theexperience, and six months later." All changes were quitesmall; the main findings indicated a negative correlation betweenthe use of LSD, on the one hand, and aggression, competition, andpreference for structure and conformity, on the other. Rather, apositive correlation with an increase in aesthetic appreciationwas found. One result of the experiment was proved particularlyilluminating: Fifty-nine per cent of the subjects who had beengiven 200 mg. of LSD thought that the drug had had lastingeffects on their personality, even though the tests"provided only minimal supportive evidence."" Inthe control groups, none of those given 25 mg. of LSD, and 13 percent of those given 20 mg. of amphetamine, had similar feelingsabout the experience. While other researchers have found anegative correlation between chronic LSD use and aggression andcompetition," there is a self selected quality to thevoluntary chronic user that did not exist in the aboveexperiment. The major short-term risk of taking LSD is the "badtrip," a term used to describe several different types ofadverse experiences. A mild adverse reaction can mean only thatthe images and feelings during the experience were unpleasant. Atthe other extreme, a serious panic reaction, accompanied byimmense anxiety and fear, may occur. Bad trips are probablycommon, but most of them do not reach the severe level. Under clinical conditions, serious adverse reactions appear tobe rare. In one study, for instance, it was found that 25,000administrations of LSD to 5,000 people in clinical settings hadresulted in only 0.08 per cent serious reactions in experimentalsubjects and 0.34 per cent in subjects undergoing therapy."Serious" was defined as causing either suicide or asuicide attempt or a psychotic break lasting more thanforty-eight hours. 14 Of course, most LSD use does not take place under clinicalconditions; some observers believe that such use may thereforeresult in higher percentages of adverse effects, for severalreasons. To begin with, putative LSD may be heavily adulteratedwith substances ranging from strychnine to methamphetamine. Also,use of LSD has been an illegal and deviant activity; this maymake users anxious and more susceptible to bad reactions. It isalso possible that a higher proportion of street users havepsychological factors impelling them toward deviant behavior thanwould be true of an experimental population. Age differences mayalso be an important factor in adverse reactions (a theory in thefield is that young users are more likely to lack the experienceand identity that enable a more mature person to handle thepowerful impact of the drug) . One could, of course, argue the precise opposite on almostevery point made in the last paragraph. For example, street usersmay seek out warm and supportive settings that reduce theincidence of bad reactions as compared with the clinical setting.LSD use may be deviant in the context of the larger culture butnot in the subculture within which most users live. Older people,generally more rigid in their attitudes, may resist the drugeffect and panic, while younger people, being more flexible, mayaccept -the drug experience more easily. Contact with asubculture in which LSD is common may reduce fear of the drug,regardless of age, more than will clinical reassurances. At present, there is no rational way to choose between thesearguments. It should be emphasized that reports of large numbersof serious adverse reactions among street users have not beendocumented. What evidence there is consists mostly of anecdotes. Chlorpromazine, a powerful tranquilizer used in the treatmentof psychiatric illness, will counter the physical effects of LSDalmost immediately. If, however, the LSD user is having apanic reaction, it may continue in spite of the chlorpromazine.Physicians familiar with this phenomenon believe thatchemotherapy may prolong panic because of the anxiety itsadministration arouses in the patient. "Talking the patientdown" in a calm manner is the preferred treatment .115 There are some long-term risks associated with LSD use. Insome individuals, prolonged negative effects are associated withuse of hallucinogens; cases of serious depression, paranoidbehavior, and prolonged psychotic episodes have been documented.Whether the hallucinogens cause these effects is not clear. LSDmay serve only to precipitate them in someone who is about tohave such a problem anyway. The frequency of such effects is notknown. Another possible long-term effect of the hallucinogens is theflashbacks recurrence of some aspect of the drug experience vhenthe subject is nor under the influence of the drug. The flash)ackencompasses a wide range of possible LSD-like perceptual orsubjective effects of varying degrees of severity and duration,lasting from a few minutes to several hours and occurring withindeterminate frequency. The user is not affected betweenexperiences. Causation has not been definitely proved, however,and it could be that a controlled experiment would find similarexperiences in a non-LSD-using populations" The most common type of flashback recorded is the recurrenceof perceptual distortion; the rarest is the recurrence of alteredphysical sensation; and the most dangerous is the recurrence ofdisturbing emotion and panic. (This may be hard to distinguishfrom the depressive reaction or schizophrenic episodes discussedabove.) The last two types of flashbacks are more likely to occurafter a bad trip than after a good one. Assuming that flashbacks are caused by LSD, the mechanismresponsible is a mystery. The theory that LSD persists in thenervous system is not compatible with its known short life, andthe theory of a persistent, undiscovered metabolite isincompatible with the wide variations in onset and duration.Nevertheless, there is no lack of other theories, ranging fromsemipermanent changes in the optic pathways, to learned responsesto stress, to dissociative reactions. Generally, it is probablypsychological rather than chemical, but, given the lack ofknowledge about the relationship between psychological andchemical events, this conclusion does not tell very much." There is no information on the incidence of flashbacks, theextent to which they occur after only one LSD experience, or therelative frequency of the different types. The effects of the other hallucinogens are similar to those ofLSD. Mescaline, which lasts as long and has about the sameeffects, although it is less potent, seems to be the usergs drugof choice. It is unclear whether this preference is due to thepublicity regarding possible birth defects caused by LSD or tosome subtle difference in effect. It may just as well be due tothe belief of many users that natural substances are superior tosynthetics, a factor that may also account for the preference forthe mushroom hallucinogens. This question has not been studiedclinically, and it is difficult to know the effects of naturalhallucinogens, since they are rarely available. Most streetmescaline is either LSD or LSD plus speed or some otheradulterant. DOM (STP), MDA, and some other drugs are a cross betweenhallucinogens and amphetamines. The duration of action of DOM issixteen to twenty-four hours, and rough observations indicatethat the incidence of panic reactions and flashbacks has beenhigher than that associated with LSD. The physiological effects(rapid heart rate, dry mouth, dilated pupils) are also morepronounced. It is possible that, when the drug first appeared,users were more prone to panic, because they were not preparedfor the long duration and greater physical reaction." Jaffestates that low doses of DOM give some of the subjective effectsof LSD without the perceptual or hallucinogenic effects, althoughthe drug has typical psychedelic action at higher doses." According to some sources, MDA causes an LSD-type reaction forthe first six to eight hours, but it also has amphetaminelikeeffects that persist for a longer time. Other reports are thatMDA is sui generis, with LSD-like subjective feelings butwithout the perceptual distortion of LSD ordepersonalization." DMT is a hallucinogen whose effects last only forty-fiveminutes to an hour. It is sometimes called "thebusinessman's lunch." Tolerance. Tolerance to the hallucinogens developsrapidly. If taken daily for three or four days, LSD will cease tohave any substantial effect." The tolerance does not appearto be so closely tied to the dosage as in the case with otherdrugs to which tolerance develops-that is, it seems that onecannot achieve the desired effect simply by increasing the dose.The sources, however, are ambivalent on this. Sensitivity returnsafter a few days of abstinence. There is cross-tolerance among LSD, mescaline, and psilocybinbut not between any of these and the amphetamines." There isno information on DOM, MDA, or DMT on this point. Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. Hallucinogens suchas LSD and mescaline do not produce physical dependence, andthere are no withdrawal symptoms after discontinuation."Again, there appears to be little information on DOM, MDA, orDMT; at least, there are no reports of dependence or withdrawal.They are likely to be about the same as LSD. Mechanisms of Action. A number of CNS effects of LSDare known; the manner in which LSD causes these effects, however,is still not known. LSD and the other hallucinogens interferewith the production and action of serotonin (also called 5-HT or5-hydroxytryptamine) in the brain. This is an important bodysubstance with significant effects on many organ systems. But,since the functions of serotonin in the CNS are not known, thisdoes not represent substantial progress in understandingLSD." CANNABIS" The Drugs. Cannabis sativa, the hemp plant, growsalmost everywhere in the world. It flourishes in hot, dryclimates, and it is generally believed that plants produced insuch regions have the most pronounced psychoactive effects. Marijuanaconsists of the chopped leaves and stems of the cannabisplant. It is usually smoked, but it can be taken orally. Hashishis formed of resin scraped from the flowering top of thecannabis plant. It, too, can be smoked or eaten, and it isthought to be about five to eight times as potent as marijuana.Some experts believe there are qualitative differences in effectas well as simple differences in potency. Kil, bhang, andgania are other preparations of cannabis used in variousparts of the world. Their potency lies between that of marijuanaand that of hashish. The most important psychoactive ingredient of cannabis isknown to be delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), but thepossibility of additional ingredients exercising some effect hasnot been precluded. Cannabis is a difficult drug to classify. Although itis often referred to as a mild hallucinogen, it does not havemany of the effects associated with hallucinogens, and probablyhas a different mechanism of action altogether. It also has somesedative effects but lacks many of the other characteristics ofthe sedative hypnotics. With good reason, therefore, it isusually classified as unique." Medical Uses. There is no accepted medical use for cannabisin the United States. In the past, especially during the latenineteenth century, it was quite popular among European andAmerican doctors, who prescribed it for a variety of ailmentsranging from menstrual cramps to migraine headaches. It was thusused generally as a mild anodyne (pain killer) ortranquilizer-but it may have more specific effects as well." By the early twentieth century, the use of cannabis formedical purposes had declined, largely because of inconsistencyin the potency of the drug. Since cannabis was cultivatedin many places with wide variations in climatic and soilconditions, no physician could be sure of potency of any givenbatch. This made it difficult to predict results. It alsoinhibited research, since nonreplication of scientific findingsmight invariably have been due to differences in the drugs used. Another problem was that there was no satisfactory way toadminister the drug for medical purposes. Smoking is not amedically acceptable method, because the doctor cannot know howmuch of the drug is being inhaled and absorbed. Oraladministration is possible, but effects are delayed. Moreover,since neither the plant material nor the resin is soluble inwater, injection is difficult. Thus, as other drugs becameavailable-particularly the barbiturate sedative hypnotics, whichbegan appearing on the market in 1903-cannabis wasreplaced. Almost no research has been done on the drug since the latenineteenth century, and government policies made such researchimpossible from 1937 to about 1968. Whether cannabis hasunique medical uses or is in some ways superior to commontranquilizers now in use is therefore an open question. A revivalof interest is now taking place, however, in the medicalcommunity. For example, several doctors are using cannabis totreat migraine headaches, and some research is being done intoits effectiveness as a treatment for epilepsy. Certain variantsof THC may lower the blood pressure of hypertensive people." The isolation and synthesis of THC-achieved in the early1960's-has promoted such research by making consistency in dosageconceivable for the first time. In addition, NIMH has a projectunder way to cultivate cannabis in Mississippi, with theobjective of providing drugs of constant quality to researchers.But there are still problems: For example, there is some evidencethat THC is subject to oxidation, and that the potency of cannabismay therefore change over a period of time that varies withstorage methods. Also, THC is expensive to synthesize and remainsin short supply. Recent work has developed at least one watersoluble derivative of THC with a pharmacological profile similarto that of the original drugs. This should aid research further. Physical Effects and Toxicity. The immediate physicaleffects of cannabis on man are mild. Heart rate isincreased moderately. There is a dilation of the conjunctivalblood vessels (i.e., a reddening of the eyes) and sometimes anincrease in heart rate. There appear to be no changes inrespiratory rate, pupil size, or blood-sugar level. After asingle inhaled dose, measurable physical effects reach a maximumwithin half an hour and diminish three to five hours later."When cannabis is eaten, the effects are delayed forseveral hours, and symptoms may persist for up to twenty-fourhours. As discussed in the next section, subjective effects of highdoses of the cannabinols may be similar to those of LSD. This hasled some to classify them as mild hallucinogens. Physical effectsare not the same, however, because cannabis does not havethe stimulating effects of LSD and has sedative properties thatLSD lacks. There is no cross-tolerance between the cannabinolsand the hallucinogens." At present, there is no reliable evidence of organic damage,and the most that can be said against cannabis is that theeffects of long-term or heavy use have not been ascertained. Tobe sure, heavy, long-term smokers of cannabis developbronchial disorders, but these seem no different from thedifficulties experienced by heavy smokers of tobacco. Reports oflong-term brain damage are suspect, at best. For one thing, theyderive from studies of cannabis users in underdevelopedcountries, such as India and Morocco. These studies, furthermore,are skewed by the fact that they used inmates of mentalinstitutions as subjects and assumed a causative relation if theyfound that the inmates had been users of cannabis. Scientificprotective devices, such as control groups and blind studies,were lacking. The recent crash program of federal research hasnot filled this gap, and many experts do not expect that it willdo so. In this view, gross organic damage would have been foundbefore now, and long term subtle damage is difficult to studyretrospectively. The lethal dose of THC for humans has not been determined, butit is known that the cannabinols are not very toxic: There hasyet to be a report of a human death due to an overdose of THC.Animal experiments have found that the 16thal dose for rats isbetween 800 and 1,400 milligrams of drug per kilogram of bodyweight for oral administration. Extrapolating from studies inmice, the ratio of the lethal dose to the effective dose forhumans would be about 40,000 to 1. (The effective dose is thatamount necessary to produce clinically desired effects. For THCin humans, it is about 50 micrograms per kilogram.) By way ofcomparison, the ratio for barbiturates is about 10 to 1" Recent research has found that injected THC has a half-life inthe body of fifty-six hours, and that traces can be found in theurine for up to eight days. There is also a possibility that itmay accumulate in lung or fat tissue." The clinicalimplications of these facts, however, are not known. Psychoactive Effects. The general effect of cannabisis "a subtle mood change not easily perceived by thenovice."" The most common mood encouraged by the drugis a sense of increased well-being, but this is heavily dependenton the setting and expectations of the user. The nervousness thatmay accompany first use, for example, can negate any reaction tothe drug. Set and setting help to produce a wide range ofreactions and may be more crucial determinants of the effects of cannabisuse than those of most other drugs." The effectsdescribed below are those observed in clinical trials andobtained from interviews with users. One important effect is the enhancement of the senses.Sensitivity to colors, sounds, patterns, textures, and taste isgreatly increased. Perception of space and time is distorted inways that can be either pleasing or disconcerting. In particular,time passes very slowly. Inhibitions may be relaxed in a mannerreminiscent of the effects of low doses of alcohol. The subjectmay develop a sense of being in a fantasy or dreamlike state (aneffect achieved also by sedatives and anesthetics). In clinical experiments, large doses of THC have producedLSD-type experiences, but this requires quantities of THC far inexcess of the concentrations found in organic cannabis. Real hallucinationsdo not occur. The dose-response curve of THC has not yet been established;nor have systematic comparisons of THC and LSD been made. Significant adverse reactions to cannabis are rare, butthey do occur. They are more common when strong forms, such ashashish, are used. There are four types that may result: (1) simple depression, (2) a panic state, (3) toxic psychosis,and (4) psychotic break. Of the four, the simple depression reaction is the mildest andmost common. Its genesis is not known. People may be respondingidiosyncratically to pharmacological effects of the drug; or thecannabis may intensify pre-existing but suppressedpsychological states or traits. It is likely, also, that thedifferent explanations might each account for some of thedepressions seen. In any event, the reaction ends spontaneously. The panic reaction occurs when a user interprets the use oreffects of cannabis as a threat to life or sanity. It ismost likely to occur in subjects with no prior drug experiencewho are ambivalent toward drug use and possibly fearful of policearrest. Verbal and personal support by peers is the mosteffective therapy; hospitalization and the use of tranquilizersare usually contraindicated unless the person is highlyagitated." Many panic reactions have been misdiagnosed as examples oftoxic psychosis-a condition in which the presence of toxins inthe body causes organic malfunction in the cerebral cortex and aresultant psychotic state. This reaction is even rarer than thepanic reaction and ends when the toxins are flushed from thesystem. A user is vulnerable to such a reaction when consuming cannabisin concentrated forms, especially if the drug is mixed withfood and drink. The effects are delayed while the drug is beingabsorbed, and the user cannot use the effects of the drug as ameasure of when he has had enough. In the view of some experts,smoking cannabis allows the user to regulate consumptionin reaction to the immediate effects of the drug's passing intothe blood stream via the lungs. The view that differences in reaction to the two methods ofadministration are due to control of dosage can be questioned,however. Dr. Andrew Weil states: This theory of autotitration sounds nice, but I do not see it happen much. Most marijuana smokers I know smoke as much as they are handed. What is interesting is that one reaches some sort of ceiling in smoking: beyond a certain point, one does not get any higher, only more sedated. With oral ingestion, on the other hand, one can easily get into the toxic range. These observations suggest pharmacological differences between the two routes of administration.86 The use of cannabis may also trigger a psychotic breakin individuals who have normal psychological histories. Althoughevidence is scarce, the degree of risk is probably very small. Arecent study reviewed twelve cases of cannabis-related psychoticbreaks arising over a ten-month period among soldiers stationedin Vietnam. Only two of the twelve had "significantpsychiatric histories and diagnosis of personalitydisorder." In all cases, the reaction occurred after thefirst use of cannabis and was self limiting, in that thecondition cleared spontaneously." Since about 30 per cent ofthe 500,000 American soldiers in Vietnam at the time had probablyconsumed cannabis at least once, often in potent form, theincidence seems low. Other data support this conclusion. During a fifteen-monthperiod, approximately 30,000 persons were treated at the HaightAshbury Clinic for a variety of medical and psychiatric problems.An estimated 95 per cent had used cannabis. No case of apsychotic break was recorded." The risk of a psychotic break may be higher for users who havea history of mental disorder. There is some evidence to supportthis, but there are no statistical data on the degree to whichsuch population is at greater risk than "normals." Tolerance. Cannabis appears to have the unusualproperty of "reverse tolerance," in that regular usersare more sensitive to the drug than novices. This characteristichas been conventional wisdom within the drug culture for sometime; it is supported by a recent scientific study that usedradioactive isotope tagging to detect THC in body tissues severaldays after the drug had been injected. The conclusion was thatTHC may accumulate in the body, so that a regular user mayalready have a "basic dose" and require only a small,additional amount to obtain a psychoactive effect." It is not known whether pharmacological tolerance to cannabisdevelops. Because of the "reverse tolerance"effect, experts have assumed that there was no such tolerance;but, if the effects are cumulative, then "reversetolerance" in users could be accompanied by pharmacologicaltolerance. For example, when synhexyl, a potent synthetic cannabisderivative, is administered, tolerance develops in four tosix days." Physical Dependence. There is little evidence thatphysical dependence develops with the consumption of cannabis,and no significant withdrawal symptoms accompany cessation ofuse. If dependence of any kind develops, it is probablypsychological, but even this appears to be minimal." Mechanisms of Action. The way in which cannabiscauses CNS effects is not known. Additional Sources. A number of comprehensive reviewsof marijuana have recently been published, taking up many of theabove issues in greater depth. Some of these are U.S. Government, Secretary of Department of Health, Educationand Welfare, Marihuana and Health: A Report to Congress, January31, 1971 (GPO, 1971) Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology, AReview of the Biomedical Effects of Marijuana on Men in theMilitary Environment (Bethesda, Maryland, December, 1970) Lester Grinspoon, Marihuana Reconsidered (HarvardUniversity Press, 1971) Leo E. Hollister, "Marihuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, CLXXII, No. 21 (April, 1971) THE MAJOR STIMULANTS The Drugs." This category of drugs includes thosethat have the effect of stimulating physical and mental activityand of providing a feeling of such stimulation to the user: Amphetamines are synthetic drugs that are part of thegeneral category of sympathomirnetic agents-a group of drugswhose effects resemble the response to stimulation of certainnerves of the sympathetic nerve system (hence"sympathomimetic"). They are CNS stimulants. Methamphetamine is a close relative of theamphetamines. The major distinction is that it has a differentratio between central effects and peripheral actions than do thebasic amphetamines. Small doses of methamphetamine produceprominent central stimulant reactions without significantperipheral effects. Cocaine is an alkaloid of the coca plant. In generaleffects, it is quite similar to the amphetamines. Methylphenidate (Ritalin) is a mild CNS stimulant,between caffeine and the amphetamines in its effects. Phenmetrazine (Preludin) is also a sympathomimeticagent. Its effects are almost indistinguishable from those ofamphetamines. This section discusses amphetamines primarily, as theprototype. Significant differences are noted as relevant. Medical Uses." The amphetamines are used to treata rare condition called narcolepsy-the inability to stay awake.They are also used in the treatment of obesity because of theircharacteristic of depressing the appetite centers, but theresults in this area are unimpressive. Amphetamines are useful inthe treatment of children with hyperkinesis. This condition,which is also called minimal brain dysfunction, is one in which achild shows an inability to concentrate, a deficiency in motorskills, a low frustration level, and often an abnormal EEGpattern. Quasimedical uses are very common. Amphetamines increaseshort-term physical and mental performance and are widely used bypeople who desire this effect, such as students and athletes.They are also used by people who have become dependent on orhabituated to them to maintain their normal level of functioning. Cocaine is not used medically for any of the above purposes,but it is used as a local anesthetic. Ritalin is effective in treating hyperkinesis and, because itis milder than the amphetamines, may be the drug of choice." Physical Effects and Toxicity. In different relativedegrees, sympathomimetic agents have the following majoractions:" A peripheral excitatory action on such smooth muscles as thosein blood vessels supplying the skin and on salivary and somesweat glands; A peripheral inhibitory effect on other types of smoothmuscles, such as those in the wall of the gut, on the bronchialtree, and on the blood vessels supplying the skeletal muscle; Acardiac excitatory action that increases heart rate and force ofcontraction; Certain metabolic actions; CNS excitatory actions, such as respiratory stimulation andothers. Amphetamines follow this scheme. Blood pressure is increased,and the smooth muscle responses, while somewhat unpredictable,are as indicated. The amphetamines are more potent in their CNSeffects than other drugs in the group, and it is through theeffects on the CNS that they stimulate respiration, depress theappetite, and reverse fatigue. The results of an oral dose of 10to 30 mg. of amphetamine (the standard therapeutic dose is 10mg.) are wakefulness, alertness, decreased sense of fatigue,elevation of mood with increased initiative, confidence, andability to concentrate, elation and euphoria, and an increase inmotor and speech activity. Prolonged use or heavy dosage isfollowed by mental depression and fatigue. Cocaine has the same effects as the amphetamines. The majordifference is that the effects of the amphetamines last severalhours, while those of cocaine seem to last only minutes."Ritalin has less motor effect on motor and mental activities thando the amphetamines. Some CNS effect is produced by doses thathave little effect on respiration and blood pressure." The amphetamines can be quite toxic. Severe reactions haveoccurred with only 30 mg., and death has resulted from 120 mg. ofinjected amphetamine. The range is wide, however, and doses of400 to 500 mg. have been survived by nontolerant individuals.Death from overdose is quite rare, possibly because the ratio oflethal to effective psychoactive dose is high for a tolerantuser." Cocaine is toxic because the central stimulation that is theimmediate effect of the drug is followed by depression of thehigher nervous centers. Death from respiratory depression occurswhen the vital medullary centers are sufficiently depressed. Thefatal dose of cocaine has been estimated to be about 1.2 gramstaken at one time, but severe toxic effects have been reported ondoses as low as 20 mg." The basic symptoms of amphetamine poisoning are extensions ofits normal therapeutic effects on the CNS, the cardiovascularsystem, and the gastrointestinal system. A fatal dose ends inconvulsions and coma. Cerebral hemorrhage is a common autopsyfinding, but it is rarely massive. "Pathological findings inboth man and animals are generally nonspecific and show pulmonarycongestion and often congestion of other organs including thebrain.""' Amphetamines are usually taken orally, but they can beinjected. Cocaine is not effective when taken orally, but it canbe snorted and absorbed through the mucous membrane or takenintravenously. Medically, cocaine is only applied to bodysurfaces as a local anesthetic; it is not injected or usedinternally. The major, long-term toxic effect of amphetamine use is aparanoid psychosis that is often indistinguishable from aschizophrenic reaction. This can occur after continued use oreven after an extremely heavy single dose. It usually disappearswithin a week if the individual stops using the drug. Cocaine cancause the same condition even more rapidly. Whether these drugs cause long-term organic damage to the bodyis at present unknown. Some experts who have worked withamphetamine users believe that there is a long-term deteriorationthat is explicable only in terms of organic damage. At present,however, this has not been definitely established. In animalexperiments, death often results from continued administration ofmethampbetamine, but the reason appears to be that the animal'sdisinterest in food, combined with its hyperactivity, results ina malnourished conditi6n that leaves it vulnerable to infection.There have been some preliminary reports attributing arterialdisease to methamphetarnine use, but these have not yet beensubstantiated and should not be accepted until further evidencedevelops. Hepatitis is very common among amphetamine users. This is tobe expected when hypodermic needles are used without propersterilization, but its incidence goes even beyond the levellogically attributable to this cause alone. Some consideration isnow being given to the possibility that amphetamine is itselfdirectly toxic to the liver. No clinical evidence on thispossibility has been developed, however, and it remains only apossibility."' Psychoactive Effects. When taken orally, amphetaminesproduce an elevation of mood and feeling of power and intensitythat many persons find quite pleasurable. The drugs increaseconcentration and physical and mental performance and reducefatigue. Some users claim that orgasms are delayed and made moreintense when they occur, but no objective experiments have beendone. The drugs produce the same effect even when takenintravenously. In addition, the user obtains a "rush"that is reputed to be different from, although related to, theeffect obtained from opiate injection. Again, sexual analogiesare often made by users. It is difficult to know whether the rushis a product of the drug itself or of the process of intravenousinjection. Some users actually prefer impure methamphetaminebecause of the belief that the impurities cause a faster, moreintense rush."' As the dosage increases, the experience seems to become morefragmented. Increased ability to concentrate turns either into acompulsion to do repetitive tasks over and over or into a totalfocusing of attention on some object or toy. Heavy users have acompulsion to take mechanical objects apart and a similarcompulsion to try (unsuccessfully) to put them together again.Such repetitive behavior occurs in animals as well as inhumans."' Eventually-and fairly predictably-heavy amphetamine use duringa limited period of time will result in paranoid ideation and thetoxic psychosis discussed above. To some extent, users are awareof this aspect of amphetamine use and can make allowances for itduring the experience. They will not act on moderate ideas ofpersecution or visual illusions. If the run continues longenough, this control will be lost. Some heavy users may become chronically psychotic, in thatthey exhibit psychotic symptoms even when not taking the drug.The California experience is that normal functioning returns overa period of six to twelve months, although the user himself mayfeel some residual disablement .104 Cocaine has roughly the same effects as amphetamines in termsof creating feelings of well-being, euphoria, and power.According to the accounts of users, these feelings are evenstronger with cocaine than with the amphetamines, but reliableevidence is unobtainable. Tolerance." Tolerance to most effects of the amphetaminesdevelops rapidly, and very high dosage levels can be reached. Aspeed user on a run may inject as much as a gram of the drugevery two or three hours around the clock for several days.Whether this is drug disposition or cellular tolerance is notknown. The development of tolerance is not uniform, however, andthe ability to withstand what would otherwise be a fatal dosedoes not confer tolerance to the toxic psychosis. It is not certain that tolerance to cocaine develops. Thereare reports of very large doses-such as 10 grams per day-butindividuals seem able to tolerate the same doses after a periodof abstinence as before. it is known that the liver is extremelyeffective at detoxifying cocaine and can process a lethal doseevery hour. There are no reports of cross-tolerance between cocaine andthe amphetamines, but cross-tolerance between amphetamine and theother stimulants has been reported clinically. Physical Dependence. For a long time, it was believedthat there were no withdrawal symptoms from amphetamines andtherefore no physical dependence. At present, it is thought thatthe prolonged sleep, lassitude, and depression that followdiscontinuation of the drug are greater than would beattributable to the preceding loss of sleep and weight. These maybe withdrawal symptoms. In addition, the percentage of REM sleepincreases after discontinuance of amphetamine, returns to normalwhen amphetamine is given, and rises again when amphetamine iswithheld. This meets the criteria for a withdrawalsymptom."' The sources are silent, however, on the extent towhich these symptoms are dose-related. Some experts in the field believe that amphetamines are farmore dangerous than the opiates. This is related not only to thetypicality of the euphoric effect but also to the problems oftolerance and stabilization. Dr. Weil elaborates: In fact, amphetamine dependence is more serious than narcotic dependence because it is inherently less stable. When a person begins using a tolerance-producing drug, he must soon face the problem of trying to stabilize his use in order to keep his life from being disrupted. More than any other class of drugs, the amphetamines foil the user's attempt to reach equilibrium with his habit because they produce such powerful and unrelenting tolerance. Consequently, users develop erratic patterns of use such as "spree shooting," alternation with barbiturates and, eventually, with heroin. The high correlation of amphetamine use with impulsive and violent behavior is consistent with this pharmacological instability.107 Because intensive use of amphetamines is a relatively recentphenomenon, there is little information on such problems asreaddiction vulnerability, physiological bases of abuse, orcomparative success of different methods of treatment. There isno treatment comparable to methadone, but neither is there anyparticular evidence that such treatment is needed. The pattern ofheavy amphetamine use is probably too hard to sustain for anextended period of time anyway, and there is increasingindication that heavy amphetamine users eventually turn to"down" drugs, such as heroin or barbiturates."' Mechanisms of Action. There are several theories aboutthe mechanisms of the CNS effects of the amphetamines, most basedon analogies to their peripheral effects, but none isdefinitive."' While the effects of all the drugs aresimilar, the mechanisms may be different; for example, there areprobably significant differences between the amphetamines andcocaine."' BARBITURATES AND TRANQUILIZERS The Drugs."' Barbiturates and tranquilizers aresedatives (calming agents), hypnotics (sleep-inducing agents),and depressants. The category encompasses a wide range of drugsof different families. For example, over 2,500 barbiturates havebeen synthesized, and at least twelve are in common clinical use.In the area of nonbarbiturate hypnotics, Sharpless liststwenty-three commonly used drugs belonging to ten differentfamilies. In addition to these two groups, there are a number ofmajor tranquilizers that are used in the treatment of psychiatricdisorders. More is known about these drugs than about those discussed inprevious sections. This is in part because they have been in wideuse for a long time, and in part because most of them have moregeneral effects than do other drugs of abuse. Drugs of thiscategory act on a number of bodily systems besides the CNS, andthese other systems are more easily studied. This sectiondiscusses the effects of the drugs only insofar as these arerelevant to their abuse potential. The major drugs involved are as follows: Barbiturates are derivatives of barbituric acid; theywere first used medically in 1903. The major abused drugs in theseries are secobarbital and pentobarbital. Meprobamate (Equinil, Miltown), glutethimide (Doriden),chlordiazepoxide (Librium), and diazepam (Valium) are CNSdepressants belonging to several different families. Medically,they are regarded as anti-anxiety agents-not hypnotics-and theyand similar drugs are called the minor tranquilizers. One group of powerful tranquilizers, the phenothiazines(Chlorpromazine), are not covered. While they are in commonuse, especially for the treatment of serious mental illness, thisclass of drugs does not appear to be abused."' There is nosatisfactory explanation of why they are not attractive to drugabusers. Obviously, their psychoactive effects must differsignificantly from those of barbiturates or the minortranquilizers, but the nature of these differences is unexplored. The discussion here centers on barbiturates-the most powerfuland often abused drugs-and brings in others as relevant. Medical Uses."' The barbiturates are used ascalming agents and as sleeping pills. Some of them are also usedas anticonvulsants in the treatment of certain types of poisoningor epilepsy. The tranquilizers are used in any situation wherethe patient will benefit from an anti-anxiety drug. They are notsleep-inducing, except insofar as insomnia may be caused byanxiety. Both are widely used in the practice of medicine. Physical Effects and Toxicity."' The barbituratesare general depressants of a wide range of cellular functions inmany organ systems. They are not general anesthetics oranalgesics, however, and will not prevent or relieve pain. (Someof the ultra-shortacting barbiturates are anesthetics wheninjected, but this is a minor exception.) They are respiratorydepressants, and in high concentrations they have direct effectson the cardiovascular system. Most of the peripheral effects-theeffects directly on the organs themselves-occur only atconcentrations of the drug that exceed those necessary to affectthe CNS and are thus relatively rare. "The CNS isexquisitely sensitive to the barbiturates, so that, when thedrugs are given in sedative or hypnotic doses, direct actions onperipheral structures are absent or negligible.""' Theeffect on the CNS can range from coma to mild sedation, dependingon the particular drug, the method of administration, and thedose. In some individuals, and in some circumstances, low doseswill act as a stimulant rather than a sedative. It is not clearwhether this depends on the mental set of the user or on thepharmacological phenomenon that the first effect of a drug issometimes on brain centers that regulate and inhibit excitatorybodily functions. For short- and intermediate-acting barbiturates, the hypnoticdose is 100-200 mg., which will give six or seven hours of sleepin the proper environment. The sleep is like physiological sleep,except that the proportion of REM phase is reduced. (Theamphetamines also reduce REM.) The usual sedative dose is 30-50mg., given two or three times daily. The duration of action varies with the particular barbiturate.Some will last only ten or fifteen minutes, some for more than aday. Performance degradation, however, may last longer than overteffects. A 200-mg. dose of secobarbital (which is known asintermediate in its duration) may cause decreased performance tento twenty-two hours later. The aftereffect of the drug may behyperexcitability, even though functioning is, in fact, stillimpaired. Taken in large quantities, barbiturates can cause death. Thelethal dose varies, but it can generally be assumed that anythingover ten times the normal hypnotic dose administered at one timewill cause severe poisoning. Moderate poisoning is strikinglysimilar to alcoholic intoxication, with slurred speech, poorreflexes, and the rest of the well-known syndrome. Severepoisoning is characterized by a deep coma, with respiratorydepression, falling blood pressure, shock syndrome, kidneyfailure, and other complications. The long-term effects of barbiturate use seem to be in somedoubt. The pharmacology books mention only the results of severeintoxication, not the effects of chronic use. At the same time,it is known that alcohol and the barbiturates have manycharacteristics in common and are to some extent substitutes foreach other. Barbiturates will suppress the withdrawal symptoms ofalcohol and vice versa; the intoxications are similar, and so arethe withdrawal symptoms. In the formal literature, abuse of thetwo kinds of drugs is linked as "drug dependence of thebarbiturate-alcohol type.""' The destructive effects oflong-term heavy alcohol use are familiar, and some authoritiesbelieve that barbiturates may have very similar effects on thecells of the liver and brain. Presumably, our knowledge of thetoxicity resulting from long-term but moderate use ofbarbiturates is in the same limbo as our knowledge of comparableuse of alcohol. Psychoactive Effects. The literature contains numerousdescriptions of the effects of barbiturates on outward behavior.Intoxication may cause sluggishness, slowness of speech andcomprehension, bad judgment, exaggeration of basic personalitytraits, moroseness, or irritability."' The sources do not contain a description of the subjectiveeffects, however, and the nature of the "high" involvedin heavy use is less discussed than is the case for any of theother drugs of abuse. The general effect seems to be one oftranquility and peace. How this compares with an opiate high isnot clear. At doses only slightly in excess of the therapeutic dose, theeffect may be one of excitation and mood elevation rather than oftranquilization. A combination of barbiturates and amphetamines produces moreelevation of mood than either taken separately. The reason forthis is not known. Nor is it known whether this is the reason forthe common drug abusers' practice of taking the two incombination. The other depressants in this category are abusable and havemuch the same effects and symptoms as abused barbiturates. Abusein the sense of self-administration does not seem to be terriblycommon, however; some of them, such as Librium, have ratherminimal euphoriant effects. In general, from the standpoint ofthe abuser, barbiturates-particularly short-acting ones-are asuperior good, with others acceptable as substitutes only ifbarbiturates are unavailable. Tolerance. Both drug disposition and pharmacodynamictolerance to the barbiturates develop with repeatedadministration. The first is caused by the activation ofdrug-metabolizing enzymes in the liver and consequent increase inthe speed of detoxation of the drug. A higher dose is thenrequired to maintain a given tissue concentration. The secondinvolves the adaptation of nervous tissue to the presence of thedrug. Tolerance develops quickly, and the CNS probably becomesresistant to the effects of the drug during the action of asingle administration."' The tolerance, however, is largely limited to the sedative andintoxicating effects of the drug. The lethal dose is not muchgreater for addicts than for nonaddicts. In addition, the rangeof tolerance is narrow. An individual tolerant to 1.2 grams of aparticular drug may show acute intoxication if the dose is raisedas little as 0.1 gram per day. The other drugs of this class develop tolerance in the sameway and with the same limitations as do the barbiturates. Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. Severe physicaldependence on the barbiturates develops, but, unlike thesituation for the opiates, the dosages required for this effectare higher than the therapeutic dose. With pentobarbital, forexample, 200 mg. per day can be taken for months withoutproducing withdrawal, and 400 mg. per day for three months willproduce EEG changes in only 30 per cent of the cases. The other70 per cent apparently show no effects. After 600 mg. per day forone to two months, half the subjects will have minor withdrawalsymptoms, and 10 per cent may have a seizure. After continuous,intoxication with doses of 900 mg. to 2.2 grams, 75 per cent ofthe subjects may have seizures, and 60 per cent delirium; allexperience lesser symptoms."' Defining "major" withdrawal symptoms as seizures orpsychoses, the time and dosage necessary to produce severephysical dependence for different sedative hypnotics have beencalculated as follows: ... TABLE 1-1 ADDICTING DOSES OF COMMON SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS* Drug Dependence- producing dosage (mg. daily) Time necessary to produce dependence (days) Drug dosage equivalent to 30 mg. of phenobarbital (mg.) Secobarbital Pentobarbital 800-2,200 35-37 100 Diazepam (Valium) 80-120 42 10 Chlordiazepoxide hydrochloride (Librium) 300-600 60-180 25 Meprobamate (Equanil) 2,400 270 400 * Dosages sufficient to produce "major" withdrawalsigns in humans. As Table 1-1 indicates, the other sedative hypnotics arethought to produce dependence similar to that caused bybarbiturates. They have not been as carefully studied. We have found no study that divides opiate withdrawal intomajor" and "minor" symptoms. Thus, it is notpossible to compare the development of barbiturate dependencewith that of opiate dependence. Once physical dependence develops, withdrawal frombarbiturates is severe, and-unlike opiate withdrawal-may be lifethreatening. For one of the short-acting drugs, for the firsttwelve hours or so the patient seems to improve as theintoxication clears. He then becomes restless, anxious,tremulous, and weak, and sometimes has nausea or cramps. Withintwenty-four hours, he may be too weak to get out of bed,experience severe tremors in the hands, and have hyperactive deepreflexes. The peak is reached on the second or third day, andconvulsions may occur. Half the patients who have convulsiveseizures go on to delirium, which occurs between the fourth andseventh days. This consists of high anxiety, hallucinations, anddisorientation. Once delirium occurs, it may not be suppressedeven by large doses of barbiturates. This is contrary to thenormal course of withdrawal symptoms, which are quicklysuppressed by the drug of addiction. The reason for this anomalyis not known. During the delirium, exhaustion and cardiovascularcollapse may occur. The withdrawal syndrome usually clears byabout the eighth day, if untreated. For longer-acting drugs,seizures may not occur until the seventh or eighth day, and thegeneral course is slowed down accordingly."' Hallucinations sometimes persist for months, but "this isfelt by most investigators to be a manifestation of an underlyingpsychosis.""' The sources do not discuss whetherbarbiturates, like the opiates, have early and protractedabstinence syndromes. Meprobomate (Equanil, Miltown) follows the short-actingcourse. Libriurn follows that of the long-acting barbiturates. Mechanisms of Action. More is known about the fate ofbarbiturates in the body than is known about the other drugs ofabuse. It is known, for example, that they are transformed by theliver into a number of inactive metabolites that are in turnexcreted. This lessens the concentration of the drug and causesthe withdrawal from its site of action in the CNS. The generalstate of knowledge concerning metabolism, physicalredistribution, and excretion is discussed in the sources, as arethe general theories of sites of action in the CNS. These are tootechnical to discuss here. The mechanisms by which barbituratesoperate to cause CNS effects are not well understood."' A WORD ON ALCOHOL Problems of alcohol and alcoholism were not within the mandateof the Drug Abuse Survey Project, and they have not been includedin the report or in any of the supporting papers. In the contextof this chapter, however, one comment should be made: Alcohol isa drug and could easily be analyzed in the same terms as thedrugs that are covered. It has a potent psychoactive effect andis, like most of the drugs with which we are concerned, highlyspecific to the CNS. Both tolerance and physical dependencedevelop, and withdrawal can be a very serious clinical condition.The drug causes organic damage. The interplay of physiologicalfactors and psychological factors involves as many uncertaintiesfor alcohol as for the opiates. In short, the common distinction between alcohol and"drugs of abuse" is based on the fact that alcohol isknown and accepted in the culture, not on any pharmacologicalconsiderations. It is entirely possible that alcohol isinherently more dangerous than most of the other drugs discussed. In his listing of the hazards of different drugs, Dr. SamuelIrwin makes the following rankings, starting with the mostdangerous: ... 1. Glue sniffing 2. Methamphetamine 3. Alcohol 4. Cigarettes 5. Barbiturates and hypnotics 6. Heroin and related narcotics 7. LSD and other hallucinogens 8. Marijuana NOTES Because the same authors are cited continually in this staffpaper, footnotes give only the author, date of publication whennecessary, and page number. The complete references are asfollows: Baden, M. Interview by Project Staff. Ball, I., and 1. Urbaitis. "Absence of Major MedicalComplications Among Chronic Opiate Addicts," in 1. Ball andC. Chambers (eds.), The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction inthe United States (Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1970), p. 301. Blacker, K. "Aggression and the Chronic Use of LSD,"journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 111, No. I (September, 1970), 32. Brazeau, P. "Oxytocics," in L. Goodman and A.Gilman, The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics (4thed.; New York: Macmillan, 1970), p. 893. (This book is hereafterreferred to as Goodman and Gilman.) Brotman, R., and A. Friedman."Perspectives on Marijuana Research" (Center for Studies in Substance Use; mimeograph, undated). Chopra, C. "Man and Marijuana," The Internationaljournal of the Addictions, IV, No. 2 (June, 1969), 219-33, Cohen, S. "Lysergic Acid DiethyIamide: Side Effects andComplications," journal of Nervous and Mental Disease CXXX(1969), 30. Cooper, J., F. Bloom, and R. Roth. The BiochemicalBasis of Neuropharmacology (Oxford: Oxford University Press,1970). Dishotsky, N., W. Loughman, R. Mogar, and W. Lipscomb."LSD and Genetic Damage," Science, CLXXII (April 30, 1971),431. Dole, V. "Narcotic Blockade," Archives ofInternal Medicine, CXVIII (October, 1966), 304, 305. ... "Research on Methadone Maintenance Treatment," TheInternational journal of the Addictions, V, No. 3 (September,1970), 359. Dole, V., and M. Nyswander. "Methadone Maintenance andIts Implications for Theories of Narcotic Addiction," in A.Wikler (ed.), The Addictive States (Baltimore, Md.:Williams and Wilkins, Inc., 1968), p. 359. Douglas, W."Histamine and Antihistamines: 5-Hydroxytryptamine andAntagonists," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 620. Eddy, N. Interview by Project Staff. Eddy, N., et al. "Drug Dependence: ItsSignificance and Characteristics," Bulletin of the World Health Organization, XXXII(1965), 721. Egozcue, J., and S. Irwin. "LSD-25 Effects onChromosomes: A Review," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 111, No. 1 (September,1970), 10. Esplin, D., and B. Zablocka-Esplin. "Central NervousSystem Stimulants," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 348. Fingl, E., and D. Woodbury. "General Principles," inGoodman and Gilman, P. 1. Goldstein, A. Interview by Project Staff. Goldstein, A., L. Aronow, and S. Kalman. Principles of DrugAction (New York: Harper & Row, 1968). Grinspoon, L. Marihuana Reconsidered (Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, 1971). Health, Education and Welfare, Secretary of, Marihuana andHealth: A Report to Congress, January 31, 1971 (GPO, March,1971). Innes, 1. R., and M. Nickerson. "Drugs Acting onPostganglionic Adrenic Nerve Endings and Structures Innervated byThem (Sympathomimetic Drugs)," in Goodman and Gilman, p.478. Irwin, S. Drugs of Abuse: An Introduction to Their Actionsand Potential Hazards (Student Association for the Study ofthe Hallucinogens, 1970). Jaffe, J. "Narcotic Analgesics" and "DrugAddiction and Drug Abuse," in Goodman and Gilman, pp. 237 and 276. Jarvik, M. "Drugs Used in the Treatment of PsychiatricDisorders," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 15 1. Koelle, G. "Neurohumoral Transmission and the AutonomicNervous System," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 402. Kramer, J. "An Introduction to Amphetamine Abuse," journalof Psychedelic Drugs, 11, No. 2 (1969), 1. Lemberger, L., et al. "Marijuana: Studies on theDisposition and Metabolism 23. This estimate is based on interviews with several experts. 24. We found no studies on deaths by overdose. 25. Martin, 1970, p. 4. 26. Goldstein et al., p. 592. 27. Based primarily on Jaffe, pp. 239-60. 28. Martin, 1970, p. 4. 29. Jaffe, p. 240; Irwin, p. 5. 30. Goldstein et al., p. 474. 31. jaffe,p.279. 32. Ibid., pp. 279-80. 33. Ibid., p. 279; Goldstein et al., pp. 593-94. 34. Goldstein et al., pp. 597-99. 35. Eddy, 1965, p. 721. 36. Goldstein et al., pp. 600, 603. 37. jaffe,p.280. 38. Ibid., p. 288; Goldstein et al., pp. 602-3. 39. Martin, 1970, pp. 2-3. 40. Goldstein et al., p. 603; Jaffe, p. 281. 41. Goldstein et al., p. 605. 42. jaffe,p.283. 43. Goldstein, p. 605. 44. Jaffe, pp. 281-82. 45. Ibid., p. 282. 46. Dole, 1966, p. 305. 47. Goldstein, interview. 48. Goldstein et al., pp. 474-75. 49. Dole, 1968, p. 364. 50. Dole, 1970, p. 373. 51. Dole, interview. 52. Martin, 1970, pp. 8-9. 53. See Jaffe, pp. 296-97, and Brazeau, pp. 899-900. 54. This section is summarized from the Journal ofPsychedelic Drug September, 1970. 55. Jarvik, p. 196. 56. Ibid., p. 197. 57. Ibid.; laff e, p. 296; Shiek and Smith, p. 16. 58. Egozcue and Irwin, pp. 1 0-1 1. 59. Dishotsky et al., p. 439. 60. See Irwin, p. 8; Jaff e, p. 296. 61. McGlothlin et al., pp. 20-31. 62. Ibid., pp. 30-31. 63. Blacker, pp. 32-37. 64. Cohen, p.30. 65. Irwin, p. 9. 66. Shick and Smith, pp. 13-19. 67. Ibid. 68. D. Smith, 1969, p. 75. 69. jaffe,p.297. 70. D. Smith, 1969, p. 82; STASH, 1970. 71. Irwin, p. 8; Jaffe, pp. 297-98. 72. jarvik, p. 197. 73. Irwin, p. 9; Jaffe, p. 298. 74. Jarvik, p. 196; Cooper et al., pp. 157-59; Douglas,p. 656. 75. This section was written with the assistance of PeterWilson. 76. Jaffe, p. 300; Meyers, p. 32. 77. Snyder, pp. 121-25. 78. Ibid. 79. Irwin, p. 7; Weil et al., p. 1242. 80. jaffe,p.300. 81. HEW, p. 68; Grinspoon, pp. 227-28. 82. Lemberger et al., p. 1322. 83. jaffe,p.299. 84. Tart, pp. 701-4. 85. Weil, p. 999. 86. Weil, letter. 87. Talbot and Teague. 88. D. Smith, 1968, p. 41. 89. Lemberger et al., p. 1322. 90. jaffe,p.300. 91. Brotman and Friedman, p. 20; Jaffe, p. 300; Irwin, p. 7. 92. See Innes and Nickerson, Jaffe, and Ritchie et al. 93. Innes and Nickerson, except as otherwise noted. 94. Esplin and Zablocka-Esplin, pp. 354-55. 95. Innes and Nickerson, p. 478. 96. Ritchie et al., pp. 379-82; Jaffe, p. 293. 97. Esplin anl Zablocka-Esplin, p. 354. 98. Kramer, p. 10; Jaffe, p. 295. 99. Ritchie et al., p. 381. 100. Kramer, p. 1 1. 101. Ibid., p. 12. 102. Jaffe, pp. 293-94; R. Smith, p. 35. 103. Jaffe, p. 294; Kramer, p. 9. 104. Kramer, p. 7. 105. Jaffe, pp. 294-95; Ritchie et al., p. 381. 106. jaffe,p.295. 107. Weil, Staff Paper 6. 108. R. Smith, p. 184. 109. Innes and Nickerson, pp. 503-4. 110. Jaffe,p.293. 111. Sharpless, pp. 98-134. 112. Irwin, p. 9; Weil, interview. 113. Sharpless, pp. 98-120. 114. Ibid. 115. Ibid., p. 100. 116. Eddy, p. 725. 117. Jaffe, pp. 289-90. 118. Sharpless, pp. 107-8. 119. laffe,p.290. 120. Ibid. 121. D. Smith and Wesson, pp. 294-95. 122. laffe,p.290. 123. Ibid. 124. Sharpless, pp. 101-2, 1 1 0-1 1. 125. Irwin, pp. 3-4. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT01-B32-2IA031-000652-B044-111http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131334 text/html 116196HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:13:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:09:07 GMTContent-length: 115977 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Drug Education Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 2 Drug Education by Patricia M. Wald and Annette Abrams Goals of Drug Education * Techniques of Drug Education forStudents a Total School Involvement * Out-of SchoolDrug-Education Programs * The National Media * Films and AudioVisuals & School Curricula * Education for Nonstudents *Sponsors of Current Efforts GOALS OF DRUG EDUCATION "Prevention through education" has become the newestpanacea of the drug-abuse field. Law enforcement has failed tostem the supply of illegal drugs, and rehabilitation efforts havethus far failed to reclaim many abusers. Everyone now talks ofpouring money into education to stop the problem before itbegins. As of any educational undertaking, the first task of a drugabuse-prevention program is to define the goals sought. Ifobjectives are not understood, developing the educational effortand the techniques to be used is difficult. At present, this is amajor problem of drug education. No one is sure what goals arerealistic or desirable, and proponents of massive efforts cannotagree on what they hope to accomplish. The most that can be saidis that there are a number of possible objectives foryouth-oriented, drugeducation programs: Stopping all experimentation with foreign substances Keeping experimentation at the minimum and limiting it torelatively safe substances Preventing casual experimenters from becoming habitual users Preventing addiction or severe dependence Reinforcing the anti-experimentation tendencies of those whohave not yet tried drugs Presenting information for students to use in making drugdecisions for themselves Increasing student understanding of the complex factorsrelated to drug use, social attitudes, and policies For adult audiences, the goals may be somewhat different- forparents, to give them the best information available, to heightentheir concern about the effects of drugs, to make them lesslikely to panic if they find one of their children using drugs,to encourage them to lobby for more education, treatment, or lawreform, or to teach them to communicate more openly with theirchildren on the subject. For teachers, counselors, and other"gatekeepers" the object might be to train them tocreate an atmosphere of communication in their classrooms or torecognize student drug experimenters and abusers, deal with themsympathetically, and channel them into treatment if necessary.Teachers might also be equipped with the tools to stimulateobjective discussion of the subject with their students. The traditional goal of most parents, educators, communityleaders, congressmen, and government officials has been todiscourage young people from experimenting with illegal drugs atall. In the past, government and privately sponsored educationefforts have tried to do this by emphasizing the horrors ofaddiction and lumping all drugs together as leading to the sameultimate doom. Virtually all experts now agree that such tacticshave not proved effective. Indeed, in many cases, they have beencounterproductive, causing disrespect, skepticism, and resistanceto all advice on drugs. Despite the widespread implementation ofthis technique, youthful addiction and experimentation withillegal drugs have increased. Consequently, within the past fewyears there has been a change in emphasis, with more and moreprograms concentrating on an honest presentation of accurate,factual knowledge about the effects of drugs (insofar as suchknowledge is available). The assumption is that drugs areobviously bad, and that telling the facts will be enough toconvince young people not to experiment. Although the approach may have changed, the aim of most publicand private antidrug literature remains the same-to discourageyoung people from trying marijuana, psychedelics, amphetamines,barbiturates, and, above all, heroin. The theme of a nationwidegovernment advertising campaign reflects the traditionalbroadside approach: "Why Do You Think They Call ItDope?" Many of the recent NIMH posters and television spotsare along the same lines: "Will It Turn You On, or Will ItTurn on You?" Most "model" curricula forelementary, junior, and senior high schools, even when theypresent the known facts about drugs fairly, push a stronglynegative attitude toward all commonly abused drugs. The measureof success of such programs-although few try to measure successby any formula-is almost always assumed to be total cessation ofdrug experimentation and use. In the late 1960's, however, this viewpoint ran into anembarrassing problem: no one was able to develop a factualscientific argument proving that marijuana was harmful. Thisdevelopment had its greatest impact on programs using the scaretechnique, but it also undermined programs based on the premisethat telling the truth was an effective way of discouragingexperimentation. This has put education in a difficult position.Most drug-education programs are ambivalent. They profess anhonest desire to tell the truth-but only up to a point. Whenknown facts run out or become controversial, as they almostcertainly do when the subject comes up, the approach reverts toimposed value judgments, half-truths, or presumptions that thelaw is right-devices easily seen through by the skeptical young. Increasingly, drug experts are coming to the conclusion thatit is the goal that needs to be changed more than the technique,and that total cessation of all drug experimentation, howeverdesirable in the abstract, is not a realistic goal for aneducation program. Some experts feel strongly that an educationprogram aimed at stopping drug experimentation of every kind isbound to fail and so alienate students in the process that theywill not listen to any of it. Drs. Thomas Ungerleider, NormanZinberg, and Helen Nowlis, as well as Professor KennethKeniston-to name a few experts-appear to define a different goalfor drug education: to teach youths to make informed decisionsabout drugs and indeed about every other kind of chemicalsubtance they might ingest. This must include a concentration onteaching elementary students a fundamental respect for the human.body and the effects of chemical substances. Teaching young people to make informed decisions on their ownabout illegal drugs is admittedly a more controversial goal thanmechanically urging them to avoid all such drugs. A wholly honest"tell it like it is" approach may cause a decline inthe use of heroin, amphetamines, and barbiturates, but it willalmost certainly increase the likelihood that youthful listenerswill feel more comfortable about trying marijuana and possiblysome of the milder hallucinogens. Professor Zinberg reports on acandid talk about drugs to a Massachusetts high school. Beforethe lecture, 60 per cent of the students said they would not trymarijuana; after the lecture, the figure dropped to 35 per cent.'This is not a universal occurrence, of course. For example, abefore-and-after evaluation at a Temple University educationalconference, presenting all points of view, found that attitudestoward marijuana shifted from favoring legalization to a neutralposition, especially among undergraduates. A truly factual drug-education program might also influenceattitudes toward commercially advertised and even medicallyprescribed drugs. When, for example, people discover that somelegitimate drugs directly cause more deaths annually than do mostabused drugs, they may lose faith in the argument that theyshould avoid illegal drugs because there is no official qualitycontrol or pretesting for safety. Another problem with thefactual method involves the source material to be used.Contradictory statements of "facts" could catalyze a"your guess is as good as mine" attitude, and this isan area in which contradictions are common.' Nor are the opinionsof either laymen or experts always based on scientific fact.Often the opinion comes first and the facts are chosen to fitit.' An impartial factual approach assumes that an individualchoice will be made on the basis of medical or scientificevidence regardless of what is forbidden by law. This is adifficult concept for many to accept, even though some youngpeople from time immemorial have refused to obey a given lawpartly because it is the 'Law or have engaged in -risk-takingbehavior -that appalls adults. Today's climate of individualityintensifies the likelihood that they will make their own choicesabout drugs as well. In some cases, it is precisely the fact thatdrugs are illegal and risky that constitutes part of theirattraction. It may be, therefore, that the most usefuleducational approach is to give young people the facts upon whichto make that choice, so that they will at least keep theirrisk-taking behavior within bounds. Regardless of the educator'sviews of what their attitudes should be, effective communicationrequires that they be dealt with as they are. One survey ofelementary, junior, and senior high school students in Californiaconcluded that "students feel quite strongly about anindividual's right to make decisions concerning his own use ofdrugs." In the senior high school sampling, 84 per cent ofthe users and 76 per cent of the nonusers surveyed respondedpositively to the statement "Decision to Use Drugs Is aPersonal Decision."' Even if one is willing to accept increased experimentationwith some drugs as the price of decreased damage from otherdrugs, there are more serious problems. How, for example, can ayoung child be expected to assimilate all the facts aboutindividual drugs and their effects upon the body and make areasonable choice about using them? Experimentation withingestion or inhalation of foreign substances is occurring fromage seven on with increasing frequency. How can so young a childmake an informed decision? Might he not lean too heavily on hisemotions, impulses, and peer-group pressure? Clearly, the"responsible decision" model has its limitations, too. Other goals for an education program may be identified whenthose who are to be educated are involved in the selectionprocess. It is highly recommended by the U.S. Office ofEducation's Drug Education Branch, for example, that young peopleshare more of the responsibility for specifying objectives. Sucha partnership arrangement tends to enhance the credibility of aprogram by "plugging it into" the representative needsof its target audience. The unfortunate fact is that we do not know whether anexclusively factual approach works with the very young, even tothe extent of mitigating the most dangerous kinds ofexperimentations. Conversely, we do not know whether a concertedattempt by schools and media to control the behavior of thechildren by propagandizing against drugs and punishing their useworks, either, even if it is justified on the basis that thechild is not old enough to make a rational choice of his own inso potentially harmful an area. Because of all the problems andunknowns of the "rational choice" approach, relativelyfew programs have adopted it explicitly, even when they concedethe problems of other methods. In general, drug-educationprograms at the national, college, high school, and elementarylevels have not faced the difficult issues involved in decidingamong these goals. They have been neither realistic nor frankwith the students or themselves. In most situations, settling onthe goals that are most realistic under the circumstances andacknowledging those goals to the target group would enhance thecredibility of the drug education program. But even moreimportantly, it is necessary to articulate the precise objectivesof any education campaign before it is implemented because theyaffect the way in which drug education is taught as well as thecriteria by which its success or failure is evaluated. Until theprecise aims of a program are clear to the sponsor and to thetarget population, the methodology cannot be sensitively selectedand the program's effects cannot be accurately assessed. Such apractice would also allow us to begin to determine whichtechniques help to accomplish the objectives and which do not. TECHNIQUES OF DRUG EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS At present, we know almost nothing about how best to reachstudents on the drug issue; nor, until recently, have we triedvery hard to find out. Only within the last few years have therebeen even rudimentary attempts to evaluate some of the schoolprograms. Most of the pioneer efforts are very rough, and theoutcomes rarely determine, or even significantly influence, theplanning and allocation of resources. Although there is now consensus that evaluation is needed, ourlack of knowledge about the effects of existing educationprograms is not easily remediable. It is difficult to developreliable evaluation techniques for the programs, although manymethods are being tried. In some cases, students are testedbefore and after a drug course to see how much of the newinformation has been retained. Other surveys use attitudinalquestions about whether participants are more or less willing toexperiment with particular drugs after the program; in stillother cases, selected students are interviewed intensively in aneffort to probe deeply into their attitudes and reactions. Recentevaluative studies test the effectiveness of several factorssimultaneously by administering varied instruments.Unfortunately, as Dr. Marvin I. Rosen suggests, existing"methodologies [are] inadequate for the questions beingasked, and the designs of evaluation studies are inappropriatefor the answers being sought."' Evaluations are often posthoc, rather desperate attempts to get information out of aprogram that was set up without regard to the need for it. Evenwhen evaluation is designed into a program, it rarely includeslong-range follow-up to determine the program's effects a year ormore after its termination. There are other problems. Little of the scant material thatexists on evaluation has been pulled together and published, oreven collected in one place. Valid and interesting work may existunknown to almost everyone. In addition, only infrequent use hasbeen made of the findings of educational-psychology research indesigning learning programs on drug abuse for children of varyingages, although other areas have attempted to do so. For example,it is reported that $8 million was spent doing preliminaryresearch on the psychology of learning before airing the SesameStreet program, which teaches reading concepts to preschoolchildren. Finally, there are institutional obstacles, and dedication toevaluation is often more froth than reality. The primary concernof many evaluators is that something be done, and they take asubjective view of the quality of the effort. Program staffs fearthat objective study of their efforts will place futureactivities in jeopardy or believe that they are performing aservice that cannot be measured. Some educators feel thatevaluation produces only statistical data, which they equate withantihumanism. Program personnel often fail to specify their goalsand the means utilized to attain them. Dr. Helen Nowlis pointed out in 1967 that "at the presenttime there is no standard or widely accepted model for planningan effective drug-education program. This is an area thaturgently needs research, development and demonstration."'This statement is still appropriate several years later. Theunderpinnings for a rational drug-education approach do not existat the present time. Pronouncements abound on the kinds ofprograms that should be undertaken, and model curricula are easyto find, but hard data on the effect such programs have onstudents are virtually nonexistent. Given this situation, the twomajor priorities in this field are: (1) Well-designed and testedevaluation techniques to measure the attainment of specific goals(once they have been defined) in any school drug-educationprogram. Different evaluative models would measure differentgoals-e.g., decreasing drug use, more information disseminationamong the student body, substitution of less harmful drugs,rational drug use, less use in school, fewer acute health crises,more referrals of students to treatment, more use made of schoolpersonnel by students for advice. (2) A formal 'compilation ofwhat evaluation data exist, which programs have been evaluated,what criteria have been used, and what results have beenobtained. This information should be widely disseminated tomembers of the educational community as well as to those involvedin drug programming (treatment, rehabilitation, intervention). In the absence of this kind of information, we can only turnto the opinions of recognized "experts" in the field,without any real assurance, however, that they are right. Yet,there appears to be consensus (at least for the present) on thefollowing points: The common pattern of having physical education or healthteachers set aside one unit in the curriculum to lecture on thedangers of drugs is virtually useless. See, e.g., the Report ofthe Mayor's Task Force on Drug Abuse Education in Washington,D.C.: "To this date, most current crisis-oriented programscater to the biases of adults, and depend on the faulty theory ofemphasizing information or lecture techniques." A program must be ongoing, with the opportunity for recurrentdiscussions throughout the year. Even some of the new,well-motivated programs suffer from a "crisis"approach. An evaluation of programs conducted in four high schoolclasses showed that "short-term programs, even though verysophisticated and intensive, may have little impact on theattitudes of students regarding the abuse of drugs." Thestudy concludes that "the primary value of [the] project isthat it adds a note of caution to those who would set aside asingle day for drug education and be satisfied with theresults."' Although countless "one-shot" programsare sponsored nationally, there is little evidence that suchprograms have any lasting effect. Different approaches have to be taken for students ofdifferent ages, cultural backgrounds, and levels of drugsophistication. The subtle variations among particularsubcultures must be recognized. Drug education of some generalkind needs to begin in kindergarten, or even earlier, and shouldfocus on the specific drugs of abuse by fourth or fifth grade.The program for teenage suburban experimenters with marijuanamust be different from the program for ghetto heroin users. Eachtarget group must be studied to determine what kind of messagewill reach it. The information must then be structured so that itrelates closely to the students' sophistication and willingnessto identify with the subject matter. There must be open and free dialogue between students and theteacher or discussion leader in an atmosphere of tolerance forall points of view, free of moralizing and shock reactions. Use should be made of the comments and experiences ofyoungsters who have actually used drugs, with confidentialityassured. From junior high school on, students should be involved inplanning and implementing the drug-education program to assureits relevance to the specific situation in that school. Again,the students' level of sophistication must be accuratelyassessed. Predetermined curricula are to be avoided unless theyare clearly relevant. Factual material must be absolutely accurate and honest. Whereresearch does not yet provide clear answers, this must beadmitted. Tobacco and alcohol abuse should be treated along withillicit drugs as part of the same over-all problem. The dangersas well as the benefits of legitimate drug use must be franklyacknowledged where they exist. The curriculum should not be a passive one, relying solely onpamphlets, lectures, or films. There should be an emphasis onactual experimental data that let the students see the underlyingmethodology of drug research and the way conclusions are reached.Where possible, students should view actual experimentation withthe effects of drugs on animals and, at higher grade levels,conduct these experiments themselves. In Dr. Louise Richards'view: "The expectation is that deeper understanding of theCNS [central nervous system] and effects of psychoactive drugswill result in more profound respect for the hazards ofunsupervised use."' Emphasis should be placed on the motivational aspects of druguse-why people use drugs, what they hope to accomplish and whatthey hope to escape, and how they can fulfill these needs inother ways. Interviews with high school students in Californiareveal a strong dislike for repetitive programs focusing oninformation alone. The students greatly preferred continuingdiscussions on the reasons for drug use." Again, this is away of actively involving the student in the learning process andmaking it a two-way engagement. Equal emphasis should be given tothe reasons people do not want to take drugs. Dr. Helen Nowlispoints out that college students often seem less interested inthe legal and medical facts about drugs than in a personal,philosophical discussion about the limits on an individual'sright to self-discovery and expression." Education of any kind will have little or no impact on ayoungster who is already deeply involved with drugs. A survey ofstudents in nine high schools concluded that "students whohave used drugs are not likely to be favorably impressed or to bechanged by viewing ... drug abuse films. In all nine schools thepattern was the same: the students, after viewing the films, saidthey were likely to continue their behavior as users or nonusersof drugs."" Alternative behavior patterns should be provided, for manyusers frequently give up drugs for something else. The"something else" varies but frequently takes the formof intense personal experiences, often of a religious nature,deep interpersonal experiences through the use of transcendentalmeditation or yoga, participation in sensitivity groups, orfree-school activities. (See Staff Paper 6, below.) Suchalternative programs, in order to be effective, should beattractive, easily available on a continuing basis, and organizedwith advice from the student body. Given this consensus, however, a fundamental dispute stillexists over whether the purely factual approach to drugs is moreharmful than helpful to young "risk takers." Someexperts believe that giving specific factual knowledge reinforcesthe antidrug propensities of persons not likely to abuse drugsanyway but actually contributes to the "seduction" ofvulnerable high-risk groups by romanticizing the negativism thatmotivates their conduct." Movies, media advertising, rockmusic, underground newspapers, and commercial films that exciteinterest in specific drug use transmit the nonverbal message thatusers get attention and sympathy. Dr. Paul Blachley espouses adifferent kind of education, focusing on underlying behavioralresponses and on why people consciously hurt themselves and thosearound them. He would convey the over-all image of thedrug-abuser as a boring, weak-minded, easily "conned"individual, not as a daring and reckless adventurer. But thestudent survey quoted above concluded that none of the six drugfilms examined lured anyone into trying drugs who had not alreadydone so. Other studies highlight the need for additional investigationinto the effects of drug education." Studies by Gilbert Geis(1969) and the California Department of Education (1970)determined that short-term programs (four weeks or less)significantly increased student knowledge about drugs and causedmore cautious attitudes toward drug use. However, several studiesconducted at the Pennsylvania State University in 1970-71"showed consistent relationships between better knowledgeabout drugs and pro-drug attitudes; better knowledge and the useof marijuana; and pro-drug attitudes and the use ofmarijuana."" A still unsettled question is whether drug education should beintegrated into a "life-problem" course that includessuch other subjects as sex and relations with parents and peers.Dr. Norman Zinberg, for one, espouses the integrated model. Therealso appears to be pressure toward this broader model from manystudents. Even courses labeled "drug education" veryoften take a motivational approach that examines underlyingvalues and behavioral problems. A comparison of eighth- andeleventh graders in California revealed that users know lessabout drugs and drug-related information than nonusers at thesame grade level. The study concluded: "While the continuedteaching of factual drug information might somewhat lessenstudent drug use, it could not do the job by itself, but whencombined with an affective or attitudinal approach could be ofreal effect."" The Coronado Unified School Districtconsequently led other schools in stressing the need for acomprehensive program covering values, valuing processes(decision-making), value orientations, and their possible effectson human behavior. Advocates of this approach recommend its usewith parents, teachers, and students to increase mutualunderstanding and the ability to cope with the problems ofeveryday life. Another fundamental question, especially for schools, is whoshould do the drug educating. Are regular teachers orknowledgeable outsiders more effective? All experts stress thatit must be someone the students like and trust, someone who knowsand will present the facts accurately and who feels comfortableand free in open discussion. Few teachers in any school fit thatdescription. It has been observed by some outside speakers thatstudents' questions dramatically increased in sophistication whenthe teacher left the room. In Washington, D.C., the mayor's taskforce suggested selecting teachers for drug education on thebasis of a "sociogram" asking students to stateanonymously to whom they would go for consultation or advice onpersonal problems. On the other side, several reports andinterviews have warned about the possibly insidious effect ofteachers who themselves actually promote drug use, wittingly orunwittingly. Perhaps because of the more personal level of communicationencouraged in primary grades, elementary students stand alone inpreferring the teacher as a source of information. When surveyed,high school students usually prefer ex-addicts and medicaldoctors as resource people. Ex-users were considered qualifiedbecause of their firsthand experience with drugs. Conversely,doctors were seen as authorities on drug effects but lostcredibility when discussing the "feelings" drugsproduce. Dr. Thomas Ungerleider, of UCLA, reports that, in hisexperience, the most successful approach for a medical lecturerbegins with an assurance to the students that he is not there forthe purpose of persuading them to stay off drugs and does notrepresent law enforcement, parents, or school authorities, but isthere only to tell them the known facts about drugs and the humanbody and to answer their questions. Any discussion leader must be able to validate his credentialsby showing the students that he knows the facts he states aretrue. Many schools have drug-education and rehabilitation centersrun by, or with the help of, former drug users who presentprograms consisting of small student group discussions. These areoften supplemented by discussions with faculty and parent groupsas well. PLACE, in Boston, is an example of a drug-informationand service center for hippies, runaways, and drug users, staffedby graduate students and run by the youthful clients withprofessional supervision. They conduct programs for localschools. The role of the ex-addict in school programs deserves specialconsideration. He is the current fad of drug education, on thetheory that only one who has been there can tell about itconvincingly. There is some truth to this, but apparentlydifferent children receive different messages. The ex-addict isperceived by some as a self-promoter capitalizing on his drugexperience for admiration or profit. Others get the idea that itis as easy to get off drugs as it is to get addicted, so thatthere is little risk in trying them. A ghetto youth might wellsurmise that, if the ex-addict had never become addicted toheroin in the first place, he would be worse off, probablyjobless, and without the attention and respect he is nowreceiving. To some, the ex-addict is a glamorous"anti-hero" somewhat like a rock singer. In oneCalifornia high school, ex-addict visitors were the recipients ofphone calls from girl students seeking after school dates.Several schools have had unfortunate experiences with ex-addictswho are not really "ex" and are either pushing or usingdrugs. Others are akin to religious converts, uttering rigidopinions about all drugs, including marijuana, and denigratingall treatment modalities other than their own. Still others turnout never to have been serious users at all but are merelywell-versed in the jargon of the users. Reportedly, someout-of-work rock musicians earn extra money making the schoolcircuit. And, disturbingly, large numbers of ex-addicts reminisceabout the actual "high" with an exquisite affection notlost on their young audiences. Some ex-addicts, although offdrugs, are currently abusing alcohol. Others are prey to the samemyths about drugs as nonusers and pass misinformation on tostudents. All this gives the negative side of using ex-addicts, apractice that is sometimes accepted too uncritically. But this isnot the only side. Ex-addicts can be excellent teachers, able tospeak with credibility and to relate to youngsters, although themere fact that they are ex-addicts does not ensure rapport. Oneof the very few carefully evaluated school programs showed, forexample, that, while students liked to hear ex-addicts tell oftheir experiences, they did not give them so much credence whenthey lectured about drugs generally." Ex-addicts withnatural talent in relating to the young and with some training insensitivity and substance may make very good drug-educationteachers, indeed, and their experience may give them extraeffectiveness. A good educator who happens to be an ex-addict mayhave a special and valuable feeling for the factors that leadyouths to try drugs. In ghetto schools, antidrug black-militant organizations oftenhave a special appeal. The ghetto youngster's need for a rolemodel may focus on such a symbol of racial pride. Organizationssuch as Blackman's Development Center and PRIDE, Inc., inWashington, D.C., have recently entered the drug education fieldand vigorously propagandize against drugs in schools, sometimeswith homemade slides of addiction horrors and appeals to racialunity against a "white man's" scourge. How successfulthey will be remains to be seen. The difficulty with most school education programs run by"outsiders" is that they lack continuity in the schoolitself. The ex-addicts, the graduate students, and visitingdoctors come and go, while the students' need for information orhelp may continue for months. One of the more promisingapproaches is that used by a San lose high school, which releaseda popular young teacher for several months to learn the drugscene intimately by going on "buys" with local police,attending court trials, working with doctors in drug clinics,interviewing patients at treatment centers, and spending time onthe streets and in criminology labs. On his return, he took on(apparently successfully) the combined duties of teacher andcounselor to students with drug problems." Dissatisfied with past results, many school systems this yearare trying a variety of new preventive-education methods todiscourage drug abuse, involving more direction by the studentsthemselves. The New York City Board of Education has announced atrial program in sixteen high schools in which pupils will designand run their own antidrug programs. In Philadelphia last year,selected students from seven high schools (accompanied by ateacher) learned basic drug facts from doctors, treatmentexperts, and law-enforcement officials and went on field trips.They then went back to their own schools to initiate and runprograms of their own choice. Most of them opened counselingservices. With regard to peer involvement, there are indicationsthat students should be given a voice in basic approach,curriculum content, and choice of teachers but should not besaddled with administrative chores, which they abhor and oftenperform poorly. Nevertheless, tapping the enthusiasm ofwell-selected students can be beneficial in motivating thestudent body to seek creative antidrug activities. The notion that young people relate to their peers better thanto adults has validity but also limits. They relate only to someof their peers. Rigid social groups exist in many schools, andstudents chosen by teachers and school officials may not be theones to lead the group that the antidrug program hopes most toreach. Whenever possible, some student participation in planningand operating programs should come from the group the program istrying to reach, whether nonusers, experimenters, or borderlinecases. The student council in an Oregon high school sought thecooperation of ex-users and faculty in creating a youthful"Mod Squad." Teams of experienced students providedsuccessful peer counseling, assistance in crisis situations, andreferrals to local treatment facilities and otherwise contributedpositively to the school's educational programming. There is also the "role model" theory that youngerchildren, between the ages of seven and twelve, will learn fromand relate better to older youth than to children their own ageor adults. "Dope Stop" in Arizona uses high schoolstudents, trained by physicians, psychiatrists, or ex-addicts, tocounsel grades five to eight. One proposal suggests subsidizingteenaged youth with a reputation for being "in" and"cool" to work with younger boys against druginvolvement. NIMH drug-information officials say they are alsoconsidering having students of different age groups prepareeducation programs for the next-youngest age level. A study of a junior high school drug-education program thatfeatured teachers and ex-addicts produced some illuminatingresults. The program lasted an entire semester in two junior highschools in the high narcotics area of the inner city, andquestionnaires were administered before and after the program aswell as in a control school using the traditional lecture method.The results showed that teachers and ex-addicts were hostiletoward one another, resenting each other's prerogatives androles. Teachers resented the time spent on testing forevaluation, and ex-addicts needed feedback on how the studentsreacted toward them. The students in the experimental schools didbetter on factual knowledge than those in the control schools.Parent education efforts failed. The students thought the filmswere "no good" and exaggerated the behavior of drugusers, and that the reading material was "cut anddried." They wanted more talking and less reading; also, tohear the ex-addicts relate personal experiences but not tolecture. The students did not like the personal questions on thetests and were suspicious that their answers would not be keptconfidential. They wanted more concentration on the drugs used intheir own schools; they wanted to see samples of the drugs inorder to recognize them. Discouragingly, however, there is no evidence that most of thenew programs being undertaken will be evaluated any moresystematically than the older ones have been. Until that happens,therefore, we will not know the best way to educate about drugabuse. TOTAL SCHOOL INVOLVEMENT Once again, as has happened so often with complex socialdilemmas, the schools have inherited America's number-one"Problem cbild'-the drug-abuse crisis. At present, educatorsare joining with related disciplines in defining approaches tothe problem for use in classrooms, libraries, and counselingoffices. Educational institutions have become the testing groundfor diverse preventive alternatives. It has become clear that thefundamental areas of school involvement must be to providerelevant educational programs from kindergarten through collegeand to serve as an avenue for community action involvingstudents, parents, faculty, and other local elements. According to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs: The schools cannot by themselves be expected to rehabilitateyouth and their neighborhood environments. Sociologists andothers who have worked in the drug abuse prevention field havepointed out that drug education is not a problem for the schoolsalone. It is a community problem and requires total communityeffort for its solution. The schools cannot assume the roles ofparents, clergymen, enforcement officers, physicians orpsychiatrists. But they can exercise leadership in facing aproblem that the total community, working together, can try toremedy. This is education in its broadest and most importantsense. It is making schools relevant to their communities. An initial effort must be made to formulate school policiesthat are sensitive to the needs of all elements of the schoolcommunity. There is no point, for example, in expecting"free" class discussions or adult cooperation whenstudent informers are widely used throughout the school andteachers are required to report all suspected users to thepolice. If the school intends to act as an extension of civilauthority-to investigate and turn users over to the police-itmust come to terms with the fact that its effectiveness as aneducational force will be substantially reduced. On the otherhand, no school administrator can be expected to sit idly bywhile drug traffic flourishes within the school. Therefore, amajor responsibility of school authorities is to give carefulconsideration to alternative choices in defining the school'saction policy toward drug use. Once established, the policyshould be clearly explained to students and their parents, aswell as to the school staff. The failure of school administratorsto communicate with students about policies that they will beexpected to obey inevitably creates mistrust of all officialadvice and information. By seeking and accepting inputs fromyoung people and their parents in the formulation of schoolpolicies, school officials not only open up valuable channels ofcommunication but make it possible to develop policies that arerelevant to the needs, interests, and aspirations of each memberof the school community. Until recently, schools could do little to deter student useof drugs, because most of them had no announced policy. More andmore, administrators are moving to establish such guidelines, fora very good reason: Lacking established policy guidelines, aschool has no standard procedure for providing help or disciplinewhen a student is found with drugs. A variety of policies ispossible, and it is difficult to say in advance how mucheffectiveness in one area should be traded for gains in another.Some colleges say that what the student does with his own body ishis own business, unless it results in active disruption ofclasses, threatens the safety of others, or prevents satisfactoryacademic functioning. This laissez-faire policy, however, is lesslikely to be acceptable at the high school level. Some schoolshave opted for the policy that selling or distributing drugs isforbidden, and that distributors will be punished while userswill be treated more leniently or ignored. Other schools refuseto initiate disciplinary action for anything that happens offschool grounds. More cautious institutions have adopted thetheory that drug use spreads in epidemic fashion, and that it isnecessary to quarantine and isolate the carrier. Theyaggressively seek out drug users through urinalysis or lockersearches and either expel the users or report them tolaw-enforcement officials. Some recent court decisions have madeit difficult for school personnel to conduct searches of astudent's personal belongings, thus imposing limitations on whata school can do to investigate possible drug dealing. The optimal relationship between school policy and the lawenforcement system is difficult to determine. Some schools haveworked out cooperative agreements with law-enforcement agenciesin seeking feasible alternatives to arrest (which is viewed as alast resort). Unfortunately, however, most school officials havegiven little thought to methods of diverting student drugpossessors who need help out of the criminal process and intotreatment, as witness a booklet published by the NationalAssociation of Secondary School Principals in 1969: There is a distorted notion gaining widespread acceptance thata school or college is a sanctuary. These institutions are a partof society and are subject to the same laws as the rest ofsociety. Accordingly, the school authorities have the sameresponsibility as every other citizen to report violations oflaw. Students possessing or using on school premises drugsprohibited by law should be reported to the appropriate lawenforcement officials .20 John Langer, of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,advises principals to use discretion and judgment in situationsthat may involve the violation of federal, state, or local laws.He emphasizes that teachers and administrators are notlaw-enforcement officers but school officials with aresponsibility to carry out school board policy." Continuing lines of communication between law-enforcementagencies and schools (such as the involvement of policemen inteacher-training and community educational efforts, speakers'bureaus, and community-relations programs) are often mutuallybeneficial in dealing with drug issues. In several metropolitanareas, these efforts have led to the establishment of counselingsessions that must be attended by first offenders and theirparents in lieu of a jail sentence. A Hudson Institute study hassuggested specially supervised "drug-free" schools forall students found to be using drugs. Opponents of this approach,however, argue that isolation and expulsion will only confirm theoccasional user's alienation and result in his furtheridentification with deviant behavior. Students frequently cited the need for a designated person inthe schools to whom they can go for information or help, assuredthat their confidence will be kept. Helen Nowlis states,"Within any institution it should be made clear who will andcan guarantee confidentiality and such guarantees should berespected."" Such a person would be anombudsman-counselor, able to work with parents as well asstudents to solve drug problems. He must be the kind of personstudents normally seek out for sympathetic but sound advice. Inaddition, he should have thorough familiarity with the drug-abusefield as well as access to treatment and intervention programs,so that he can provide referrals in acute situations. (There isreason to believe that this type of counseling resource can bemore important for schools than traditional educationalprograms.) Such a person could also advise the school on generalpolicies and provide drug-usage information. His expertise wouldbe invaluable in conducting drug-abuse education classes. The ombudsman concept must be carefully considered by theschools. Their wholehearted commitment must be assured, fornothing could be so damaging as to invite confidences and thennot to be able to honor them. The legal problems raised when aschool official acts in the counselor's role must also beresolved and cooperation obtained from the authorities to preventpressure on individuals who may not enjoy a technical legalprivilege. Because school policies frequently forbid teachers tohonor student confidences, many are hesitant to encouragepersonal involvement, which may place the student in jeopardy. Many believe that the ombudsman-counselor should provide hisservices for other kinds of adolescent problems in addition tothose related to drugs-family, sex, alcohol, and so on."Classroom teachers often have tremendous influence on students,especially on those who lack parental understanding. They occupya more neutral position than parents and sometimes are betterable to identify behavior requiring special counseling orreferral. Until now, schools have relied almost entirely on classroomteachers to assist student drug abusers in finding help. Publicfunds earmarked for "teacher training courses" haverarely included guidance-counseling personnel. It is unfortunatethat schools have failed to take advantage of the position ofthose guidance counselors who enjoy the trust and respect ofyoung people. Recently, the American Personnel and GuidanceAssociation began developing a national effort to train guidanceworkers to deal with the complexities of drug abuse. The programis being held in abeyance until adequate seed money can beprocured. Information alone cannot always help a youthful user. The headof a Mexican-American outreach program in Los Angeles testifiedbefore Congress that a large proportion of youth in his area wereheavily addicted to barbiturates, but that education could nothelp when there was no place in the area they could go formedical aid in withdrawal. Teacher and guidance counselors shouldprovide the link between the school and treatment resources thatis now lacking in many places. If it is to reach users orexperimenters, a school education program not only must supplyinformation on where to go for help but also must have aneffective system for getting them there. Teachers or counselorsmust know, for example, whether the student-user can receivetreatment on his own (as in California and Connecticut) or musthave parental permission before anyone can treat him (as in mostother states). School counselors should be willing to take theinitiative in getting the student to the treatment service and inrunning bureaucratic interference for him. They may even have tohelp make parents more sensitive to their children's drug problemin an effort to prevent them from acting destructively. On the other hand, treatment facilities in many areas faroutnumber institutions that focus on prevention. Young people whodo not use drugs have legitimate questions but find few places towhich they can turn for answers. The school counselor can act asan effective source of information. Any well-balanced school program should harness the supportand cooperation of outside community elements in providing helpto young abusers. The Office of Education's national teachertraining program challenged schools to consider communitymotivation as their ultimate long-range goal. OE staff membersreport that teachers were often unsuccessful in gaining thenecessary support of politicians, school board members,principals, and parents in accomplishing this final phase oftheir program. As a rule, the attitudes of the communitiesprecluded the exploration of innovative ways to prevent drugabuse. What is needed, therefore, is widespread local awarenessof the need for unity in making progress-a recognition thateducational institutions are merely conduits through whichcommunal efforts must pass. OUT-OF-SCHOOL DRUG-EDUCATION PROGRAMS Education does not take place only in school. As Helen Nowlisstated before Congress: It is learning about drugs that should concern us today,rather than the formal mechanisms for presenting druginformation. Information by itself is not education, education byitself is not learning. How do people, particularly young people, learn about drugsand form their drug-related attitudes? We believe that a seriesof influences help shape these attitudes: the atmosphere of theschool, as well as the factual information presented there; thelife-style at home, and the attitude of parents; peer-grouppressures; popular culture, including music, films, magazines andnationally publicized events; personal experiences with drugs ordrug-related substances; the availability of alternativemechanisms for carrying out certain kinds of behavior-risktaking, wish fulfillment, etc .24 Most of a youth's initial information about a subject comesfrom his peers. A survey of Maryland high school students showedthat they got most of their drug information and attitudes frompeers and underground newspapers. In addition, the students mostprone to serious drug abuse are often those who are mostantagonistic to the school climate. There is general agreementthat more out-of-school programs are needed to reach those whomthe schools cannot reach. Unfortunately, antidrug programs run byprivate and public organizations outside the school are ofvarying quality and totally lacking in evaluation. Nevertheless,the New York Addiction Control Commission alone spent $1 millionin 1970 on such "preventive education." Most prevention programs, besides lacking evaluation, are notgrounded on any hypotheses based on field observations. Dr.Irving Lukoff, of the Columbia University School of Social Work,believes that effective prevention programs await basic researchto discover what influences young people in heavily addictedareas not to take drugs, why some do use drugs, and how drug usespreads. The most that can be done at this point is to categorize fivebasic kinds of nonschool prevention programs: PEER-GROUP PROGRAMS Many types of teenage peer-group, antidrug programs haveemerged. The following are illustrative: The members of one national group-the Smarteens-pledge not touse drugs, wear buttons deriding drug use, and distribute postersscorning the drug culture. The psychology is to provide supportand reinforcement for youngsters who choose not to use drugs.Such a technique, however, merely widens the gap between the"squares" and the drug users and alienates the latterstill further. Those familiar with the group admit it has itsgreatest impact in middle-class suburban areas. Members of Project DARE (Drug Abuse Research and Evaluation),in the Los Angeles area, do not use drugs, but participate in therest of the psychedelic scene-rock music, flashy dress, crafts-soas to show that one can be "cool" without beingdrugged. Other activities include evaluating drug educationfilms, lecturing to encourage an understanding of today's drugculture, and stimulating the involvement of youth in the solutionof community problems. Two New York City ghetto high schools have experimented with aprogram in which members of a black youth organization visit theschools, assess the drug situation, and then"penetrate" by mixing at the ball courts and otherstudent gathering places, seeking to identify student pushers anddeal with them, either through persuasion or by reporting them tothe authorities. Identified users are urged to seek treatment.The organization itself reports a reduction in selling and usageof drugs, but no official evaluation is obtainable. Teen Challenge is a private, religion-oriented agency withcenters across the country that offer treatment to anyone overeighteen. Its premise is that a drug user should be given anopportunity to undergo a religious experience that can give himthe strength to overcome his destructive desires and habits. Private businesses often fund programs offering alternativesto youth. One recently financed a project involving youth groupsfrom Harlem and Nassau County, utilizing peer-group dynamics asan alternative to drug abuse. Films, magazines, and educationalmaterials created by the students are disseminated to schools andcommunity organizations. Several treatment and rehabilitation facilities have openedtheir doors to youngsters for whom they organize extracurricularactivities. Patients in a Detroit methadone facility have"hit the streets" to provide speakers, peer and familycounseling, and neighborhood projects to stimulate politicalawareness and consumer education. RAP, Inc., a Washington, D.C.,therapeutic community, encourages neighborhood children to join a"block club" designed to channel energiesconstructively. Tutoring services, speakers, and libraryprivileges are extended to members of the group. Some of the more creative programs involve both drugexperimenters and nonusers in activities that seek to exploreways youth can pursue inward and outward experiences that willmake drug use less desirable. Dr. William Soskin's ProjectCommunity in Berkeley has such a program for 140 youths betweenthe ages of fourteen and eighteen. Acting on the hypothesis thathome and school have not provided sufficiently satisfyinginfluences in their lives, the Center seeks to create a"third force" consisting of a group of peers, undersupervision, who engage in mutual activities a few hours a day.These activities include inward meditation, body language,poetry, and even active practical jokes for the more aggressivemembers. Rap sessions and encounter groups as well as activecommunity projects and recreation outings complete the program.Sympathetic counselors are always available to talk to anindividual about his problems. FREE CLINICS AND CRISIS CENTERS There are a number of free medical clinics for "streetpeople" providing a range of services on a twenty-four-hourbasis-not only emergency medical or psychological help for drugcrises (bad trips and severe reactions), but also up-to-dateinformation on the quality and effects of drugs currently beingsold in the immediate area, long-term treatment, and referral.Their basic purpose is not to proselytize against drugs but toprovide help when people need it most and to disseminate accurateanalyses of the risks of street drugs. In some cases, forexample, there followed a dramatic decrease in the use ofparticular drugs or batches of drugs after the clinic staffspread the word that a particular product was having bad effects.2' Free medical clinics reach those in or on the edge of thedrug culture, and they enjoy a high degree of credibility. Mostcrisis centers cater to a variety of needs, including draft,abortion, and family counseling. These facilities sometimes offertemporary residence for runaways and intervention with parents.Usually, they give medical help to those with drug problems andprovide speakers and materials as well as information to othercommunity organizations, including schools. Some even provideemployment in crafts and work with delinquent youngsters in thecommunity. Most clinics and crisis centers are run by the youthsthemselves with professional and medical guidance. Young peopleare attracted by their neutral attitude toward drug use. Whatpreventive effects, if any, the centers have on continued druguse is extremely speculative, but they fill acute needs for helpin immediate health crises and for accurate information. "HOT-LINE" TELEPHONE SERVICES Anyone can call such a telephone service anonymously withquestions about drug reactions as well as a score of otherproblems. Not infrequently, hot-line staffers are asked to locatelost pets, give advice on domestic squabbles, and make referrals.It is inherent in the nature of such a service that there is noway of telling what happens to callers, or whether they make useof the advice and information given about drugs and treatmentservices, or whether, indeed, calls are legitimate. Anonymityconstitutes the service's main attraction. Ex-users often findpositive reinforcement and satisfaction in serving as hot-lineoperators. Yet, there are cases where constantly talking aboutdrug effects has led these people back to drug use. As a rule,however, their past drug experiences enhance their ability todeal effectively with crisis situations. In cases of extremeemergency, trained professionals are consulted. AFTERSCHOOL AND INSTEAD-OF-SCHOOL PREVENTION PROGRAMS As of 1970, New York City's Addiction Services Agency ransixteen youth centers in poverty areas to discourage drug use bynonusers or early experimenters aged nine to nineteen andreferred by parents, schools, police, or courts. Ten centers werefunded by OEO, four by NIMH, but all were to be shifted to localand state funding. ASA was asking for money to open four morecenters in middle-class neighborhoods. ASA has estimated that 80 per cent of New York City youthsover twelve have experimented with at least one drug. Themajority, however, reportedly have no deep-seated mental problemsrequiring a residential therapeutic community setting. During1970, about 500 youths were in such afterschool centers at anyone time and some 5,440 in all were served. The focus is on group therapy and counseling to help the youthmake basic decisions about his values and life goals."Disrupters," seriously disturbed youth, and heavyopiate users are not eligible. Parent groups also operate out ofthe centers, which try to work with the schools, so that teacherstoo can play a supportive role. Centers are open five days a week, each handling 50 youths ata time. Youths, if attending school, come to the center in theafternoons, generally for a period of three to six months. Ifthey are not in school, center activities are scheduled duringthe day. Peer-group sessions, role-playing and psychodrama,individual counseling, recreation, workshops, and seminars areall used. An attempt is made to establish role-modelidentification with staff members. These centers have not, to our knowledge, been evaluatedsystematically. Their aim is to create pressure against the useof drugs. The agency's own assessment is that the centers havehad difficulty because the youths referred to them need moresupportive services than can be offered. There have been recurrent proposals for outdoor work or summercamps for drug-using youngsters. ASA would like to create one for150-180 youths aged twelve to nineteen, modeled on Outward Bound.(This is a program that gets youth into the country, where theyincrease their wilderness skills in challenging situations, thusincreasing their sense of confidence and selfworth.)Group-encounter sessions would be combined with regular camplife. Dr. Gordon Heistad, of the University of Minnesota, hasexperimented (successfully, he believes) with a camp modelcombining drug education and regular camp life for high schoolleaders. DRUGMOBILES These vehicles, which follow street youth into their naturalhaunts, to ball games and rock concerts, have been tried inseveral cities. Generally, they feature informational exhibitsand ex-addict staffers. Counselors answer inquiries on anindividual basis and ensure anonymity. Credible staff is quite difficult to retain, since trainedcounselors prefer working with more stable programs. In mostcases, these mobile units end up having middle-aged discussionleaders with good intentions but little facility incommunicating. Many young people suggest that more emphasisshould be put on honest discussions and less on"clever" exhibits. THE NATIONAL MEDIA A perpetual dispute in the drug-education field involves theinfluence of the national media on drug-abuse-prevention efforts.What effect do they have? What effect should they have? Some whowork with young drug users believe that television is more likelyto influence them than school programs, because they relate moresympathetically to the medium; others fear that a high poweredtelevision campaign stressing "risks, thrills, scares,fantasies, high tragedy and antiheroism" will increase drugexperimentation." Dr. Norman Zinberg points out thattelevision may bend growing children in the direction of seekingexperiences that transcend tangible boundaries, such asmind-altering drugs." The role played by the mass media in any comprehensive drugeducation effort depends on the specific objectives of thateffort and the methods used to attain them. The current lack ofagreement on these matters, however, makes it difficult toconceive of the ideal media program and virtually impossible topredict the benefits to be derived from it. Nevertheless, as thefollowing review of present efforts will show, everybody is doingsomething. Between 1968 and 1970, the National Institute of Mental Healthconducted a national television campaign against drugs, featuringspots created by the Grey Advertising Company with famous"name personalities," such as Rod Serling and theEverly Brothers. Air time was donated on a public-service basis,and eighteen different films were supplied to every major networkstation and most independents. Radio stations also aired antidrugmessages, twelve in all. Some fourteen posters and pamphlets weremailed out to supplement the campaign. No one knows what thetotal effect was, aside from generating 22 million requests forinformation. Gerald Kurtz, Director of the Office ofCommunication at NIMH, has been quoted as saying that the effort,which was specifically youth-oriented, was not expected to turnyoung people away from drugs. Its real purpose, rather, was toheighten the concern of laymen and private organizations andcreate national awareness of the problem of drug abuse. In 1970, a new national media campaign was begun under WhiteHouse sponsorship, based on the same untested assumption thattelevision can "unsell" drug usage. According to theprevailing theory, peer pressure against drugs can be created toreinforce those who have not yet tried drugs or are only veryoccasional users. The approach still lumps all drugs togetherunder the slogan "Why Do You Think They Call It Dope?"Some black reporters have criticized it as obviously a product ofthe white advertising world, both in its content and in its styleof presentation. It was put together by the Compton Agency, whichworked through the Advertising Council. The new campaign startedby directing its programs to the preteen group, then moved tohigh school and college audiences, then to blacks, parents, andthe military. While medical hazards are mentioned, the emphasisis on inculcating the attitude that taking drugs is"stupid" rather than on presenting factual information. Other groups have entered the media fight against drug abuse.In February, 1971, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting beganairing eight one-hour programs entitled "The Turned-OnCrisis." The series, intended for general audiences,includes programs on several facets of the drug problem. Forthose more involved in the drug problem, CPB can also provide anin-service training program of six thirty-minute segments forteachers and school administrators and an in-class series ofeight twenty-minute programs for junior high school youth. There are many efforts to develop effective television andradio antidrug spot ads, but whether any such device cancounterbalance everyday pressures supporting drug use isdoubtful. It has been pointed out that most teenagers listenincessantly to the radio, while their television viewing issporadic, and that radio spots repeated between rock songs aremore likely to reach them than spots on television. But merelyreaching the audience is not enough; the ads must be effective.Some stations that carry antidrug spots have complained of a lackof good material but an abundance of poor, ineffective material.The National Institute of Mental Health has provided funds to theNational Coordinating Council on Drug Education to evaluate radioand television material; the results are included in a monthlynewsletter, Tune In, distributed to approximately 5,600 radio andtelevision stations. Included are reviews of spot announcements,factual programs, interviews, and public-service announcementsavailable to the media for broadcasting. A black-audience station in Woodside, New York-WWRL hasadopted a more direct approach: It asks listeners to call in thenames of pushers, which it then submits to the police; thecaller's anonymity is kept, and all tips are investigated. Thestation contends that thirty-two arrests have been made in sixmonths as a result of this campaign. It also broadcasts areferral telephone number for those who want help with their owndrug problems. Other radio stations are beginning to use the rock sound incommunicating antidrug messages. Disk jockeys, for example, playauthentic-sounding rock tunes with lyrics describing youthfuldeaths caused by overdoses or by the ingestion of poor-qualitystreet drugs, in the hope that the young will pay serious heed.But some teenagers resent this attempt to make the scare approachpleasing to the ear. The subject of rock music raises another question about therelation between national media and the drug problem. Someobservers believe that the media are better at aggravating theproblem than at solving it. Songs with so-called drug-relatedlyrics were banned from the airwaves by the FederalCommunications Commission because of their alleged potential toglamorize drug abuse. This action was vigorously opposed byunderground radio stations, record companies, and privateorganizations, which castigated the FCC for exercising censorshipand imposing an "establishment" interpretation of musicon the general public. A booklet put out by the JusticeDepartment's Bureau of Narcotics, entitled Drug Taking in Youth,declares that, "Numerous entertainers whose records areplayed frequently are drug advocates. Many popular songs havehidden or expressed drug allusions. Underground FM radio stationslate at night reach many young people with 'acid' rock and theirovert or disguised messages about drug use, sources, andavailability. Rock festivals are frequently advertised throughthis medium."" The effects of rock lyrics on anindividual's decision to use drugs still remain a mystery,however, clouded by the contradictory pronouncements ofgovernment spokesmen and rock-music enthusiasts. Television has also been charged with contributing negativelyto the drug problem because of its steady advertising of over-thecounter drugs. In 1969, drug manufacturers reportedly spent $13.7million for television promotion of seventeen brands of sedativesand stimulants alone. All types of advertising for allproprietary drugs involved expenditures of $282 million. Messagesthat are criticized for "pushing" over-the-countermedication promise to solve problems and alleviate everydaystresses. The manufacturer of a popular pain reliever supports asuccessful advertising package attributing love, success,tranquillity, self confidence, health, and so on, ad infinitum,to its product. Another commercial selling children's vitaminsshows two youngsters floating through the sky on a magic carpetafter chewing the tablets. Although manufacturers of proprietary (over-the-counter) drugsdeny the cause-and-effect relationship between advertising andabuse, many public groups are adamant about eliminating mood drugadvertisements. The National Association of Broadcasters, forexample, has proposed content restraints and criteria for thebroadcasting of such messages. Both the FTC and HEW have beenstudying the relationship between over-the-counter drug ads ontelevision and drug abuse. Members of Congress are also holdinghearings on advertising that urges mood alteration throughnonprescription drugs. An HEW-sponsored study concludes: By and large, advertising, per se, seems to have a relativelylow level of general influence upon students, when compared toother environmental factors such as home (parents) and school(peer groups) . This suggests that advertising is not, by itself,responsible for student behavior toward drugs and/or otherproducts, substances or activities. At most, advertising operates within the context of thestudent's total environment and cannot be uniquely responsiblefor student values, attitudes and beliefs. Even though advertising, per se, may not be considereduniquely responsible for attitudes towards legal and illegaldrugs, the students, nevertheless, feel that it is potentially aninfluencing agent, particularly on the youngest students.30 The study, based on interviews with 560 fifth-, seventh-, andeleventh-grade California students, covered drugs of all kinds,including Compoz, Contac, Alka-Seltzer, Bayer Aspirin, as well asSalem and Marlboro cigarettes. Students questioned after viewingthe ads expressed disbelief of the advertiser's claims, asfollows: Cornpoz-46 per cent; Salem-31 per cent; Contac-40 percent; Bayer Aspirin-19 per cent; Alka-Seltzer-12 per cent;Marlboro -11 per cent. The study also found that "users ofillegal drugs tend to be more receptive to proprietary drug adsthan non-users." Concluding that such ads may be a"cultural prop in the maintenance of favorable attitudestoward drug usage among the young, the study suggested that theindustry initiate an examination of" promotional programsand more government studies of children's receptivity. No formal report has been released on the FTC study.Nevertheless, it is the view of a number of FTC staff members, aswell as some scientists and some officials of BNDD, that such arelationship does exist in certain cases." In any event,many lawyers are convinced that the FTC has the power to attackmany of the suspicious ads without necessarily proving theexistence of such a relationship. A study by four physicians at the University of SouthernCalifornia pointed out that high-pressure advertising ofprescription drugs to physicians depends on a technique of"mystification."" The ads identify ordinary humanreactions and emotions as symptoms of physical illness and thenprescribe a drug as remedy. Tofranil, an antidepressant drug, iscited as one example. The ad suggests that parents agonizing overa runaway daughter might be treated with the drug. The sametechnique may be applied to television ads for proprietary drugsthat impel the listener to seek a drug remedy for the relief ofnormal tensions arising from interpersonal relations. Another example is the excessive use of over-the-counterdrugs. Richard Blum reports that those who use such drugs heavilyassert more frequently than others that medicines make adifference in the way one feels; also, they recall having moremedicines in their childhood homes than do light users. Notsurprisingly, therefore, they are more likely to use drugs toreduce fear, induce courage, or change mood in socialsituations." Similarly, many youths learn favorableattitudes about drugs through underground newspapers; yet, thesepapers often present accurate reports about specific drug dangersand effects. This source of information should not be ignored,even though its ideological slant may be quite different fromthat of official sources of drug education. If solid researchshows that a drug has severe toxic effects, an underground papermay be the quickest and surest way to communicate with those mostlikely to be damaged by it. For example, Washington, D.C.'sQuicksilver Times has printed the pharmacological analyses ofstreet samples provided by the Washington Free Clinic as awarning of the unreliability of certain varieties of drugs thenavailable. FILMS AND AUDIO VISUALS The recent emphasis on school drug-education programs hasproduced a receptive market for drug films and audiovisualmaterials; in the past few years, the number of these teachingdevices has reached approximately two hundred. The potentialvalue of visual teaching cannot be disputed-it makes learningsituations more realistic and more acceptable, especially totelevision-oriented youth. The problem, however, for any schoolor civic group is how to distinguish between effective materialand that which is inaccurate or counterproductive. Certainly,there ought to be readily accessible, up-to-date evaluations ofdrug films by both experienced adult and student viewers,indicating the content, level of sophistication, target audience,and goal orientation of the films. Different reviewers may wellcome to different conclusions, but the plethora of drug films nowbeing sold or given away makes a meaningful choice impossible inthe absence of some reasonably reliable guide. The Educational Products Information Exchange, which de spots and films created by young people tend to presentinformation that is honest and sensitive to the needs of theirpeers. Many evaluators criticize existing films for not conforming tothe life-styles of the viewer, for containing technicalinaccuracies, and for failing to use either black or Puerto Ricanactors or, at least, a Spanish soundtrack. It has been suggestedthat students do not identify with actors or even with realpeople in a strange setting, and that movies made in thestudents' own locale may have more effect. Several drug-treatmentprograms are planning homemade movies set against familiarbackgrounds. Such a series was made in Bedford-Stuyvesant bylocal talent, under the sponsorship of the Bedford-StuyvesantRestoration Corporation, and was shown on New York's Channel 13. Most problems, however, seem to occur once the film is in theteacher's hands, ready for use. Fortunately, most film reportsare accompanied by remarks on how to use the materialseffectively. Previewing is the essential first step, preferablywith students as well as with adult screeners. Films should notbe shown if they fail to meet the audience's level of knowledgeand sophistication. Next, creative interaction should take placebetween the audience, the educator, and the film. Students shouldbe allowed to give their own evaluation or to discuss theirfeelings about the film's message. A plethora of commercial films focusing on the youthful drugculture has flooded the market. As is to be expected, many suchmovies sensationalize and exploit the drug-abuse problem. A few,however, present the cruel realities of drug addiction in asensitive manner, thus meriting their use in student and adulteducational programs. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsfeels that "recent films directed to youth ... initiate theminto the drug scene." The emphasis on student participation has prompted a newmethod-videotaping the students' own discussions on drugsthat isbeing tried in many classrooms. Educators are able to gaininsights from studying the dynamics of the situation, andstudents profit from observing themselves in peer-group settingsattempting to solve problems and make decisions collectively.Outside the schools, videotapes have been used successfully inadult training courses, especially those focusing on increasingthe participants' level of communication. For most, theexperience becomes a mirror reflecting strengths, weaknesses, andlimitations in dealing with others. Unlike the passive screeningof drug education films, live videotape replays often enhance theability of teachers and parents to relate to young people.Unfortunately, however, videotape apparatus is too costly formost schools and civic groups. SCHOOL CURRICULA Paralleling the proliferation of antidrug films has been theemergence of packaged curricula. Private businesses, statedepartments of education, local school systems, publishers,pharmaceutical manufacturers, professional associations,consulting firms, and universities have all jumped on thebandwagon in response to the growing demand for ready-made drugcourses. These vary tremendously in quality, content, andapproach. Some are very useful, while others are aimed merely atexploiting the commercial market, offering little more than thebasic facts about drugs with a few suggestions about researchprojects for students. The better material offers teachersthoughtful background information on specific drugs, suggestionsfor effective course presentation and teaching aids and flexiblelesson plans. Such publications as the NIMH Resource Book for Drug AbuseEducation and Teaching About Drugs: A Curriculum Guide, K-12,issued by the American School Health-Pharmaceutical ManufacturersAssociation, contain excellent background material on particulardrugs. The National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information willsend, on request, eight model curricula from various schoolsystems, again without endorsement or evaluation of theirappropriateness for different target groups. As a total package,the booklets provide a valuable diversity of approaches as wellas supplemental resources. A few of the education packagesencourage self-examination by both teachers and students. The current emphasis on youthful self-evaluation has givenrise to techniques stressing the importance of student values inmaking decisions about drugs. Those who promulgate the valueapproach contend that behavior and personal values areinseparable. Richard E. Carney believes that drug abuse can beprevented, or at least explained, if it is viewed as anindividual's attempt to actualize his values. In one of hisstudies, drug users placed significantly less value on suchcategories as "power" as it related to participation instudent organizations, clubs, and "politics";"affection" and "respect" as they related totheir willingness to become involved in parental conferences onimportant personal subjects; and "skill" as it relatedto participation in sports and organized activities." But noone knows how students come to hold certain values, or why somevalues are more prevalent than others. This may explain theadamant refusal of many schools to consider adoption of thevalue-clarifying curriculum until more concrete data are madeavailable. Channels are opening up, however, and skepticaleducators are becoming more tolerant of "radical"approaches to education. Several counties in Maryland, forexample, recently adopted a value-oriented curriculum packagedeveloped by Drug Central, a division of Washington, D.C.'sCouncil of Governments. As is often the case with new methods,the Maryland teachers are in need of special training programs toassure positive results in the classroom. At present, increasingnumbers of schools are adopting this approach and reportfavorable responses from students and teachers alike. Other imaginative innovations in the field are receivingfavorable support from the educational community. The CreativeLearning Group in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has integratedmaterials available for elementary and junior high schoolsfocusing on problem solving and teaching younger children how tomake decisions about life and drugs. A vast array of uniqueteaching aids is offered for classes, and teachers are equippedwith a comprehensive manual containing drug-abuse information,sound medical information for use in emergencies, and suggestionsfor generating group discussions. The group's services will bebroadened to include short-term programs, guides for studentcounselors, preschool film strips, and materials for inner-city,Spanish-speaking youngsters. Macro Systems, Inc., has a complex package consisting of aself-discovery kit for use by the teacher in finding out his ownposition on drugs and exploring his own biases, before proceedingto lead an objective and probing discussion among his students.It also contains a consensus map for the classroom that enablesstudents to plot their own attitudes compared with those of theirpeers. It is encouraging to note that at least one group, NewDimensions Publishing Company, has responded to the scarcity ofmaterials for minorities. This New York City firm produces booksin Spanish and English for blacks, Puerto Ricans, and MexicanAmericans at the elementary level. There are undoubtedly other good materials that we did nothappen to find. As yet, no one can prove that any particularpackage or curriculum has an edge over others. There is nopresent basis of comparison, since distributors rarely makeprovisions for evaluation, student testing, periodicalre-evaluation, or updating of their materials, although theOffice of Education is funding efforts in the area. For any curriculum, it is essential that teachers besensitized to the philosophy, techniques, and goals of thematerials. If the instructors fear the subject and doubt theirability to teach it, the odds are that they will not succeed withyoung people, regardless of the caliber of the materials. EDUCATION FOR NONSTUDENTS Despite massive expenditures on public drug-abuse-educationprograms, there is still widespread ignorance of basic drug factsamong the population at large. For instance, a New York AddictionControl Commission survey of 6,000 persons aged thirteen and upfound that one out of every four regarded drug abuse as among thetop four problems facing the nation. Yet, 67 per cent had no ideawhat should be done about it; 60 per cent did not know what stateagencies were at work on the problem; and 50 per cent did notknow what effects heroin or amphetamines had on users." AGallup poll in December, 1970, showed that 64 per cent of theadults and 39 per cent of the students interviewed thought drugswere a serious problem in the public schools." In most cases, parents, teachers, and community leaders aremore in need of accurate information about drugs than studentsare. Parental responses to a student's involvement in drugs cancurb or accelerate further experimentation. It is thereforeunfortunate that most school drug-education programs have notprepared parents to deal with the complex drug issue. For parentsneed not only accurate information but also the ability todiscriminate between the effects of experimenting once withmarijuana and those of heavy involvement with drugs as well asthe ability to establish and maintain lines of honestcommunication with their children. Thus, to begin with,school-education programs should include a parent component.Several sessions could be designed to encourage adultparticipation and interaction with groups of young people.Community information and education programs sponsored by privateand public organizations could also serve to reach and informparents. Even more importantly parents need a place to go forspecific help when they find drug abuse in their own family. Asnoted in a newspaper article, "This is sheer panic thatsimply cannot wait. If advice is not quickly available, fear,anxiety, rage or protectivism takes over. If action is takenduring the panic and without advice, irrevocable damage may bedone to the sick victim as well as to the total family structureand relationships."" As a general rule, parent "help" programs shouldimpart sympathy and counseling together with facts. The guilt,fear, and anger parents are likely to feel when a family drugcrisis occurs should be channeled into constructive actionthrough effective self-help programs. Parents of drug-dependentchildren can also help each other. It is often beneficial to talkto someone else who has been through a family drug crisis intrying to approach the situation calmly and objectively. No oneis better prepared to provide this assistance than those parentswho have been forced to deal with their own children's abuse ofdrugs. Opinion varies concerning the value of involving parentsin group discussions with their own children. Some plannersinsist that direct family interaction is alwayscounterproductive, while others advocate the confrontation offamilial problems after the initial ice-breaking session. New York's ASA runs programs for parents and relatives ofserious drug-users and for community residents worried about theproblem in their neighborhood generally. Several school programs(as in Nassau County, New York, and in Los Angeles) also runspecial sessions for the parents of children enrolled in theschools. In some, parents participate with youngsters (not theirown) in group discussions on why young people use drugs. Thereare, of course, a multitude of drug-information programs run bycivic groups, eager to involve parents. (In Miami, for instance,about two dozen organizations have drug-abuse educationprograms.) Many parent-oriented programs focus too heavily on howto recognize the symptoms of drug usage and may provoke needlessconfrontation between parent and child. Many are not prepared tohelp in actual cases. Until very recently, most urban centers hadno place where parents could go for balanced personal adviceabout what to do when they suspected, or discovered, their childwas using drugs. Experts do not agree on how a parent should react whenconfronted with a drug-abuse crisis. They all begin by urging theparent not to panic but differ markedly on what should be done incoping with the crisis. Some suggest that the parent compel thechild to seek treatment, even by threatening to throw him out ofthe house. Others counsel the parent to be patient andunderstanding in an effort to get at the underlying problems. Dr.Paul Blachley suggests that relatives of a drug user be told that"bailing him out" encourages continuation of dependenceand drug use and advises that they not be accessory to theproblem." Sidney Cohen, former director of NIMH's drugprogram, advocates a middle course, urging parents to demonstratean attitude of "I love you and I will help you, but I won'tsupport you if you persist in behavior that I believe to bedetrimental to you."" He further advises that thesedecisions must be made on an individual basis, depending on thedrugs involved, the child's age, and his willingness to seek helpvoluntarily. Of course, other adults who come into contact with youth needaccurate information on drugs-especially teachers, counselors,policemen, and doctors. How much information is needed has yet tobe assessed. Nevertheless, NIMH recently funded the Bureau ofSocial Science Research to study the knowledge levels ofprofessionals who have contact with the drug scene in Baltimoreand San Francisco. The study will focus on eleven occupationalgroups, including policemen, probation officers, pediatricians,general practitioners, psychologists, social workers, teachers,school administrators, and counselors. Results should cast somelight on the level of knowledge in the various professions, aswell as on prevailing attitudes, and should indicate methods ofupgrading levels of education. The current emphasis is primarily on training teachers,especially through the Office of Education. But other youthworkers deserve attention as well. The National CoordinatingCouncil on Drug Education points out, with a note of lament,that, in 1971, half of the administration's funds for drug-abuseeducation were spent on teacher training. In contrast, New YorkCity's ASA would put primary emphasis on a training institute toprepare a "virtual army of skilled addictionspecialists" to interact with drug-prone youth within theframework of existing institutionsschools, churches, recreationprograms, settlement houses, block associations, and othergroups. To enhance the effectiveness of local efforts, the NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Education has put out a manual forcommunity action-Common Sense Lives Here-that sets out a processwhereby interested community people can define their communitydrug problem and work together to solve it. Not a "howto" manual, the pamphlet, together with an accompanyingfilm, encourage each community to mobilize its own resources andseek the local causes and cures for increasing drug use beforeattempting to formulate a plan of action. It advocates federalplanning grants for communities to finance this preparatoryprocess. (It is possible that such grants could be made underTitle I of the 1970 Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act.) Also,it cautions against rushing into any major educational effortuntil the nature of the local problem is clearly perceived andadequate support has been gained. SPONSORS OF CURRENT EFFORTS THE FEDERAL GOVERMENT A number of federal agencies participate indrug-abuse-education programming, but only five have asubstantial involvement the National Institute of Mental Health,the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, the Office ofEducation, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, andthe Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Their expenditurelevels and basic activities are described in Staff Paper 5. There is general agreement among these primary agencies thattheir present system of program development and funding ispiecemeal, uncoordinated, and inefficient. It involves variousagencies independently supporting different drug-abuse programswithout regard for the resulting duplication of effort and wastedresources. Ongoing programs, too, are poorly evaluated or notevaluated at all. Consequently, the agencies have reached a deadend. They are finding it virtually impossible to judge thesuccess of programs or even to design cost-benefit analyseswithout comprehensive assessments. Only one fact is certain:Millions of dollars are being spent. just how effectively fundsare being used is still unknown. STATE AND LOCAL EFFORTS Virtually every sizable community in the country now has atleast one public or private drug-abuse prevention and educationprogram. The quality of these efforts varies from one area toanother, depending, for example, on the flow of fundinginformation from Washington, the attitudes and concerns of localcitizens, the fiscal condition of the locality, and the number ofagencies active in prevention programming. State educationadministrators agree that there are too many crash programsconcentrating on drug education in isolation; that there is notenough coordination of effort where many agencies are in the samefield; that there is too much attention to medical and legalfactors and not enough to social and psychological factors; andthat, finally, there is too little an attempt to relate specificdrug use to the "drug culture," and too much relianceon one-way education (i.e., handouts, lectures, films, andspeakers). States also suffer from a lack of support from schooladministrators and local political structures. The NationalLeague of Cities/U.S. Conference of Mayors and the NationalAssociation of Counties are responding by planning educationalprograms beamed at local office holders. This chaotic situation is further complicated by theinnumerable commercial firms entering the field, putting out anavalanche of gimmicks as well as legitimate drug-educationmaterials, along with model school curricula, films, and cartoonbooks. State planners have been inundated by the tide ofmass-produced course materials and usually have been unsuccessfulin sorting the good from the bad. Different agencies in different states provide drug educationfunds in response to the variety of laws. A 1970 compilation byHEW of drug-abuse education programs supported by state educationagencies shows that twenty-one states have legal requirements forschool drug (and alcohol) education and are "complying"with them. Four other states have programs in all educationaldistricts, despite a lack of legal requirements. In eleven statesand Puerto Rico, some, but not all, districts have schoolprograms. A parallel survey of drug programs supported by statehealth authorities, conducted by NIMH in 1970, found thattwenty-two states had such health-related programs, and sixteenmore had them in the planning stages. A major problem at the state level is lack of effectivecoordination. Most states are plagued by a lack of cooperationbetween existing programs, by unnecessary overlap and duplicationof effort, and by an insufficient flow of information from thegrassroots level to the legislature to stimulate effectivepolicies and leadership. A few states, such as Arizona,California, and now Florida, have statewide councils tocoordinate and give direction to public and private agencies inthe field. California alone has 300 community-based drug-abuseprograms, all of which have sprung up in the past two years. NewYork City has 47 identifiable drug-education programs, and NewYork State has Community Narcotics Education Centers in sixteenlocalities, manned by professionals, as well as 57 localnarcotics-guidance councils to coordinate local programs. To eliminate the fragmentation that exists among the states, aNational Association of State Drug Abuse Coordinators wasorganized recently. Since it is still in the organizationalstages, however, its impact remains uncertain. PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS A plethora of professional organizations, social-welfareassociations, charitable volunteer organizations, and othergroups also conduct community education programs. Few, if any, ofthese programs have been evaluated with regard to their impact ona target population or their record of accomplishing specificgoals. They rarely assume an action-oriented role, preferringinstead simply to disseminate educational brochures andaudiovisuals. Their programs all look rational and successful onpaper, but no one has any real notion of their effectiveness,except, perhaps, for a pervasive feeling that nothing they havedone so far has made much difference. In fact, they are oftencriticized for jumping into the drug field without first askingfor experienced advice on what their role ought to be. Also, thehuge sums of money they expended on mediocre printed materialswould, according to people involved in delivery of serviceprograms, be better spent on the treatment and rehabilitation ofaddicts. On the other hand, some private groups do make successful useof low-key approaches in performing unique and valuable services.Several minority professional associations, for example, sponsorclinics that provide dental care for addicts and support halfwayhouses that offer counseling, job placement, and training tohard-core, youthful drug abusers. Undergraduate chapters of blackfraternal organizations educate members of their campuscommunities, while their graduate counterparts initiate theinvolvement of local groups in educational programs and"action" workshops. Another case involves studentprofessionals who spend their summer months working ininterdisciplinary teams, providing improved health-care delivery(including drug treatment and related legal services) toinner-city residents. Finally, several organizations whose mainfocus is drug abuse not only encourage research and conducttraining sessions for professionals but offer free consultationto people setting up treatment centers. Inherent in the structure of national groups is a widespreadnetwork for the dissemination of materials and information. Theseexpansive communication mechanisms are frequently used to supportlegislative reform efforts and to provide information to themedia and the public on the subject of drugs. Federal money is not being spent to evaluate ongoingeducational programs. As the National Coordinating Council onDrug Education has testified: There is a danger from continued massive education programmingwithout first taking the time to evaluate what has been done,what needs to be done, and what can be done. Unexamined andunevaluated information and education programs are certainly noanswer; and it is safe to say that in some instances they may beas harmful in the long run as no program at all .44 Most private efforts are limited, and many are local in scope.A few, however, are important forces nationally. With publicattention being focused on the drug-abuse problem, increasingnumbers of national drug organizations have begun to emerge, andmany of them project coordination as their main function. Themost inclusive of these is the National Coordinating Council onDrug Education, formed in 1968 as a coordinating group for publicagencies and private organizations involved in drug-abuseeducation. The Council's philosophy emphasizes rationalapproaches to drug-related issues. Any interdisciplinaryregional, state, or local organization whose purpose relates todrug education is eligible for membership. National organizationswishing to cooperate with NCCDE in achieving its goals may alsojoin. At present, most members are white, middle-classorganizations, although there are a few black groups, againprimarily middleclass. Federal agencies are assured of theCouncil's cooperation. The National Coordinating Council has beenfinanced by government contracts, private foundation funds,contributions from private industry, and donations from itsmembers. NCCDE has been quite independent despite its governmentfunding. It refused to join in National Drug Abuse PreventionWeek because it felt that such one-shot crash campaigns wereuseless; it criticized the national advertising campaign; and itfiled suit against the Federal Communications Commission,challenging its ban on rock music. Whether it will continue toreceive government support is doubtful. The Student Association for the Study of Hallucinogens (STASH)is an independent, nonprofit group run by the studentsthemselves. It publishes the Journal of Psychedelic Drugs,provides reprints, issues a bibliography on hallucinogens andother drugs, and holds regular conferences on drug abuse andrelated problems; it has a good (and computerized) librarycontaining 90 per cent of all the literature in English onmarijuana and hallucinogens and has compiled a directory ofdrug-information groups. STASH is objective and scientificallyoriented and, for the sake of credibility, will not accept anygovernment money. It expects, in time, to support itself totallyfrom membership and publication fees. BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY The increasing extent of drug use in industry began to berecognized during the last year by management and personnelofficials. Nationwide interviews with 6,000 workers in theautomobile industry recently compiled by the Alliance for LaborAction found that about 46 per cent of the workers interviewedwho were under thirty years of age had used drugs at leastonce." Of approximately 222 major businesses surveyed aboutdrug abuse among blue-collar workers and alcoholism amongexecutives, nearly two-thirds saw drug abuse as a majorindustrial problem, either now or in the immediate future, and 53per cent had already discovered some form of drug abuse in theirorganization." The existence of drug abuse in a business creates seriousproblems for an employer. It is legitimate for him to considerwhether the employee's behavior on the job endangers otherworkers or consumers, or even the image (or profits) of thebusiness. He can also be encouraged to understand the underlyingproblems that may have led to the drug use, to help the user findtreatment, and to allow him to continue to work undersupervision. Although most businesses still maintain a "findthem and fire them" policy, an increasing number ofexecutives realize that they cannot find and do not wish to fireall employees who use drugs. Such employers are institutingeducation programs in an effort to wean employees away from drugsand to teach management how to recognize serious drug problemsand channel workers to helping agencies when necessary." Business must also be involved in another urgent problemproviding employment opportunities for ex-addicts who are in orhave completed a treatment program. Long-term rehabilitationrequires that an ex-addict be able to find a job. Governmentaland social-service agencies can contribute greatly to this-theVera Institute and the City of New York are pioneering theemployment of patients who are in treatment in speciallysupervised work projects-but real progress will depend upon thetolerance and assistance of far-sighted employers. Moreexperimental work is needed, of course, to determine theproblems, possibilities, and legitimate expectations ofemployment programs. CONCLUSION This examination of current drug-education efforts indicatesthat additional money is not the most urgent requirement.Creative individuals are needed to act as catalysts for thegrowth, testing, and support of creative educational approaches.Evaluation is vital, as is a climate that encourages thetranslation of research findings into action. Educationalprogramming must respond to differences among addicts inethnicity, age, and mental set. Finally, concerted efforts toclarify goals, drug knowledge, and institutional responsibilitiesare essential. NOTES 1. Norman E. Zinberg. Personal communication. 2. John D. Swisher and Richard E. Horman, "Evaluation ofTemple University's Drug Abuse Prevention Program," ResearchReport Contract J-68-50 (U.S. Department of Justice, Washington,D.C., 1968). 3. See Lester Grinspoon, Marijuana Reconsidered (HarvardUniversity Press, 1971), for a discussion of different beliefsabout one drug. 4. See Norman Zinberg and John Robertson, Drugs and the Public(in press). 5. California State Department of Education, "A Study ofMore Effective Education Relative to Narcotics, Other HarmfulDrugs and Hallucinogenic Substances" (a progress reportsubmitted to the California Legislature as required by Chapter1437, Statutes of 1968), Sacramento, California, 1970, pp. 16-27. 6. Marvin J. Rosen, "An Evaluative Study Comparing theCognitive and Attitudinal Effects of Two Versions of anEducational Program About Mind-Affecting Drugs," SanFrancisco, California, Evaluation and Research Associates, July,1970, p. v. 7. Helen H. Nowlis, Drugs on the College Campus (Garden City,New York: Anchor Books, 1969), p. 60. 8. John D. Swisher and James L. Crawford, Jr., "AnEvaluation of a Short-Term Drug Education Program," TheSchool Counselor (March, 1971), p. 272. 9. Louise G. Richards, "Psychological Sophistication inCurrent Drug Abuse Education," Rutgers Symposium onCommunication and Drug Abuse (October 14, 1969), p. 15. 10. California State Department of Education, op. cit., note5, p. 26. 1 1. Helen H. Nowlis, op. cit., note 7. 12. "Ten Drug Abuse Films: What Students andProfessionals Think of Them," Educational Product Report,III, No. 7 (April, 1970), 16. 13. Paul Blachley, Seduction: A Conceptual Model of DrugDependencies and Other Contagious Social Evils (1970). 14. Swisher, Crawford, Goldstein, and Mura (1970); Swisher andWarner (1 97 1) ; Swisher, Warner, Upcraf t, and Spence (1 97 1). 15. Richard W. Warner, "Evaluation of Drug AbusePrograms" (unpublished article), Pennsylvania StateUniversity, State College, Pennsylvania, 1971, p. 6. 16. Herbert 0. Brayer, "A Comparative Analysis of DrugUse and Its Relationship to Certain Attitudes, Values andCognitive Knowledge on Drugs Between Eighth and Eleventh GradeStudents in the Coronado Unified School Districts,"Coronado, Calif., 1970, p. 53. 17. Gilbert Geis, "Impact of an Experimental NarcoticsEducation Program on Junior High School Pupils" (1967). 18. Thomas Ungerleider, "Drugs and the EducationalProcess," The American fournal of Psychiatry, XXV (June,1969). 19. Louise G. Richards and John H. Langer, Drug Taking inYouth (Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington, D.C.,1971), p. 37. 20. The Reasonable Exercise of Authority, NationalAssociation of Secondary School Principals, Washington, D.C.,1969. 21. John H. Langer, "School-Law EnforcementCooperation," Guidelines for Drug Abuse Prevention Education(Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington, D.C.,April, 1970), pp. 13-14. 22. Helen H. Nowlis, op. cit., note 7, p. 66. 23. Thomas Ungerleider and Haskell Bowen, "Drug Abuse andthe Schools," American journal of Psychiatry, XXV (June,1969). 24. U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Labor and PublicWelfare, Special Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Narcotics,Hearings on S. 3562, 91st Cong., 2d sess., March, 1970, pp.176-77. 25. Montgomery County joint Advisory Committee on Drug Abuse,Final Report, March 10, 1970. 26. Frederic Meyers, "Incidents Involving theHaight-Ashbury Population and some Uncommonly Used Drugs,"journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 1, No. I (Fall, 1968). 27. Robin Nelson, "Dragon Slayers on an OminousCrusade," Marketing Communications (September, 1970), p. 20(quoting Dr. Nes Littner, Director of the Chicago Institute forPsychoanalysis). 28. Norman E. Zinberg, "Why Now?: Drug Use as a Responseto Social and Technological Change," lecture, Aspen,Colorado, August 29,1970. 29. Richards and Langer, op. cit., note 19, p. 29. 30. Donald L. Kanter, "Pharmaceutical Advertising inYouth: A Monograph Reporting upon a Quantitative PilotStudy" (mimeograph), December 30, 1970, p. 15. 31. Henry Lermard et al., "Hazards Implicit inPrescribing Psychoactive Drugs," 169, Science 438 (1970).The authors cite examples of such statements as follows: 1. "The epidemic of drug abuse is rapidly becoming anational emergency. Part of the responsibility for this must beborne by the drug industry, radio and television. just ascigarette commercials made smoking romantic, manly, relaxing,smart, and 'in,' drug advertising has helped'turn on' ourcivilization, especially our youth. We are constantly bombardedby people on television with an easy solution to any of ourtroubles, most of it half truth or lies. The continuous sellingof drugs on television and radio must be stopped. All drugadvertising should be prohibited from the mass media, a smallstep toward regaining our children." (Letter from Robert A.Levine, M.D., to the editor, 282 New England journal of Medicine,pp. 1378-79 [1970].) 2. "Our technology provides us with highly potentsynthetic materials and through the mass media means to informany person who can read, listen, or look about these dangeroussubstances. In this situation it is all too easy for anyone ofany age who does not like the way he lives to try a drug'high'insearch of a mystique of esoteric meaning, of euphoria, or ofoblivion." (Stanley F. Yolles, M.D., "The DrugPhenomenon," NS10 journal of American PharmaceuticalAssociation, p. 403 [1970].) 3. "Our culture and communications media teach childrenthat one solves almost all problems by 'turning on@-drugs forheadaches, constipation, sleeplessness, 'nerves,' and forwhatever other maladies beset us." (Allen Y. Cohen, Ph.D.,"Inside What's Happening: Sociological, Psychological, andSpiritual Perspectives on the Contemporary Drug Scene," 59American journal of Public Health, pp. 2090,2093 [1969].) 4. "The impact of mass media advertising . . . tends tocreate a psychological dependence upon drugs as a palliative forthe strains and stresses of contemporary society." (Dr.Donald C. Brodie, Drug Trade News, June 15, 1970, p. 8.) 32. Ibid. 33. Richard Blum et al., Society and Drugs, I (San Francisco,California: Jossey Bass, Inc., 1969), 262. 34. Educational Product Report, op. cit., note 12, p. 16. 35. "99 Films on Drugs +," University of CaliforniaExtension Media Center, Berkeley, California, 1970. 36. Drug Abuse Films, 2d ed., National Coordinating Council onDrug Education, Washington, D.C., 197 1, p. vii. 37. Richards and Langer, op. cit. 38. Herbert 0. Brayer, op. cit., note 16, pp. 54-55. 39. Glaser and Snow, "Public Knowledge and Attitudes onDrug Abuse," NACC (1969). 40. Washington Post, December 10, 1970. 41. New York Times, April 27, 1970. 42. Paul Blachley, op. cit., note 13. 43. Sidney Cohen, "The Drug Dilemma: A PartialSolution," Resource Book for Drug Abuse Education, NationalInstitute of Mental Health (October, 1969), p. 15. 44. U.S. Congress, op. cit., note 24, p. 176. 45. Alliance for Labor Action (ALA) is an organizationrepresenting the United Auto Workers and the Teamsters Unionwhose "Drugs in Industry" survey results will beavailable early in 1972. 46. Harold M. F. Rush and James K. Brown, "The Drug AbuseProblem in Business," Conference Board Record (March, 1971). 47. Carol Kurtis, Drug Abuse as a Business Problem: TheProblem Defined with Guidelines for Policy (New York: New YorkChamber of Commerce, January, 1971). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT01-B32-3IA031-000652-B044-153http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131352 text/html 204579HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:13:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:08:42 GMTContent-length: 204360 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Treatment and Rehabilitation Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 3 Treatment and Rehabilitation by James V. DeLong Introduction * Abstinence Programs * Methadone Maintenance *Antagonists * Multimodal Programs * Heroin Maintenance *Treatment of Users of Nonopiates INTRODUCTION HISTORY OF TREATMENT The beginnings of our current narcotics problem go back over acentury. As many authors have noted, the United States had alarge number of opiate addicts in the period between the CivilWar and the passage of the Harrison Act, which limited theavailability of drugs, in 1914. These addicts were primarilywhite, female, rural, lower to lower-middle class, andmiddle-aged.' They regularly injected morphine or took morphineor opiated patent medicine orally. Opiates were freely availablefrom the local pharmacy, so they were not criminals. Some of them did not even know that they were addicted tonarcotics. Patent medicines were not always labeled, and the usermay have known only that he felt sick when he did not take aparticular medicine, not realizing that the problem waswithdrawal from the medicine itself. Most were knowinglyaddicted, of course, and addiction was a matter of greatindividual concern. Physicians had developed many different"cures" between 1856 and 1914, and the effort continuedthereafter. In 1928, Dr. Charles Terry and Mildren Pellens, afterreviewing these efforts extensively, stated: . . . for the most part, the treatment of this condition has not emerged from the stage of empiricism. The various methods described in general indicate that the basis of the majority of them is merely the separation of the patient from the drug. Very few of those who have described the details of treatment have given a rationale for their procedures but rather have outlined dogmatically the adoption of certain measures whose primary object is the withdrawal of the drug and have stated or left the reader to infer that the completion of the procedure brings about cure .2 True to the spirit of the age, there were also numerous patentmedicine "cures" available, some of which werethemselves laden with opiates. It is difficult to recapture the dominant attitudes towardaddiction during this period. Terry and Pellens cite contemporarysources contending that addiction was a vice, a physical disease,a moral perversion, a product of neurotic inheritance, or aresult of morphine poisoning.' Much of the debate is cast interms of virtue and vice, and it is hard to tell what these termsmeant to the participants. On the whole, however, the argumentsare remarkably similar to those used in current debate aboutaddiction. While there was no consensus on the nature or causes ofaddicrecognized as a significant publiclegislative actiondeveloped. The Act in 1914 changed the problem opiates were to becontrolled and than freely available on the open market. It is not clear what response the lawmakers expected from themedical establishment. They may have expected doctors to keep onsupplying existing addicts while avoiding the creation of newones; they may have expected doctors to force addicts to give uptheir habit by refusing to prescribe narcotics; they may not havethought about it at all. In any event, at passage of the HarrisonAct, the country had at least 200,000 to 300,000 opiate addictswho were now cut off from their normal sources of supply andunable to receive drugs except through physicians. One result was predictable, although not necessarilypredicted: Physicians were deluged with addicts seeking drugs.' Asurvey conducted by a Treasury Department committee in 1918 thatreached 31 per cent of the physicians in the United States foundthat they had 73,150 addicts under treatment. Treatment, thecommittee believed, meant supplying drugs.' In addition to, andpartly in replacement of, private physicians, more than 40maintenance clinics were opened from about 1918. Most weresponsored by cities. Whatever the lawmakers may have thought about the nature ofaddiction, the law enforcers considered maintaining existingaddicts on opiates unacceptable. This group believed that, oncethe drug was removed and the addict had gone through withdrawal,he should have no further problems. Rufus King has given someexamples of this view: the medical conclusion, propounded as not open to question [was] that drug addiction was a correctable and curable condition, viz. the following preface to the Prohibition Bureau's Regulations: "It is well-established that the ordinary case of addiction will yield to proper treatment, and that addicts will remain permanently cured when drug addiction is stopped and they are otherwise physically restored to health and strengthened in will power." Moreover, a small but strident segment of the medical community went even further than the authorities ... In 1921 a member of the American Medical Association's Committee on Narcotic Drugs, purportedly speaking officially for the Association, was quoted [as saying]: "The shallow pretense that drug addiction is a disease which the specialist must be allowed to treat, which pretended treatment consists in supplying its victims with the drug which has caused their physical and moral debauchery .... has been asserted and urged in volumes of literature by the self-styled specialists.",, To people with this mental set, the maintenance clinics servedno useful purpose; they simply prolonged the addictive stateinstead of curing it. If one assumes that abstinence isrelatively easy, then drug maintenance does appear to be theequivalent of drug pushing. The government put severe pressure onthe clinics, and the last one was closed in 1923.' At the same time, a very tough policy toward physicians wasmaintained. The Narcotic Division of the Treasury Departmentarrested or threatened 14,701 persons registered to dispensedrugs under the Harrison Act in 1918, 22,595 in 1919 and 47,835in 1920.' Between 1914 and 1938, 25,000 doctors were arrested forsupplying opiates, and 5,000 of them actually went to jail.'Those doctors who maintained that addiction was more complicatedthan what the official view held, and who advocated maintenance,were purged from the field. It is tempting today to condemn this enforcement policy asboth cruel and ineffective. It was certainly cruel, but its realeffect will never be known. To begin with the most elementaryquestion, no one knows whether the policy of closing offlegitimate sources of supply decreased the total number ofaddicts. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics has estimated that thenumber of addicts declined from 200,000 at the time of theHarrison Act in 1914 to 118,000 in 1930, 60,000 in 1936, and20,000 in 1945. Dr. Alfred Lindesmith has pointed out that theseestimates are improbable, since they depend on the propositionthat new addicts were not being recruited to replace those whodied or quit the habit. if this were true, the average age ofaddicts would have risen as the population aged. In fact, theaverage age declined steadily throughout the period, and theother demographic characteristics of the population also changed,so there must have been substantial recruitment. Lindesmithreached no firm conclusion on absolute numbers, but pointed out:"Since the range of estimates of the addicted population atpresent is at least as great as it was before 1914, one can makeout a case for any trend one chooses by judiciously selecting theestimates."" One can argue that the policy worked fairly well for theaddicts of the early part of the century, who were 60 per centfemale, 90 per cent white, rural rather than urban, and middle orlower-middle class rather than impoverished. By 1945, the addictpopulation was about 85 per cent male and only 75 per cent white,a substantial change in character. Since then, the addictpopulation has remained about 85 per cent male and becomesteadily younger as well as more minority-group-concentrated. InNew York City, for example, the Narcotics Register shows 47 percent of the addicts to be black, 27 per cent Puerto Rican,"and 26 per cent white. During the last two or three years,addiction has been spreading back into the middle class, but thisis not a marked trend as yet. Clearly, the population of the1910's and 1920's did not replace itself, and this could bejudged a successful result of sorts. By any account, a hard core of addicts remained after theclosing of the clinics. During the 1920's, they were largelyignored, and treatment for opiate addiction disappeared for adecade. Then, in 1935 and 1938, the Public Health Service clinicsin Fort Worth and Lexington were opened, largely because ofproblems created by addicts in the prisons. The basic theory oftreatment remained unchanged since the earlier period-if anaddict could be separated from his drug for a time, he could becounted as cured. It was generally believed by this time that thehorrors of withdrawal were so great that few real addicts wouldundertake it on their own, but that a few months at one of theclinics would see them through withdrawal and allow them torecover. Once they went back to the community, it was presumed,they would never want to go near the drug again because of theirfear of withdrawal. Subsequent studies have indicated that the PHS clinics did notwork very well." This was not generally recognized at thetime, however, and there was another hiatus in the development ofnew treatment techniques until the explosion of urban addictionin the 1950's and 1960's. During the latter part of this period,several new methods came into being in response to the obviousinadequacies of the old ones. Synanon, founded in 1959, became the precursor of a line oftherapeutic communities that emphasized the psychologicalcomponent of readdiction and tried to restructure the addict'scharacter. During the next decade, many such communities werefounded across the country. The apogee of the movement wasprobably reached in New York City's Addiction Services Agencybetween 1965 and 1968. At the same time, civil-commitmentprograms more or less on the Lexington model were applied on alarge scale by California starting in 1961 and by New York Stateand the federal government starting in 1967. In 1964, Dr. Vincent Dole pioneered in the use of methadone, asynthetic opiate substitute for heroin. Methadone maintenance hasgrown rapidly in the last few years, and, as of 1971, it is thetechnique into which most new money is going. Contemporaneously with methadone, researchers at Lexington in1965 began experimenting with the use of antagonists-drugs thatblock the effects of opiates without themselves being addictive.This method, however is still experimental, has a great manyproblems, and is not yet an operating modality. At present, the dominant treatment modalities are therapeuticcommunities, civil commitment, outpatient abstinence, andmetbadone maintenance. A large number of hybrid programs,however, have developed in response to the concern over addictionduring the late 1960's. Some are explicitly multimodal, utilizingall the major techniques. There are also detoxification programsthat simply take an addict through withdrawal, often usingmethadone but sometimes not; there are also crisis interventioncenters, and programs that supply very small doses of methadoneon demand. Many community organizations have become active in thefield, with operations of all types and combinations. For purposes of clarity, this paper imposes more order on thefield than exists in practice. Methadone receives by far the mostdetailed analysis. In part, this is because methadone treatmentis expanding very rapidly, and thorough analysis is thereforeespecially important. It is also due to the fact that, sincemethadone maintenance has been in the hands of physicians andscientists who believe in records, evaluation, and research,information on these programs is more readily available. GOALS OF TREATMENT The apparent goals of treatment are obvious. Society wants theaddict to stop using heroin and committing crimes and, instead,to find a job, stabilize his personal life, generally improve hischaracter, and become a useful and productive citizen. Analyzingprograms in terms of these objectives presents a series ofproblems, however. The first is mechanical, although important:It is extremely difficult to get good information on the resultsof programs in terms of these or any other measures of success. The second is more subtle. Even when information on treatmentresults can be obtained, it tends to focus on whether the patienthas stopped using heroin. This represents in part a moraljudgment that this is the most important goal of treatment and inpart the belief that abstinence is a valid proxy measure of theachievement of the other objectives. Historically, there has alsobeen a tendency to believe that treatment has failed if an addictsubsequently uses narcotics for any length of time whatsoever, onthe assumption, perhaps, that any relapse automatically meanstotal relapse. Increasingly, experts have become aware that thisconcentration on abstinence is questionable. While abstinence isto some extent a proxy for the other possible benefits of atreatment program, it is not completely accurate. The many facetsof the addicted life-style are not totally inseparable, and,equally important, they need not all be treated at once. Aftertreatment, an addict might hold a job, support a family, refrainfrom criminal activity -and still go on occasional benders ofdrug use. Or, he might continue to commit crimes, but fewer thanbefore. His physical health might be improved even if nothingelse were changed. It is also possible for a program to have areverse effect. It might, for example, eliminate opiate addictionat the price of alcoholism, a dubious bargain. In short, there is a range of possible benefits and adverseeffects that can be produced by treatment programs. Differentprograms attach different importance to each; conflicts of valueare inherent in comparisons of effectiveness. Since suchquestions are not easily resolvable, an objective examination oftreatment programs should, ideally, use varying measures ratherthan only two categories-success (total abstinence) or failure(anything else) . Abstinence, stabilization on methadone (or, infact, stabilization on heroin), employment, decreased criminalconduct or non-criminal conduct, support of a family, improvedphysical health and psychological functioning-any of theseoutcomes represents at least partial success for a treatmentprogram and should be so regarded. Despite the strong reservations about using abstinence as ameasure, this paper repeatedly uses freedom from drug use as themajor criterion of the success of treatment programs. Whileevaluation of even this factor is fragmentary, it is far morecommon than evaluation in terms of other possible measures.Anyone trying to analyze program results has to use it as a proxyor refrain from any judgments at all, and it is sufficientlyimportant to be of use. It should be emphasized, however, thatgood multifactor evaluation might drastically change many of theconclusions contained here. The third problem is even more fundamental. No one knowswhether the goals of treatment as set forth in the beginning ofthis section are realistic or even desirable. Since no one knowswhy people become narcotics addicts, no one knows either how tomake them stop or what will happen to them if they do stop. Forexample, NIMH officials recently stated that about 25 per cent ofthe addict population are people who suffer from depression andchronic anxiety, another 25 per cent are hedonists who like toget intoxicated, and the rest are psychopaths who need immediategratification and are not particular about how they obtainit." Other researchers have also concluded that there is noone addict type, and that addiction can serve as a functional andadaptive characteristic for people with different types ofpsychic problems. Yet, there are also a number of researchers who, denying thisstress on psychopathology, contend that people are inducted intodrug use through peer pressure and that large numbers of addictsmay not suffer from severe psychopathology. The argument can bemade that whatever characteristics addicts appear to have incommon are forced upon them by the requirements of sustaining theaddiction once it exists. Still another view is that addicts dohave psychological problems but that these are in many cases nomore severe than those shown by many nonaddicts. If one conducteda mental-health survey of the population from which most addictsare drawn, one might discover as many symptoms of mental disorderamong the nonaddicts. Finally, some argue that heroin itselfcauses a metabolic change in the body that makes it difficult tocease being an addict. Thus, one can become addicted casually andthen be unable to rid oneself of the addiction no matter whattherapeutic techniques are brought to bear. 14 Treatment programs have disparate philosophies on thesequestions. Some, though by no means all, methadone programsassume some physiological basis of addiction. Most therapeuticcommunities probably assume a character disorder that can behelped by group therapy. Some outpatient abstinence programsassume that addiction may be an almost accidental event for manyaddicts, and that they can be helped with minimal intervention.But these assumptions are not constant within any modality, andalmost all spectrums of opinion exist in each. In short, there is no uniform theory of addiction and noadequate description of the addict population. Further, addictionhas spread rapidly in recent years, and we know less about thenew population than we do about the old. And we knew littleenough before. The difficulties these factors create in judging treatmentprograms are obvious. We do not know what expectations arerealistic or desirable. We do not even know for certain that itis good for addicts to stop taking drugs. Some programs may bebetter for certain types of addicts than others, but we are notsure what types, or whether the programs are attracting the typewith which they do best. All the figures given in this paper are gross figures-theprograms are judged by effects on the total number of people whowere involved without any breakdown of results for differenthypothetical subgroups of the addict population. The conclusions,therefore, are tentative, at best. ABSTINENCE PROGRAMS DETOXIFICATION The most straightforward way to help a heroin addict is todetoxify him-reduce his daily heroin intake to zero and see himthrough withdrawal. The addict can be maintained on an inpatientbasis without any drugs for the five-to-ten-day period necessaryfor primary withdrawal symptoms to disappear; or he can betreated with tranquilizers but not opiates; or methadone can beused to decrease his opiate dosage gradually until he isdrugfree. Detoxification services are offered in many places and modesacross the nation-in hospitals, therapeutic communities, freeclinics, and government programs. There is no way of learning howmany addicts receive them each year. Detoxification has several clear benefits for both the addictand society. Even if the addict does not intend to stay offdrugs, it reduces his habit and decreases its cost. This spareshim the hassle and society the crime costs of his addiction forsome period, even if only a few days, after the process iscomplete. For some addicts, it is also a step towardrehabilitation. After repeated failures to remain detoxified,they become ready for other modalities. On the whole, however, it is not clear that detoxificationitself contributes greatly to the achievement of long-termabstinence. One program that used methadone in decreasing dosesfound that 74 per cent of the patients either did not finish thewithdrawal program or relapsed to drug use within 48 hours afterleaving it. Another, which effects withdrawal without opiates,found that only 10 per cent successfully completed thewithdrawal, and almost all of these soon relapsed." The NewYork Narcotic Addiction Control Commission has estimated thatonly 24 per cent of those who receive detoxification withoutother services "remain drug-free for any length oftime."" The Haight-Ashbury Clinic in San Francisco has beenexperimenting with outpatient withdrawal, utilizing analgesicsbut not opiates. It reports the results with 450 patients: 56 per cent dropped out before they were clean and were lost to follow-up for at least two weeks; 5 per cent of these resumed their habit, 22 per cent were in treatment, and the rest were apparently not known. 12 per cent had decreased their habit to "chipping" no more than once a week. 5.5 per cent had been clean for one month or more. 38 per cent were lost track of after only one clinic visit." This population differs from the standard drug-addictpopulation because it includes individuals who are basicallymiddle class and who began using heroin after being involved inthe San Francisco speed scene; many have not been addicted forlong. No one knows whether this population is harder, or easier,to work with than the more familiar ghetto populations. Otherprogram examples could be cited-some better and some worse-butthe general picture remains: Detoxification does have somebenefits, but it is primarily a service for the drug user whoneeds a respite and a short-term way of protecting societyagainst crime rather than a long-term treatment for addiction. Assuch, it is valuable, especially for anyone who believes thataddicts should be treated more humanely than they are at thepresent time and that bandaids can be valuable things. Butexpectations should not be too high. CIVIL COMMITMENT In theory, civil commitment is the nonpunitive incarcerationof an addict for purposes of rehabilitation. This method oftreatment was started in the 1930's at the Lexington and FortWorth hospitals, where the programs were part voluntary and partcoercive. In the 1960's, civil commitment was applied on a widerscale, first in California then in New York. Subsequently, thefederal government started using civil commitment as analternative to imprisonment through the Narcotic AddictRehabilitation Program. Dr. John Kramer has traced therelationship between the earlier programs and the massiveinvestment of the 1960's: The roots of these commitment laws can be traced to the federal narcotics hospital in Lexington. In recounting the initial expectations for that institution Isbell writes . . . "Drug addicts were to be treated within the institution, freed of their physiological dependence on drugs, their basic immaturities and personality problems corrected by vocational and psychiatric therapy, after which they would be returned to their communities to resume their lives. It seems to have been tacitly assumed that this program was the answer and would solve the problem of opiate addiction. Within a year it was apparent this assumption was wrong . . . a more adequate treatment program [required]: (1) Some means of holding voluntary patients until they had reached maximum benefit from hospital treatment. (2) Greater use of probation and parole. (3) Provision for intensive supervision and aftercare. . . . Isbell goes on to say that the reasons why these problems were not solved were complex. "In 1961 the California Legislature enacted laws establishing a commitment program for addicts which was designed to accomplish those objectives recommended but never carried out at Lexington."18 It is generally thought that the programs started in the1930's were almost total failures. Between 1935 and 1964, therewere 87,000 admissions to the two centers, of which 63,600 werevoluntary and 23,400 were federal prisoners. Of the voluntarypatients, 70 per cent left against medical advice. A series ofstudies of addicts released from the abstinence facilities foundthat up to 90 per cent of those followed up relapsed into druguse within a few years." As is true of almost every other aspect of the field, thisconclusion is debatable. Recent research has suggested that itmay exaggerate the failures. Dr. John O'Donnell points out thatall the studies had problems with data collection and withcategorization of those addicts who could not be found. He alsoquestions the assumption that any relapse-any use of drugs-shouldbe regarded as a failure, an assumption that was made by severalof the studies. As has been pointed out, an addict may becomebasically abstinent, even though he does relapse a few times;and, even if he relapses regularly, he may spend more time offdrugs than he would have without the treatment. This is also anet social gain. O'Donnell uses the following example. If one has 2,000exaddicts in a two-year study (a total of 4,000 man-years) anddefines relapse as a two-week period of heroin use at any time,then a 90 per cent relapse rate could mean that anywhere between69 and 3,600 of the 4,000 man-years were spent in a state ofaddiction. That is, 90 per cent of the addicts could haverelapsed for exactly two weeks each, or, at the other extreme, 90per cent could have relapsed for the entire two years, oranything in between." The social and individual consequencesof these polar possibilities are very different. The revisionist approach to the Lexington experience hascaused many observers to soften their adverse judgments somewhat.Most still believe that it was not effective with very manyaddicts but concede that the question probably cannot be answereddefinitely. The data that would allow methodologically acceptablestudies are lost. This does not seem to bother anyone too much,however, because the Lexington population drew heavily from ruralwhite populations, and the exact results would be of marginalrelevance to our present situation. The three programs that were started in the 1960's built onthe Lexington model, although they tried to improve it. Theyappear to have been started because addiction was eitherincreasing or becoming more visible, and was thus becoming apolitical problem. In 1961, there was simply no treatmentmodality available except civil commitment, and even by 1966 itdid not appear that there was any clearly better alternative.Under pressure to do something, state and federal authoritiespicked up the only available model, apparently on the premisesthat: (1) The failures of the Lexington program were due in partto the fact that the duration of treatment was too short (sixmonths or a year) ; (2) Improved vocational and counselingservices would be helpful; (3) Some careful studies had indicatedthat better supervision in the community after release wouldimprove the success rate; 21 (4) Civil commitment would at leastget addicts off the street. The California program, instituted in 1961, provides forcommitment on court order in lieu of sentence or prosecution.Voluntary commitment and commitment by relatives are alsopossible, but over 90 per cent of the inmates are thereinvoluntarily, after conviction. In fact, the program isstructurally and functionally very similar to imprisonment. Themain center, in Corona, California, is a maximum-securityfacility under the direction of the Department of Corrections.There are armed guards and barbedwire fences, and most of thepersonnel are corrections workers. The minimum institutional stayis six months, and the average is about 14 months. After leavingthe institution the addict is required to undergo a three-yearperiod of "community aftercare," which is essentially"parole." During this time, he follows the same regimenas ex-felons, with the additional requirement of regularurinalysis testing and group counseling. Violations oft1parole" can and, in the case of relapse to drug use,usually do mean return to the institution. Attempted escape fromthe institution and serious parole violations are felonies inthemselves. The facility does provide inmates with a modified form ofencounter-group therapy, based on the hypothesis that drug use isa symptom of aberrant personality patterns which must be changed.However, a study of the program's results concluded that theprogram was interpreted by addicts and professional visitors asmore punitive than therapeutic. Whether one were releaseddepended in large part on how well one played the game at groupsessions. This was not conducive to the honesty that real grouptherapy demands. Evaluation showed that between 1962 and 1964 there were 1,209persons on release status at some time. At the end of the year,only 35 per cent were still in good standing and only 16 per centmaintained this status after three years. The majority who failin aftercare do so for drug use, "poor adjustment,"failure to report in, or new arrest. During the first year, 56per cent were detected using drugs and 20 per cent convicted ofnew crimes. In the three-year period, 81 per cent had beensuspended from release status at least once. The usual patternfor the inmate consisted of periods spent in the facilityfollowed by periods of abstinence in the aftercare phase, andthen return to the facility in Corona. As a result of thispattern, inmates who would have been serving a felony sentence(70 per cent) actually spent less time "incarcerated,"while those who were guilty of misdemeanors (16 per cent) were"incarcerated" longer than if they had served anordinary prison sentence. No later results seem to have changedthis pattern. Felon addicts who receive no therapy while inprison do as well as or better than California RehabilitationCenter addicts while on parole." The New York program, adopted several years later, differssomewhat in conception." Like California, New York providesfor commitment in lieu of sentence or prosecution, for voluntarycommitment, and for commitment by relatives or other persons,such as school officials or prosecuting attorneys. Unlike theCalifornia system, New York's system is under the direction of anindependent Narcotic Addiction Control Commission (NACC) and hasa mental-health orientation involving the use of professionalmental-health personnel. NACC is also more committed to researchand community aftercare programs. New York's total program, by far the largest in the UnitedStates, has spent $475.3 million in the last four years,including its investment in methadone and therapeutic communitiesas well as in civil commitment. The direct annual investment inthe civilcommitment program appears to be at least $50 millionout of a total budget of $88.5 million. As of the end of 1970,NACC had 10,764 addicts in its own facilities, and another 10,419were in facilities accredited or funded by NACC. These populationfigures were not broken down by modality." Despite the dominance of a mental-health approach andprofessionalized therapy, the emphasis on security and remoteinstitutions has apparently produced a penal atmosphere at manyof the NAOC facilities. Recreational and entertainment facilitiesappear to be lacking, and life in a NACC institution has beendescribed as a dreary round of a few hours in a classroom orworkshop, some time in group meetings led by civil servants, andthe rest of the time watching television or loafing. The peerpressures, ex-addict, encounter-group leadership, and meaningfulwork assignments needed to create an effective therapeuticenvironment are absent." The program has been subject tosome fierce attacks, as in the 1970 New York gubernatorialcampaign, when one candidate claimed that in three years NACC hadspent $345 million and cured 120 addicts." It is difficultto know whether all of these accusations are justified. But it isequally difficult to find disinterested observers who contradictthem. NACC officials state their results fairly carefully. In June,1971, the research director testified that "a relativelysmall number of people" had been processed through theentire civil-commitment procedure (the three to five years), andthat, of those who had gone all the way through, 25 per cent"are currently abstinent, according to a physicalfollow-up." Another 25 per cent had either recertifiedthemselves to NACC or had entered other treatment programs. Therest (50 per cent) were in jail as a result of new drug-relatedoffenses or had returned to drugs." This statement does notreveal how many addicts had completed the program, how many wereable to drop out or escape in some way, or what level offunctioning the abstinent addicts were maintaining. Thepopulation is referred to as "small." The federal NARA program of civil commitment for addictsincludes three separate programs. Title I provides for addictscharged with violating federal laws (nonviolent crimes only). Inlieu of prosecution, the addict can be committed to a three-yeartreatment period involving both institutional and aftercaretreatment facilities. Admissions under this title have been few.Between July, 1967, and June, 1970, only 207 persons wereexamined and 179 accepted, although a case load of 900 per yearhad been anticipated. The main reason seems to be a generaldisinterest by U.S. Attorneys." Title II offers treatment in lieu of sentencing for addictsconvicted of federal crimes. This program is administered by theBureau of Prisons, which provides facilities for treatment withinregular penal institutions. The time of incarceration is not toexceed ten years, and - the addict can be released to aftercareservices after six months. Only about 375 addicts are currentlybeing serviced under this title.30 Title III provides for voluntary commitment by addicts who arenot involved in criminal proceedings. The commitment is for aperiod of three years, most of which is spent in aftercarefacilities. The term of the institutionalization itself is to bedetermined by the patient's progress but is not to exceed sixmonths. Until recently, Title I and Title III patients were sent tothe Lexington or Fort Worth facility, under the Surgeon General.(Fort Worth has now been transferred to the Bureau of Prisons andwill no longer be used for addiction treatment.) Title IIIpatients receive their initial evaluation at Lexington, but manyare channeled into community or state programs funded by NARAgrants and contracts. The Lexington facility is the most open ofthe institutions and has a more relaxed policy toward escape orattempted escape. The primary treatment methods employed aredetoxification, counseling, and some work and recreation therapy.They have begun an experiment with a small therapeutic community(Matrix House) but require a longer time commitment for patientsin this program. The initial evaluation determines whether the addict issuitable for treatment. The rejection rate is about 55-60 percent. The grounds for rejection are not clear. Some officialsclaim that suitability is based on an assessment ofmotivation-whether an addict has sufficient self-control to beable to function in a relaxed and open environment, and, if not,the availability of other types of treatment facilities. Anotherview is that decisions on suitability are made on the basis ofobjective criteria, such as current legal status, criminalrecord, age, employment, history, prior drug experience, andmental state. In a study of the first 27 months of operation under the newAct (1966-69), about 2,000 addicts were tested at Lexington. Asof September 30, 1969, there were 802 Title I and Title IIIpatients on an aftercare status; 26 per cent had been recommittedto the institution for aftercare violations, and 5 per cent hadbeen discharged. As of March, 1971, 2,000 patients were in thecivil commitment program, of whom 1,300 were in aftercare. Of the2,000, 60 per cent were white. Average age was in the late20's." In June, 1971, the Director of NIMH stated: In the civil commitment program, a study of 1,200 patients who were in aftercare in 1970 showed that approximately 85 percent were employed, 70 percent were not arrested and spent no time in jail during that period, 35 percent were in self-help therapy, and 33 percent were pursuing their education. Patients who had been [in] aftercare for 3 months or more were, on the average, drug-free 80 percent of the time. A similar statement can be made regarding the heroin use of patients who were in the community treatment programs. As you know, many patients during the treatment of their addiction may abuse drugs other than heroin occasionally, such as cocaine, marijuana, amphetamines, or barbiturates. Of the patients in the civil commitment program who had been in aftercare for 3 months or more, 60 percent were not abusing any drugs. The same is true of patients who had been in the community treatment program for 3 months or more. Of the patients who are in the civil commitment aftercare phase, we know that 60 percent do not become readdicted during their first year in aftercare. Of the remaining, 25 percent do abuse some drugs or become readdicted and require further hospital treatment. About 15 percent were dropouts .32 It is difficult to know what to make of these results. Evenallowing for selectivity in acceptance into the program, they arefar better than the New York or the California experience wouldhave led one to expect. Since the detailed studies on which thisstatement is based are not available, one can only reservejudgment. The Bureau of Prisons has analyzed initial results from itscare of inmates committed under Title II of NARA. As of the endof 1971, 896 inmates had been examined for program eligibility,and 70 per cent (630) had been accepted. The program had released414 inmates to aftercare after an average institutionalization of15 months, and 297 (72 per cent) of these were still active. Theother 28 per cent had "violated or absconded." Overfive thousand months of "successful aftercare" had beenaccumulated, but the meaning of that term as used in the reportis unclear." Many drug experts believe that programs of civil commitmentoffer little more than custodial care in a predominantly penalsetting. Counseling and therapy, when employed, are imposed onthe patients by the staff and are of questionable value.Apparently, most addicts are committed as an alternative tocriminal prosecution or sentencing, and view commitment as such.Most do not appear to be motivated toward inner change, and thosethat do succeed might succeed equally as well in a voluntarycommunity program. In addition, civil commitment is expensive. Itrequires secured facilities, around-the-clock guards, and largestaffs. (Cost estimates for all three of the large programs are$10,000 to $12,000 per year per addict while the addict is in theinstitution. It is not clear whether this represents full costs,including capital expenditures, or operating costs only.) Inspite of these costs, the chief function of civil commitmentseems to be nothing more than to keep the addict out ofcirculation for intermittent short periods. The NARA information cited above seems to indicate that civilcommitment for a limited term followed by aftercare is more promising than this conclusion suggests. The Californiaprogram was structured in somewhat the same manner-although witha more open law-enforcement orientation-and it may be that itshows worse results than NARA because it was more carefullyevaluated and the patients were more carefully controlled. Adefinite answer to this will have to await more detailedinformation on NARA. THE THERAPEUTIC COMMUNITY "Therapeutic community" (TC) is a generic term usedto describe an institution that attempts to treat the addict bydealing with the underlying causes of his addiction. The basicconcept of the TC modality, as of the civil-commitment programs,is that addiction is the result of psychological problems, andthat intensive therapeutic techniques utilized within thestructure of a residential community can restructure thecharacter and personality of the addict to the point where he nolonger needs to use drugs. Although heroin addicts constitute themajor part of the TC population, most TC's service users ofnonopiates as well. As of mid-1970, there were probably 40-50therapeutic community programs in the country with approximately4,000-5,000 residents." The growth of therapeutic communities is in some ways as mucha quasi-evangelical movement as a drug-treatment modality, and itis difficult to describe them without distorting the views of atleast some of the participants." The flavor of this modalitycan be partly conveyed by tracing some analogies and intellectualroots. First, there is a parallel between the TC and AlcoholicsAnonymous. Synanon, the original addict-oriented TC, was foundedin 1959 by an ex-alcoholic as a treatment program for alcoholicsmodeled after AA. It drifted into treatment of opiate addictslargely by accident. Many of the TC's retain some of the basic AAcharacteristics-the concept that there is no such thing as anex-addict, only an addict who is not using at the moment; theemphasis on mutual support and aid; the distrust of mentalhealthprofessionals; and the concept of continual confession andcatharsis. However, the TC has extended these notions to includethe concept of a live-in community with a rigid structure ofday-to-day behavior and a complex system of punishment andrewards. The rise of the TC also parallels the rising popularity ofgroup therapy generally. Encounter groups, support groups, andmarathon sessions are as prevalent in the "straightworld" as in the TC's, and the many differences ingroup-therapy methods that exist outside exist in the TC's aswell. One reason for the frequent confusion about the differentTC's is that they reflect the many variations in approaches togroup therapy. The growth of TC's has occurred at the same time as the growthof interest in communes, and some TC's have an element of thecommune in them-the residents are rejecting a dishonest world infavor of a better way of life. Synanon, for example, hasresidents who have never been addicted to anything but who preferthe Synanon life-style. Dr. John Kramer has referred to Synanonas "the third community," different from the drug-usingcommunity and the "square" community. He points outthat there is a fundamental difference between Synanon and manyof the TC's in that "the Synanon ideal is to retain membersin the group indefinitely and to expand steadily, drawing in moreand more members, squares as well as addicts. Other TC's differin that they do expect their members to re-enter the squarecommunity. "3r The past decade has seen a movement towardcommunity action and a rejection of services furnishedexogenously. Community control is a familiar slogan, and thebeliefs that only the poor know what the poor want and onlyblacks can help blacks are also common. To some extent, TC'sreflect this movement. Many of them have adopted the view thatthe nonaddict does not really understand the problems and worldof an addict and therefore cannot contribute as an ex-addict can.Since addicts are often poor and black as well as addicted, thisconcept is a powerful force. Finally, the quasi-evangelical aspect of the TC creates aninteresting, although certainly not documented or provable,situation. The addict may be replacing his addiction to heroinwith an "addiction" to being an ex-addict and to theencounter therapy. The philosophy of the TC becomes a religionfor the addict. It is something to believe in and a message tospread to his fellow addicts in the world. The "religiousfervor" involved exists in varying degrees. In Dr. Kramer'swords: It has been undiplornatically stated that religiornania is a cure for narcomania. This observation is valid, particularly if one defines religiomania broadly as the devout acceptance of clearly defined tenets of a faith and its principles of behavior, and persistent participation in its prescribed rituals. The faith and its practice will usually encompass all the life activities of the communicant and in its practice he will have the opportunity for both penitence and ecstasy. Obedience is part of it as is the sense of being an accepted member of the congregation, however lowly, and thus possessing an attribute not possessed by anyone outside the sect. The requirements can be fulfilled not only by formal fundamentalist religious groups such as Teen Challenge but by such an organization as Synanon and other programs which have been modeled on it.37 In terms of structure and program, some common features ofTC's can be identified, despite wide individual variations. Mosthave three identifiable phases to their program. The first ofthese is a testing for admission; the addict must show thegenuineness of his desire to become drug-free. In some places,the addict must become drug-free on his own and remain so for agiven period of time before he is admitted. In some, he must workin a storefront center for a time, showing the proper attitude.Others do not require abstinence in advance and will have apatient detoxified on methadone or go through withdrawal afterformal admission. In some TC's, an addict is put through anencounter session with present residents to test his dedication. The methods vary, but at some point early in the process everyTC tests the candidate's motivation. As might be expected, thereis a high loss rate at this point, although numbers are difficultto find. The different entrance procedures must be kept in mindin evaluating TC's, because they can obviously make a substantialdifference in the statistical records of the program. A communitythat does not formally admit addicts until they have passedstringent tests is likely to show a higher success rate than acommunity that does its weeding out after formal admission. Whatever the form of testing used, relatively few addicts passit. In most TC's, somewhere between 50 per cent and 90 per centof the applicants are rejected or quit at this initial stage.Once admitted, the addict enters a treatment ladder. The programof treatment is usually highly structured and extremely rigid,with an enforced system of rewards and punishments. The residentstarts at the very bottom of the ladder, with little freedom, noresponsibility, and the lowest types of tasks. As he proveshimself, he begins to acquire more freedom, better jobs, andincreased responsibility. This period of treatment lasts at leasta year and is characterized by clearly marked stages in status.The emphasis is usually on confronting the addict with theimmaturity of his past behavior and his need to learn responsiblepatterns of dealing with the world. Group therapy is emphasized,and the encounters can be extremely rough. It is part of theethos, however, that the motives behind the encounters areconcern and love rather than hostility. Finally, the resident arrives at the re-entry phase. Duringthis period, he begins to have a life outside the communityagain-he takes educational courses, spends weekends with hisfamily, works, etc. When he has established a stable patternoutside the community and is considered responsible by theprofessional staff and/or peers, he may be discharged. (AtSynanon, there is no re-entry phase. Family life, education, andwork are all incorporated into the community. To Synanoncommunity members, the straight world outside the community hasnot changed, and the pressures and problems that resulted intheir addiction in the first place are still there. Return to theoutside means return to heroin addiction, alcohol, or whateverdrove them in.) A major problem in evaluating therapeutic communities is thedifficulty of ascertaining facts. Even a matter so rudimentary asthe costs involved is a matter of dispute because of differencesin calculating capital and operating costs, treatment of welfareexpenditures that go to support the community, allocation offunds from different government agencies, appraisal of donatedgoods and services, and simple lack of records. Costs rangeanywhere from $3,000 to $10,000 per year per resident. Even more difficult to assess is the result of the effort,since little careful evaluation has been done. One multimodalprogram analyzed the "split rate" from the TC componentof its program. They found that, of 122 entrants, 40 per centleft within three weeks, 50 per cent within seven weeks, and 85per cent within one year. A TC that appealed mainly to white,middle-class residents found that, during one year, almost 700persons entered the program, 535 left voluntarily, and 23 wereexpelled. Of those who left, 175 came back. The program graduated38 residents during the year. Of 113 graduates of the programover a four-year period, 13 had relapsed to drug abuse. Of theremaining 100 graduates, 25 were employed in the subject TC, 51in other addiction programs, and 19 in the community at large;five were unknown .18 These are only fragments, because there isvery little hard information on the results of TC's. In part thisis because evaluation is expensive and difficult and manyorganizations do not have the money to spend on it. Also, someprogram operators oppose evaluation on philosophical grounds-theybelieve that what they are doing is humane and valuable and thattheir work is demeaned by attempts to judge it in quantitativeterms. They may also believe that evaluation has negative effectson the program. If it shows many failures the residents will cometo believe that they, too, will fail, and the prophecy will beself-fulfilling. Finally, there are sound bureaucratic reasons for avoidingevaluation as much as possible. All the preliminary and anecdotalindications are that, while a few people are helped greatly byTC's, an overwhelming majority are not. In the hard competitionfor government drug-treatment money, evaluation might well hurtthe TC's more than it would help them. The incentive to permitevaluation, let alone fund it, is minimal. Looking at all the available evidence and the impressions ofexperts in the field, it is hard to escape the conclusion thatTC's are, at best, good for a very limited number of drugaddicts. As a rough guess, considering the initial rejectionrates, the split rates, and the relapse rate, it would besurprising if careful evaluation showed that more than 5 per centof those who come into contact with the program are enabled tolead a reasonably drugfree, socially productive life. There is also a major question about the type of addict forwhom the TC is the proper solution. Some experts believe that theTC works best for the sociopath who is tough enough to take theencounters but not for those with less serious psychologicalproblems or those who are the least alienated. Other experts havedifferent categorizations. The TC's may have advantages in dealing with particularsubgroups of addicts, however. Although exact populationbreakdowns are seldom available, it is generally recognized thatthe mean age of the residents is lower than that of eitheraddicts in the methadone programs or the total addict population.This could mean that the TC is especially attractive to youngaddicts, but this is not certain; the same result would ensue ifit were less attractive to older addicts. It may also beeffective with multidru'g users or with young experimenters, butthis has also been unproved. In terms of any national program of treatment of heroinaddicts, it is difficult to see a major role for the TC, simplybecause the success rate is too low and the cost too high to makean important impact on the problem. At the same time, most drugexperts, when they discuss the necessary elements of acomprehensive drug-treatment program, include a therapeuticcommunity, but whether this is based on a genuine belief in itsutility, on the hope that utility might be demonstrated, or onsimple politics is unclear. In the long run, it may turn out thatthe TC is much more interesting outside the drug context thanwithin it. By setting itself the task of rehabilitating drugaddicts-a notoriously hard group to rehdbilitate-the TC movementmay have destined itself to look bad. The real contributions thatsuch methods might make to improvements in the condition andfunctioning of more tractable populations are easily lost sightof by appraisers who are concerned with the drug problem. OUTPATIENT ABSTINENCE Many programs have a component that treats outpatients andattempts to get them to abstain from heroin use. Of 142 programscovered by an NIMH survey, only 23 were for inpatients only, andonly 43 of the 142 engaged in methadone maintenance; therefore,at least 76 were operating some form of outpatient abstinenceprogram. These programs differ as much as or more than the therapeuticcommunities. The major components are community outreach to findpeople who need help; group and individual therapy of varioustypes; vocational and social counseling; intervention withauthorities, employers, or schools on behalf of the patient;vocational training and education; and family counseling. Theprograms emphasize these elements in varying degrees, of course,and most probably do not offer a complete range of services.Another variable is the intensity of the patient's involvementwith the treatment center. Some are halfway houses, where thepatient spends the whole day and goes home only at night. At theother extreme are agencies that have only one or two sessionswith a patient or that are more or less social centers. Mostprograms are, of course, between these extremes." This method of treatment is not based on any constanttheoretical beliefs. Some people believe that addicts suffer fromunderlying character disorders and can be changed only throughheavy involvement in therapy. Others believe that helping withthe immediate problems of the patient will enable him to helphimself. Still others are desperately trying to fend off thetotal catastrophe that may overwhelm the patient if he does notreceive aid. Very little evaluation of these programs has been done, andthere are no reliable data on the results. Most observers believethat the attrition rates are very high, the number of patientswho remain drug-free is small, and the impact on such areas asemployment and criminal activity is minimal. Dr. Robert DuPont,Director of the Washington, D.C., Narcotic Treatment Agency, hasfound that only 15 per cent of the patients who selected NTA'sabstinence program remained in it for six months, although thosewho did remain did well." A -D.C. Department of Correctionsstudy of the performance of abstinence patients in NTA facilities(all of whom had been referred to NTA by the Department ofCorrections) came out with somewhat better results: 50 per centof 165 referees were failures after six months. If"escape" was removed as a category of failure, then thefailure rate was only 25 per cent." Programs connected withthe criminal-justice system usually have the spur of return tojail if the patient fails, of course. The Office of Economic Opportunity enlisted a contractor to doa thorough evaluation of eight OEO-funded projects; but thedata-collection problems were great, and it was impossible forthe evaluators to reach any meaningful judgments." OEO isnow trying again, but the results have not yet been published. In general, the conclusions for these programs are about thesame as for the therapeutic communities and the detoxificationcenters: They help a few people a great deal and more people tosome degree, but the failure rates are very high. They have aconsiderable cost advantage over the therapeutic communitiesbecause they do not need extensive and expensive residentialfacilities. Their over-all, long-term contribution to the drugproblem is in some doubt. The major imponderable is the extent towhich changes in the addict population may invalidate pessimisticconclusions drawn from past experience. Addiction may have spreadto people who are not so intractable as the groups on which theseconclusions are based. They might become abstinent with the helpthat can be given by the outpatient facilities. Most important is whether these programs have an impact on thejuvenile who is dabbling in the drug scene but has not yet becomea confirmed addict. This is the target population for many suchprograms and would seem to be the area in which they have themost to offer. At present, the answer is an enigma. Some of theconclusions reached and questions raised in 1969 by Judith Calofof New York's Community Service Society are still valid: Voluntary treatment agencies have always emerged in response to the neglected needs of segments of the community. In the addiction field, there are still grave unmet needs. For one, the number of school-aged addicts has been growing, while voluntary and public agencies continue to concentrate on the older addict. Are special techniques needed for reaching and treating this young age group?... A major unmet need is addiction prevention. Do voluntary treatment agencies have a major contribution to make in prevention? Could their coordinated efforts succeed in identifying and reaching those most vulnerable to this disease? The limited success of the voluntary treatment agencies should not be interpreted as failure, but should be viewed in long-range terms. Pioneering means trial and error, with inevitable setbacks and frustrations, but it reveals the assessment of a situation. Voluntary treatment agencies have already demonstrated the enormity of the addiction problem and the immense difficulties in rehabilitating heroin addicts. The results of their dedicated efforts should serve as a learning against unrealistic expectations. Their experience can prevent catastrophe in a massive government program, and refusal of the public to allocate further funds for treatment .43 METHADONE MAINTENANCE CHARACTERISTICS OF METHADONE Methadone is a synthetic opiate. For purposes of understandingits use in the treatment of heroin addiction, its most importantcharacteristics are as follows: It is a substitute for heroin, in that it will prevent an addict from having or feeling withdrawal symptoms if he replaces his usual drug with methadone. Unlike the heroin available in this country, it is effective when taken orally. If the dosage is sufficient (the exact level depending on the addict's level of tolerance to heroin), the methadone will block the action of heroin, so that the addict receives no euphoric effect if he tries heroin. At lower doses, methadone will not block this effect of heroin, but it will suppress the "narcotic hunger"-described by Dr. Jerome Jaffe as a "felt sense of physical abnormality"-that an addict feels without his drug. The effective action of methadone is about 24 hours, as opposed to about six hours for heroin. Thus, it needs to be taken only once a day. When taken orally in constant doses, methadone does not produce a euphoric effect. To date, no significant deleterious side effects have been reported. THE PROGRAMS Starting with a 1964 experimental project sponsored by the NewYork Health Research Council and conducted by Drs. Vincent Doleand Marie Nyswander, programs that maintain addicts on methadonehave grown steadily. Despite some differences in theory andpractice, in all maintenance programs an addict receives a doseof methadone every day, either at a clinic or, if he has provedhimself, at home. He may also receive ancillary services-group orindividual therapy, individual or family counseling, vocationalrehabilitation, employment services, use of social centerfacilities, and medical and dental care. The extent and qualityof these varies greatly, but almost all programs providesomething. There are wide variations in the modes of operation ofmethadone programs." For example, a study of 47 methadoneprograms found that 27 programs used ex-addicts on the staff,while the others did not; 6 had inpatients only, 19 hadoutpatients only, and the rest had both. Only 8 of the 47provided chemotherapy without any group work. Table 3-1 lists the types of service offered by the 47programs in terms of the numbers of programs and the per cent ofthe total sample offering the service. TABLE 3-1 TYPES OF SERVICE OFFERED BYMETHADONE-MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS Service Number Per cent Detoxification Methadone 30 64 Tranquilizers and other drugs 6 13 Drug freed 4 8.5 Chemotherapy Methadone maintenance 47 100 Cyclazocine maintenance 8 17 Naloxone and other 3 6 Group work Therapeutic community 8 17 Group psychotherapy 36 76 Group discussions and programs 9 19 Tndividual psychotherapy 35 74 Medical-surgical treatment 23 49 Educational classes 8 17 Religious counseling 5 1.1 Work assignments 3 6 Rehabilitation services Vocational rehabilitation 20 42 Employment counseling 24 51 Social and family services 16 34 Occupational therapy 10 21 Recreational programs 8 17 Prevention 6 13 Research 17 36 a Drug-free detoxification is not a feature of the methadoneprogram. More detailed statements obtained from 25 of the methadonemaintenance programs showed that 14 favored narcotic-freerehabilitation as the ultimate goal, and only 11 favoredprolonged maintenance. Also, 18 preferred high-doseadministration (50-180 mg.) and 7 preferred low-dose (20-40 mg.).Not surprisingly, there was a correlation between preference fornarcotic free rehabilitation and preference for low doses. The precise number of persons now in methadone-maintenanceprograms is not known. At the Third National Methadone Conferencein November, 1970, Dr. Vincent Dole estimated that there werethen about 9,000 people on methadone maintenance in the UnitedStates and Canada .4' This estimate was based on a variety of inputs, including discussions with the manufacturer ofmethadone. It was in rough accord with the numbers of patientsrecorded in publications by the major projects and was probablyfairly accurate. Growth has been quite rapid, however. The NIMH treatmentdirectory listed 44 methadone-maintenance programs as of 1968-69,and many of these had small patient populations. As of April,1970, 64 programs had acquired or applied for Food and DrugAgency authority to use methadone for maintenance, although notall of them were in operation. At that time, the best estimateswere that between 50 and 60 programs were actuallyoperating." By June 1, 1971, the FDA had given permission to257 sponsors representing 277 methadone-treatment programs, someof which included several clinics. Of these, 185 programs were ininstitutions and the other 92 were private. The number ofprograms now in actual operation is not known." The FDA estimated, in June, 1971, that there were 20,000 to30,000 people on methadone maintenance at that time. Dr. BertramBrown Director of NIMH, testified at the same hearings that20,000 was probably the best estimate." As of December,1971, the FDA has doubled its estimate again. It now believes,according to Dr. Elmer Gardner, that there are between 40,000 and50,000 patients on methadone maintenance. Costs. Costs of methadone programs are hard to determine. Manyfigures are given, but it is never clear whether all costs (suchas plant and equipment or the value of volunteer help, forexample) are included. As a rough estimate, the cost of theprograms is between $500 and $2,500 per patient per year,depending on a number of factors. Methadone itself is not an important cost, since it can beprocured for about $.05 per day per addict. Controlling and administering the methadone is a significantcost, since it requires a staff. Determination and preparation of individual doses aresignificant, since determination requires physician time,preparation requires careful work by a pharmacist, and keepingtrack of individual doses takes staff time. Whether individualdoses are more effective therapeutically than standardized onesis an open question. All programs use urinalysis to test the patients' use ofheroin and other drugs. This costs $1 to $3 per test, dependingon the frequency, the laboratory, and the number of samplestested. Obviously, this is a significant cost element: Testingthree times a week at $3 per test would cost $468 per addict peryear. There are some ways of avoiding these costs through randomtesting, which is effective for some purposes. There may also becost-reduction possibilities for the tests themselves. The method by which an addict is initially switched fromheroin to methadone makes a large cost difference. If the addictis switched to methadone as an inpatient in a hospital (as wasdone for most of the patients in the Dole-Nyswander project, forexample), each addict admitted may cause $200 to $1,400 forinitial hospital expenses. Physical plant and facilities obviously make a difference incosts. Legal requirements are important. To the extent thatjurisdictional law requires that elaborate information beobtained and records kept, the costs are increased. Any research component adds expenses. The level of ancillary services is important. An effort tosupply group therapy, counseling, vocational or educationalrehabilitation, and other services-all of which require highstaff-to-patient ratios-will increase expenses substantially.Many of the public statements on costs regard this as the majorvariable involved. While most programs pay lip service to theneed for these services, careful evaluation of the extent towhich they influence the success or failure of the program isonly beginning. The rate of expansion of a program makes a significantdifference in average cost. An addict will probably require moreservices and control in his first year than later, when he isstabilized in a new life-style, so that a new or expandingprogram should show higher average costs than a static one. These variations account for the wide range of the basic costestimate. At present, $500 per addict per year seems about theminimum for a program that uses standardized dosages, outpatientinduction, fairly cheap urinalysis, and no services except thosesupplied by the addicts themselves. A reasonable estimate for aprogram with individual doses, some inpatient induction, frequentand expensive urinalysis, and many ancillary services is $2,000,although, of course, the cost for each patient stabilized in theprogram would be much lower." This figure could be raisedalmost without limit by the provision of more extras, of course,a phenomenon sometimes referred to by program operators as thedanger of "Taj Mahalism"---providing very elaborateservices to a few addicts rather than minimal effective servicesto many. Population Characteristics. Because of regionaldifferences the demographic characteristics of the over-allmethadone population are hard to describe. The patient populationof the Methadone Maintenance Treatment Program (MMTP) in New YorkCity, for example, is about 40 per cent black, 19 per cent PuertoRican, 40 per cent white, and I per cent Oriental. This breakdowncompares with the ethnic breakdown of the New York City NarcoticRegistry, which, as of December, 1969, was 47 per cent black, 27per cent Puerto Rican, and 26 per cent white." The SantaClara County (California) Methadone Program reports a patientpopulation of 55 per cent Mexican American, 6 per cent black, and39 per cent white." Other programs also exhibit ethnicbreakdowns' indicating that methadone maintenance appeals tominority-group addicts. The Washington, D.C., program, forexample, is 95 per cent black." The ethnic composition ofany methadone project is probably not too dissimilar from that ofthe local addict population of comparable age, although it may beskewed slightly toward overrepresentation of white addicts. Methadone has not had similar success in attracting youngeraddicts. Although the minimal age required for admission to mostprograms is 18, the mean age of the patient population is usuallybetween 30 and 35. In addition, the average length of addictionfor the patient population on methadone is 10 to 15 years,although most programs require only two years, and some nowrequire only one. There are reports, however, that the mean andmedian ages and length of addiction are now falling."Unfortunately, no treatment method has been developed thatattracts the majority of young addicts. Most members of thisgroup do not seem to be sufficiently disenchanted with either thelife-style or the effect of heroin to seek treatment of any type,or are as yet unconvinced that they are truly hooked. Results. Most methadone programs have made an effort toevaluate their effect on the patients. The criteria employedusually follow those developed to evaluate the MMTP in New York-remaining in the program, employment, freedom from drug use,decrease in crime, and willingness to accept help for personalproblems. The New York program is not only the largest but also the bestevaluated over time. Consistently, the evaluation committee,headed by Dr. Frances Gearing of Columbia University's School ofPublic Health and Administrative Medicine, has found the programsuccessful with a large percentage of the addicts. The findingsof the evaluation, as of October 31, 1970, are as follows: " Population. Most of the patients had been selected undercriteria that required them to be 20 years old, have a five-yearhistory of addiction, display no serious psychiatric problems,and have no addiction to drugs other than heroin. Although in1969 the requirements were reduced to age 18 and two years ofaddiction, this had little impact on the age distribution of thetreatment population because of the waiting time. The mean age atadmission remained about 33-higher than the 27.9 mean age of theaddicts on the New York City Register. Whites had a mean age atadmission of 31, blacks of 35, and Puerto Ricans of a year inbetween. Retention. A total of 4,376 patients had been admitted sincethe inception of the program in 1964. Of this group, 3,485 (80per cent) were still in treatment at the time of evaluation. Theothers had left voluntarily or had been discharged because ofexcessive use of other drugs or alcohol, death, incarceration, orantisocial or generally uncooperative behavior. Of the 2,424originally inducted on an inpatient basis, 74 per cent were stillenrolled. Of the 1,952 who had been admitted directly asoutpatients, 88 per cent were still enrolled. (This group had notbeen in treatment as long as the others, since outpatientinduction was started only in 1968. They were also a selectedgroup.) Special studies of three 500-patient cohorts have been done.One of those covered the cohort for 21 months, one for 33 months,and one for 48 months. About 23 per cent of each cohort had beendischarged by 21 months after admission, 34 per cent of twocohorts by 33 months after admission, and 42 per cent of onecohort by 48 months after admission. As is shown by the cohort studies, the commonly cited80per-cent success rate is misleading. The statistic includes alarge number of addicts who have been in the program for arelatively short period and does not fully reflect the attritionover time. For example, the total admissions, as of October 31,1969, were 2,325. As of October 31, 1970, they were 4,376. Thus,the data for the latter date included 2,051 patients who had beenin treatment for less than one year, and half or more of thesemay have been in for six months or less. (The cohort studies showthat the attrition rate during the first six months is about 10per cent, and over the first year it is about 16 per cent.)Maintenance of the over-all average of 20 per cent attrition istherefore dependent on continuing expansion of the program. There is another side of this argument, however. MMTP hasfairly strict standards for behavior and drops people forviolation of those standards; a large proportion of those listedas failures were therefore dropped by the program (theythemselves did not want to leave). A study of 138 terminationsfound the following causes: 55 Involuntary terminations 81.2% Uncooperative behavior 17.4% Antisocial behavior 7.2 Unreachable psychopathology 7.2 Drug abuse 8.7 Alcohol abuse 10.9 Arrested 15.2 Medical disability 2.2 Death 12.3 Voluntary terminations 15.9 Voluntary discharge 14.5 Loss of contact 1.4 Administrative terminations and unknown 2.9 Administrative .7 No information 2.2 One can question whether a methadone program should terminatepatients for all of the causes given. Even if the patient hasserious problems remaining, the program may have substantialbeneficial effects. One can argue that the only patients whoshould be counted as failures are those who drop out voluntarily.If this criterion is applied to the 500-patient cohort that had a42 per cent attrition rate over 48 months, and if we assume thatonly 15.9 per cent of these dropouts were voluntary, then only 34of 210 dropouts would be counted as failures. By this standard,the MMTP may claim that it has a ' t least partial success with93.2 per cent of all addicts who are admitted to the program. Again, this is not totally satisfactory, for several reasons.For example, it is difficult to know how to categorize those whodie or are discharged for medical disability. Some of thevoluntary patients moved to programs in other cities. Somepatients who were expelled might have dropped out voluntarily ata later time. Thus, 93.2 per cent may be unrealistically high.But it does show that a 42 per cent termination rate over fouryears probably understates the value of the program somewhat. To sum up, if one adopts MMTP's own standards on the retainingpower of methadone, the common figure of 80 per cent success errson the high side. If, however, one argues that those standardsare too stringent, excluding too many patients who are receivingworthwhile benefits from the program, the 80-percent figure maybe too low. (it should be noted that the same problems exist inassessing the effects of nomnethadone programs. They are justmore obvious in this context.) Employment. For the group that stayed in the program,employment rose markedly. About 26 per cent of the men wereemployed when they entered. This figure rose sharply to about 57per cent and 66 per cent for those in the program six and twelvemonths, respectively, and then rose more slowly to about 78 percent for those in the program for 48 months. Because ofattrition, this percentage rise represents a much smallerabsolute rise in employment. Out of a cohort of 100 entrants, 26would be employed. After four years, 58 members of the cohortwould still be in the program, of whom 45 (78 per cent of the 58)would be employed. So, out of any group of 100 entrants, only 45would be employed after four years. Criminal Activity. For the group that stayed in the program,criminal activity apparently decreased. In the three years beforeadmission to the program, the methadone patients had 120 arrestsand 48 incarcerations for every 100 man-years. In the four yearsafter admission, they had 4.5 arrests and 1.0 incarcerations. A group of detoxification patients studied for purposes ofcomparison showed 131 arrests and 52 incarcerations per 100person years in the three years prior to detoxification and 134arrests and 63 incarcerations for the four years afterdetoxification. A separate study of 912 patients admitted over afour-and-a-half year period showed a 90-per-cent drop in criminalconvictions." Drug Use. While most patients test the methadone blockage afew times while on methadone, none had returned to regular heroinusage while still in the program. About 8 per cent have problemswith chronic alcohol use and 10 per cent with continuing use ofamphetamines, cocaine, and barbiturates. Fate of Dischargees. A Gearing Committee study of 281expatients six months after discharge had the following findings: Left Discharged Total voluntarily for cause discharge Arrested or jailed 10% 26% 23% Dead 2 2 2 Detoxification 13 20 19 Other R. program 11 4 7 Medical or psychiatric facility - 3 2 Private M.D. 2 2 2 Moved 7 1 1 Readmitted 33 6 11 No reports found 22 36 33 Total sample 100 (45) 100 (236) 100 (281) Total N (90) (472) (562) Two other studies have produced similar results. Previous evaluations of MMTP have been criticized on theground that the original selection criteria (since eased, as wehave noted) picked only those addicts most amenable to treatment.Another criticism is that the ambulatory induction program hasrequired that the applicant have either a job or a family. Thismay also select the strongest candidates. Finally, the fact thatthere is a waiting period may also operate to select patients whoare most amenable to treatment. The Gearing evaluations through1970 do not include any analysis of attrition rates from thewaiting list or any comparison of those who enter treatment andthose who drop off the list. These criticisms seem at first glance to have weight. Thereare several compelling arguments that they do not, however. Dr.Carl Chambers, Research Director of the New York NarcoticsAddiction Control Commission, headed a study that utilizedsingle-factor analysis to compare patients who stayed in theprogram and patients who did not. He found that continuing in theprogram was not related in any statistically significant way tothe patient's sex, marital status, multiple abuse of drugs, abuseof alcohol, ethnicity, education, age at onset of heroin use, ornumber of prior treatments. Continuing in treatment wasmarginally related to conviction history, in that there was asignificant difference between those with three or moreconvictions and those with two or fewer. It was related to thelength of abuse of narcotics, in that 90 per cent of those whohad abused five or fewer years and only 77 per cent of those whohad abused more than five years remained in treatment for twoyears. There was a relationship to the employment status of thepatient at time of admission-88 per cent of those who wereemployed and 77 per cent of those who were not remained intreatment for at least two years. The item with the greatestpredictive power was the number of convictions-the fewer thenumber, the greater the chance of remaining in treatment.Combinations of these characteristics do have some predictivevalue. For example, the Chambers study concluded that a patientwith seven or more convictions who had no marketable employmentskills was least likely to remain in treatment two years (55.6per cent of these did remain), and that a patient with fewconvictions and no multiple drug or alcohol problems was mostlikely to remain in treatment (95.8 per cent)." In short, the original admission criteria may exercise someinfluence on the success rate as measured by retention, but itseems to be minimal. Some admissions criteria, such as the fouryears of addiction, would operate against success. Others, suchas freedom from severe psychiatric problems (which would probablyresult in a higher percentage of employed addicts than the numberin the population at large), would operate in favor of success.But none seems to be very important. Some special studies indicate that problem groups of patientsdo respond to methadone, although not quite so well as the normalgroups. Of 269 patients on probation or parole-a group that wouldbe especially difficult to work with-72 per cent remained in theprogram in good standing." Even more convincing is the factthat the Dole-Nyswander results have been replicated by reputableresearchers in other places. At the National MethadoneConference, sponsored by NIMH and the National Association toPrevent Addiction to Narcotics, a succession of researchers fromdifferent parts of the country recited results comparable to,though usually not quite so good as, those achieved by the DoleNyswander program. Results have been generally good no matter howfew the restrictions placed on patient characteristics." Interpreting these reports is complicated by the fact that,while the basic criteria remain fairly constant, there arevariations in the exact methodology of evaluation-in the extentto which information from addicts is verified independently, inthe frequency of urinalysis, in the relations between the policeand the program (in some places, for example, the police maycooperate with methadone treatment by not prosecuting addicts inthe program except for very serious crimes), in the samplingtechniques used, and in the definition of retention. In addition,some programs use outside evaluation teams, and some rely oninternal information systems or on special studies done by theirown staff. At present, no two major programs have been thoroughlyevaluated by the same team of outside experts, although theColumbia group that evaluated the MMTP will probably alsoevaluate the Narcotics Treatment Agency in Washington, D.C. Nevertheless, the basic consistency of results is quiteimpressive. Although we may not yet know exactly how goodmethadone maintenance is, its essential efficacy is as wellestablished as anything in this field can be. It is now generallyacknowledged that methadone is medically safe, acceptable to manyheroin addicts, effective, and administratively feasible forlarge-scale programs." Clearly, methadone should not beregarded as a miracle cure. The majority of program operatorsbelieve that most addicts on methadone try heroin a few times,partly out of curiosity as to whether the block works, partlybecause of the desire for euphoria. Judging a program in terms ofwhether an addict ever relapsed might well make it appear to be afailure. Methadone addiction avoids the large swings anddemanding schedule of heroin addiction, thus making it easier foran addict to hold a job and support his family, but it is likelyto take months for an addict to revamp his life-style into a newpattern. Underlying psychological problems remain, except forthose caused by the demands of heroin addiction itself. Addictstend to abuse some other drugs, such as amphetamines and alcohol,to about the same degree that they abused them while onheroin." From society's point of view, the most important of all theevaluation criteria is remaining in the program. An addict who isusing methadone is not continuing either extensive heroin use orheroin-seeking behavior, and his criminal behavior will probablybe reduced because he does not need the money to purchase thedrug. He is not spreading hepatitis contracted from infectedneedles by selling his blood to hospitals." He is not tryingto sell heroin because he needs money for a fix. He is nothanging out in a shooting gallery or on the street serving as arole model for the neighborhood adolescents. And he is nothelping to provide the mass market for heroin that makesinvestment in its importation and distribution economicallyattractive despite the risks. It should be emphasized, however,that the addict will still have the criminal skills he haslearned and may choose to use them to support himself. In suchcase, the decrease in crime would be the difference between theamount needed to support the habit and the addict and that neededto support the addict alone. Some patients may continue to commitcrimes at the same level as before, using the extra money toraise their standard of living or to build up a nest egg.Criminal activity, according to several experts, declines slowly,over a period of a year or more. BASIS FOR THE SUCCESS OF METHADONE The expansion of methadone maintenance has been based onempirical evidence of its utility, not upon any solidunderstanding of the pharmacological reasons for its success.While, obviously, this success is due to its nature as an opiateand long-acting substitute for heroin, an understanding of thenature of addiction itself is missing. It is not known whethermethadone is more effective than other modalities becauseaddiction has physiological components that only another opiatecan offset or because of factors rooted in the psychology ofaddiction. The issues concerning possible physiological components ofaddiction can be stated succinctly: Are some persons physiologically vulnerable to heroin, in thesense that it causes physical changes in them that it does notcause in "normal" people? Are there inherent physiological factors that make some peopleseek heroin-is there some pre-existing felt physical need thatdoes not exist in most people? Does taking heroin cause a permanent or long-termphysiological change in the addict that makes him crave the drugafter he becomes abstinent? Does heroin addiction create a physiological change that makesan ex-addict particularly vulnerable to stress after he becomesabstinent? There is no clear answer to any of these questions. Yet, mostscientists would be inclined to think that the answers to atleast the first two are "No." Dr. Vincent Dole, in thepast, has hypothesized that narcotics addicts may have aninherent neurological vulnerability to the drug, but recently heseems to have modified his view." The second two questionsare the subject of debate among experts. Dr. Dole does seem tothink that opiate addiction causes a metabolic change in theaddict that, in turn, causes drug hunger. Whether he thinks thischange is permanent or only fairly long lasting (i.e., wellbeyond the period during which overt withdrawal symptoms arepresent) is, however, unclear." In either event, givingmethadone to an addict, iti Dr. Dole's view, simply corrects themetabolic imbalance that has already been caused by his heroinaddiction. In this sense, he believes the analogy betweenmethadone for an addict and insulin for a diabetic is valid.Others are skeptical." Dr. William Martin has hypothesized a more elaboratephysiological model. In his view, an opiate such as heroin ormethadone causes a metabolic change that makes the user morevulnerable to stress." An addict may become abstinent, butstress will trigger a physiological reaction that makes him cravethe drug again. Furthermore, this effect may increase withcontinued or increased doses of opiates. Thus, when an addict ismaintained on a methadone dosage higher than his prior heroindosage, as is true in many programs, the underlying physicalproblem is aggravated. This, in turn, makes it even less likelythat he will ever be able to become totally abstinent. Dr. Martinis uncertain whether the opiate-induced change is reversible. Which, if any, of these theories are correct is obviously animportant question. A finding that there is an inherentneurological vulnerability or that addiction causes anirreversible or long-term metabolic change that induces drughunger, either inherently or as a response to stress, would haveimportant consequences for law enforcement, treatment, education,and research. To reiterate, the metabolic theories are far from proved atpresent. They may turn out to be wrong, or it may develop thatthere is a physiological change that is reversible over a periodof months or years. Such a finding would pose very difficultpublic policy problems, because methadone might be prolonging andaggravating a physical condition that could be reversed if anaddict could endure abstinence from opiates for some period that,in practice, most addicts cannot endure. There are other hypotheses about the reasons for the successof methadone maintenance that are alternatives or supplements tothe metabolic theory. Some of these are as follows: To some extent, abstinence symptoms may be a conditioned response to environmental factors. In turn, self-administration of heroin is a conditioned response to the existence of these symptoms, in that for the addict it has been a successful way of eliminating them in the past. (There are reports, for example, of men who have been in prison and "clean" for years experiencing withdrawal symptoms upon return home.) By blocking the effect of heroin, methadone extinguishes the reinforcement for its self-administration .61 Heroin has a short duration of action and involves wideemotional swings, from euphoria after administration to thethreshold of withdrawal six hours later. The rapidity of thiscycle forces a totally drug-oriented existence on the addict. Ifhe does not concentrate on procurement of the drug to theexclusion of virtually everything else, he is not going to haveit when he needs it. Methadone, with its twenty-four-hour actionand gentler swings, allows the addict the luxury of thinkingabout something besides drugs. Methadone programs, with or without supporting services, givesthe addict a good deal of psychological support. The staff isconcerned with his well-being and is giving him a medicine inwhich they have obvious confidence. Medical practice has longknown that this placebo effect is important. Heroin addiction imposes a structure and purpose on theaddict's life-getting the drug. Daily visits to the methadoneclinic may provide comparable structure. The life-style and personal associations of an addict providegreat pressures to relapse after a period of abstinence. Anabstinence program located where the addict will not live in thefuture (e.g., Lexington) does nothing about this problem, becausethe addict does not build up an alternative life-style andalternative associations and will probably return to the old onesafter release. Methadone protects him from heroin while he buildsnew patterns of behavior and loses touch with the addict culture.In this view, after new patterns have been developed, it might bepossible to withdraw the addict from methadone because hisaltered environment would not put pressure on him to relapse. There is some evidence that a substantial number of addicts-perhaps as many as one-third-"mature out" of addictionwhen they reach their 30's and 40's. Some of the patients who dowell on methadone may come from this group." Studies have indicated that monitoring an ex-addict is animportant factor in keeping him off drugs." The crucialingredient of methadone treatment may be not the methadone per sebut the urinalysis. Addiction to methadone is necessary only toforce the patient to come to the program. At present, one can do little but note these differences; onecannot know how these vary in validity for different addicts orgroups, or, in some cases, even how they could be researched. ISSUES CONCERNING METHADONE Dosage Level. The first question about dosage levels ishow much methadone should be given to an addict. Most people havea general preference for administering the least amountconsistent with success. This is based partly on moral feelingsthat one should give as little of an opiate as possible andpartly on a desire to minimize unknown side effects or metabolicdisruption. The problem is to determine this minimum level. The general rule of thumb is that a daily dose of 100 mg. willblock any effect of heroin for almost all addicts. Most programsadminister a maximum of 180 mg., although a few may go as high as300 mg. in selected cases. A program that administers 80 mg. ormore is probably aiming at a blockage dose. A lower dose will notblock the effect of heroin-an addict can achieve euphoria if hetries. However, the lower dose will block the narcotic hunger andthus remove some of the pressure for heroin use. For mostaddicts, a dosage of 40 or 50 mg. is enough to eliminate thiscraving, but an even lower dose may be enough if the addict has alight habit. In the early methadone programs, it was apparently assumedthat any addict who found that he could break the block would doso, and that the higher, blocking doses were necessary. In thelast few years, some experiments have been made comparing theefficacy of high and low doses. Dr. Avram. Goldstein, at theSanta Clara County Program, maintained three groups of randomlychosen addicts on blind doses of 30, 50, and 100 mg.,respectively. (Blind dosage is not discussed with the patient,who is not aware of how much he is receiving.) The addictsreceiving the lower doses did tend to use heroin more oftenduring the first month, but by the third month in treatment therewas no significant difference among the groups in either heroinuse or retention in the program." Dr. Jerome Jaffe, of theIllinois Drug Abuse Program, has done similar research withroughly equivalent results. For the first month or so, thehighdose group has a higher retention rate; thereafter, the twogroups do about the same in terms of retention, employment, andarrest rates. Dr. William Weiland came to the same con clusionsafter similar experiments in Philadelphia with groups of 52patients on 50 mg. of methadone and 52 on 100 mg. for a period of60 days." There are few dose-related side effects. These results suggest that suppression of the narcotics hungermay be more important than the blockage effect, at least formotivated addicts. The results are only suggestive, however,because the time spans involved in these experiments are limited,and it is not known what the results of a more extendedexperiment might be. The results might also be different if thepopulations involved were younger or less motivated. Drs. Doleand Goldstein, among others, regard these experiments as veryinteresting. The low dose does mean that some addicts will dropout in the initial stages who might have been retained with ahigher dose. In addition, it exposes the patient to the medicalrisk of relapse. Given these known costs and risks, and given thelack of any solid reason to believe that a 100-mg. dose is insome way more harmful than 50 mg., some doctors are reluctant touse a low dose. The major reason for doing so is that itminimizes leakage into the community from patients who take theirmethadone home, minimizes side effects, and safeguards somewhatagainst unknown side effects or long-term effects. Some programs use doses even smaller than those describedabove, but none has been scientifically evaluated. Colonel HassanJeru Ahmed, of the Blackman's Development Center in Washington,D.C., claims to give a number of addicts as little as 5 mg. perday with good success. Without controlled experiments, it is hardto know whether his opinion is accurate. Theoretically, such adose might suppress the hunger in an addict with a very lowhabit, or there might be some placebo effect involved. SinceColonel Hassan's aim is abstinence rather than maintenance, thismight also be a method of slow detoxification. A second issue about dosage involves expense. Most programshave assumed that the specific dose should be tailored to theindividual addict and therefore give doses of anywhere from 25mg. to 180 mg., depending on the individual. From the standpointof administrative efficiency, this is costly. To work with a fewstandardized doses would allow programs to treat more addictswith the same expenditure. Dr. Goldstein has done an experimentto determine whether the individualized dose is really moreeffective and has concluded that it is not." To test this,he used a blind dosage procedure. (This procedure not only isnecessary for research on dosage but also has substantivebenefits as well. The most important of these may be that the"dosage game" is part of the addict's life style of"conning," and eliminating it contributes to over-allrehabilitation.) An initial dose of 30 mg., increased by 10 mg. aday until final stabilization at 100 mg., was equally effectivefor all patients. Ancillary Services. Most program operators declare thatancillary services are a vital part of methadone treatment. Groupand individual therapy, job training, job placement, familycounseling, medical and dental care, and education are allregarded as crucial to the process of helping addicts make theadjustment to a new life-style once they have broken the heroinhabit. MMTP, for example, provides extensive services, which isone reason the total cost is estimated at about $2,000 per yearper patient. (The cost for each patient who has finished theinduction stage is about $1,000 per year.) In its evaluationreports on MMTP, the Gearing Committee always emphasizes theimportance of services." Dr. Jaffe, whose Illinois DrugAbuse Program also offers services, agrees. In particular, hebelieves that the techniques and group procedures developed intherapeutic communities are helpful in stabilizing addicts onmethadone because they create an environment in which patientsnot only can be relieved of narcotics hunger but also can beginto develop attitudes that may be useful to them in achievingsocial rehabilitation. There are some programs that operate with a minimum of extras,however, and their success rate does not seem markedly lower thanthe others'. In New Orleans, most addicts are treated in privateclinics and pay about $10 per week." The program has limitedability to finance additional facilities. The Santa Clara CountyProgram, which also operates at a cost of about $10 per addictper week, is equally limited in its services." About 10 percent of the patients receive psychiatric help outside theprogram, and there is some vocational counseling. There is alsosome group work by the patients themselves without professionalinvolvement. Since the initial retention rate of the Santa ClaraCounty Program is relatively close to that of the MMTP,additional ancillary services might contribute little as comparedwith their costs. (An important aim of the program has been tostudy this question.) The Santa Clara Program did include avocational counselor, which many observers feel is the mostimportant single service that can be offered. It also emphasizespeer-group therapy as a key to rehabilitation." Drs. Jaffeand Dole have experimented with giving methadone without servicesto people on waiting lists. Preliminary results from MMTP aregood." Although one could easily find widespread agreement thatancillary services would be clearly desirable if they were free,one seldom finds any explicit analysis of the cost/benefitaspects of the issue. The key fact is that, as long as the supplyof addicts holds out, a minimal program can treat many morepatients than an elaborate one at any given level of expenditure.A program costing $500 per year per addict, with a retention rateof only 50 per cent, can treat more people than a program costing$2,000, with an 85-per-cent success rate. With $1 million, forexample, the cheaper program could treat 2,000 addicts for a yearand would retain half of them. The more expensive one could treatonly 500 addicts, even though it would retain 425 of them. Theeconomic advantages of the cheaper program are even greater whenthe comparative outputs are analyzed over time. Still, assuming alimited budget and an unlimited supply of addicts (and, atpresent, almost all methadone programs have waiting lists) , eachtype of program will be losing its failures and retaining itssuccesses. After some period, each would have a success rate of100 per cent, because only the successes would remain; but the$500 program would be maintaining four times as many addicts forthe same amount of money. This analysis holds even for gross differences in successrates. Since, as New Orleans and Santa Clara show, the actualdifferences may be limited, or even nonexistent, the case for thecheaper program is even stronger. Any city with a large addictionproblem and limited funds should probably choose a methadoneprogram with minimal services rather than full ones. Theprincipal argument against this conclusion is that services mightmake a crucial difference for the hard-core addicts, and thatthis is the population that causes most of the crime. But, whileit is true that addicts with long criminal records are lesssuccessful on methadone than are others, it has not yet beenproved that the services make a crucial difference for thisgroup. In addition, the proposition that society should condemnfour treatable people to addiction in order to treat one otheraddict who is causing more trouble is a hard moral position todefend. It might be better to put the hard-core addict on heroinmaintenance and treat the others with methadone. Another argument sometimes used in support of extensiveservices is that society should spend the money necessary to givefull treatment to all addicts, thus obviating the whole questionand avoiding the need for moral choices. In the practical world,however, everyone knows that the cities are in financial troubleand have tremendous demands on their limited resources. It isneither possible nor desirable to give narcotics addicts a priorclaim to limited public resources that might otherwise be spenton education, health, welfare, or countless other pressing areas.The best model may be one in which the patients are encouraged todevelop their own services, with the expensive ancillary servicestargeted on the hard-core. Outpatient Induction. The MMTP originally inductedpatients into the methadone program by putting them in thehospital for a week or two during the transition from heroin tomethadone. Because this is expensive, and because the limitednumber of available hospital beds imposes a constraint on thenumber admitted to the program, there has been much interest inambulatory induction. Starting in 1968, MMTP has adopted such aprogram for some of its patients. As of 1971, about 1,952 of its4,376 patients had been admitted in this fashion. Preliminarydata indicate that rates of attrition are almost identicalwhether patients are inducted as inpatients or outpatients. After24 months, about 72 per cent of each group remains." Thisfigure is not entirely valid because of the specialcharacteristics of the ambulatory group. Having a job or familywas a requirement for admission to the ambulatory component, and79 per cent of admittees were employed or in school. Whether apatient is employed, as we have seen, is a statisticallysignificant predictor of whether he will remain in treatment. Other programs have also used ambulatory admission withconsistently good results, and the effectiveness of this methodis no longer in doubt." Withdrawal. Eventual withdrawal from methadone ratherthan perpetual maintenance is regarded as a goal by drug experts-in part because of a moral feeling that people should not and donot need to be drug-dependent; in part because of a desire tofree the addict from his ties to the clinic; in part because ofthe wish to minimize any unknown long-term effects of opiates onthe human body. At present, it is uncertain whether withdrawal is possible. Ina study of 350 patients who withdrew from the MMTP, Dr. Dolefound that "narcotics hunger" returned in almost allindividuals immediately after they ceased taking the methadone,whether their withdrawal was voluntary or involuntary. Since thisis a somewhat special populations high proportion were treatmentfailures-the results are not conclusive, although they aresuggestive that withdrawal may be difficult. Dr. Dole has alsofound in blind experiments that a patient stabilized on methadoneand free from drug hunger may have a return of drug dreams if hismedication is withdrawn. He believes that, for most addicts,maintenance has to be a permanent way of life. It is important tonote, however, that the return of "narcotics hunger"does not automatically mean a return to heroin use; someindividuals are able to live with the hunger without returning todrugs. But hunger does make successful abstinence substantiallymore difficult."' Dr. Jaffe believes that withdrawal from methadone can besuccessfully accomplished, although his work in this area has notyet been extensive. In a study of 53 patients in activetreatment, he found that 29 per cent had voluntarily withdrawnfrom methadone but remained affiliated with the methadone units,either participating in group therapy or transferring totherapeutic communities or aftercare systems. Not all thoseobserved on withdrawal remained abstinent, although some patientsobserved after six months had been able to do so. Dr. Jaffe seemsto feel that continued therapy techniques are helpful inmaintaining abstinence." Dr. Avram Goldstein has done experiments showing that themethadone dosage can be reduced without discomfort to the patientif it is done slowly at a weekly reduction rate of no more than10 per cent. Withdrawal from a moderate methadone stabilizationprogram would then require about six months." But follow-upresults are not yet in. Although the results to date are ambiguous, it seems certainthat substantial experimentation with withdrawal from methadonewill be undertaken. Some black activists, in particular, arestrongly opposed to the concept of permanent maintenance and willaccept methadone programs in their communities only if they areseen as intermediate-term therapies with the ultimate goal ofabstinence. Dr. Beny Primm, of Addiction Research TreatmentCorporation in New York City, for example, told us that hisexplicit goal is to get everyone off methadone and into adrug-free state. Dr. Goldstein has also suggested that methadonetreatment should be thought of as "methadone temporarysupport rather than methadone maintenance, with its implicationof life-long medication." An addict could join the program,become stabilized on methadone, eventually taper off slowly andbecome drug-free, but be able to return to methadone if the urgeto take heroin became overwhelming." Ultimate determinationof the possibilities of withdrawal must await determination ofthe metabolic-change issue. Meanwhile, the only way to find outif withdrawal is possible is to try it. Since we do not know whymethadone works, there is no way of telling a priori. Someprograms have reported an unexpected phenomenon that might becalled "the 20-mg. barrier." The patient undergoingwithdrawal does well until the dose is reduced to about 20 mg. Atthis level, there is a sudden increase in physical complaints andheroin usage." What this means for permanent withdrawal is aquestion that needs study. Benefits to the Addict. Methadone maintenance issometimes criticized on the ground that it is society's way ofdealing with the addict crime problem without regard to theaddict himself. This view is especially strong among so-calledmilitant black groups. On the whole, however, the idea thatmethadone sacrifices the addict for the sake of society does notseem valid. Although many communities adopt methadone programs inan attempt to solve their crime problem, the program resultsshowing increased productivity and family stability of thepatients suggest that they themselves benefit from the changedlife-style and reduced crime as much as or more than thecommunity at large. Since most programs operate primarily on avoluntary basis, the patients themselves must prefer methadone tothe addicted life. Even when an addict is coerced into treatmentby law enforcement, simply staying in treatment is a vote againstthe former life-style. Finally, even if one were to concede the truth of thecriticism, the logical rejoinder would be "So what?"There is no good reason for society to tolerate crime simplybecause the criminal is a heroin addict when it can eliminate thecrime by forcing him to switch to being a methadone addict. It isnot as if one could choose between methadone and an equallyeffective but more expensive alternative: The other alternativesdo not appear to work so well. Even if they did, it would bedifficult to argue that addicts deserve priority in allocatingscarce public resources that could be devoted to the generalwelfare of the groups in society that furnish most of theaddicts. In general, to the extent that the criticism representsthe truth of the situation, its use as a criticism seems based onwishful thinking rather than sound analysis. Its proponents wishthere were another, equally effective treatment method or wishthat public resources were unlimited. If the metabolic theories of addiction should prove accurate,the issue will become more acute. Dr. William Martin, forexample, poses the issue as the "medical dilemma ofmethadone maintenance, namely, the creation or continuance of aserious medical disorder, physical dependence, in order todecrease antisocial behavior."" If this dilemma is areal one, all the choices would be unpleasant. The nation couldlegalize heroin or move to a massive system of heroinmaintenance, but this would pose exactly the same moral problemsas administering methadone. It could continue to keep heroinillegal and prosecute addicts for crimes committed to obtain itwhile refusing them methadone, but this seems both morally wrongand politically impossible. It could declare that addicts are notresponsible for crimes committed to obtain heroin because of thephysical duress involved. This would necessitate either heroin ormethadone maintenance, however, since no one can be given such alicense to steal without some counteraction by society. Despitethe problems stated by Dr. Martin, methadone seems the bestchoice. Methadone and the Law-Enforcement System. Some programoperators are strongly opposed to the development of closerelations between methadone maintenance and the law-enforcementsystem. In their view, a coercive system that forces an addict toaccept methadone as a condition for probation or parole is anintolerable violation of civil liberties. Others, with equallystrong opinions, disagree. They believe that the realistic choicelies between having the addict on methadone and having him injail, and that the authorities will not often impose a methadonerequirement on a man who would otherwise have been released. Inthis view, accepting treatment set by courts or parole boardsgives addicts an option that would not have been availableotherwise. All agree that participants in the methadone programshould avoid becoming informers for the law-enforcement system.Because of the need to maintain the confidential doctor-patientrelationship, patients should not be reported by the treatmentagency for violations of probation or parole. Methadone and Causes of Addiction. Addiction is oftenseen as a sociopsychological disorder, stemming from basicpersonality defects. In this view, it is useless and wrong totreat addiction by administering methadone without, at the sametime, treating the underlying disorder. A better way to approachthe problem is to deal with the basic pathology; when this isdone, freedom from drug use will follow naturally. As stated by aManhattan probation officer: My objection to the methadone program . . . is predicated on the observation that while the drug methadone removes the physical craving for the other opiates it nevertheless fails to combat in any way or deal with the various emotional or other difficulties that permitted the individual to initially become and remain involved with drugs. Since the drug problem has, so to speak, been eliminated, that basic problem has not been dealt with; that of the inadequate, ineffective person unable to cope with the reality of his situation. In essence, an aspect, the symptom, has been treated not the entire individual, with the result that they then frequently resort to other avenues of escape including amphetamines, barbiturates, wines, and liquor, or they begin to manifest serious forms of instability.88 Most proponents of methadone would readily agree thatmethadone per se does not cure any personality disordersthat might cause addiction. (Not all would; it is entirelypossible that the opiates constitute an effective treatment forcertain as yet undefined psychic states.") Those who doagree would respond to the basic criticism as follows: No consistent pathology has been found. No psychiatricdiagnosis can be shown to apply to all heroin addicts or even toa majority of them. Thus, while addicts tend to be depressive,they are not so depressive as neurotic nonaddicts. While someaddicts are schizophrenic, 80 per cent to 90 per cent are not.Some are psychopathic, but the great majority are not. In short,no satisfactory explanation of the psychological roots ofaddiction has been found, much less developed to the point whereit is operationally useful for treatment purposes's The view that an underlying pathology is responsible is anassumption rather than a proved fact. One can construct equallyplausible theories that experimentation is caused by exposure andnormal psychological processes, and addiction is caused byphysiological factors. Dr. Dole, for example, believes that theobserved common characteristics of addicts are simply thoseforced on them by the nature of the life-style required tomaintain a heroin habit. Other experts also believe that, evenfor addicts with marked problems, it is the addiction that causesthe problems rather than vice versa. Even granting the argument that pathology is at the root ofaddiction, it is easier to work on underlying causes with anaddict who is on methadone and free of drug hunger and the heroinlife-style. Again granting the argument that pathology is at the root ofaddiction, the success rates in attempting to cure suchpathologies-especially among the socioeconomic groups thatfurnish most of the addicts-are not very high. Thus, one has norealistic choice except to accept the second best solution ofmethadone maintenance, which has very great benefits for societyand for the addict, even though it is not a complete cure. Perhaps the best summary has been given by Dr. John Kramer,discussing the psychopathology of addiction generally, not justmethadone: It is generally conceded that traditional psychiatrictechniques have not been useful in the management of opiatedependence. In a psychoanalytic frame of reference symptoms areconsidered to be the behavioral or somatic representations of anunderlying intrapsychic conflict. Once the conflict is resolvedor reduced to manageable proportions, the symptoms will diminishor disappear. This conceptual model fails to account for two differentissues, either or both of which may play a role in people whoabuse drugs. First, though intrapsychic determinants may play apart in whether a person uses drugs, other circumstances such asdrug availability, subgroup attitudes, peer pressures, and plainchance are very often more important. In other words, in someindividuals, there may be no serious underlying conflicts, thoughthere may be considerable conflict with the community. Second,whatever the original determinants of drug use may be, thesymptom, dependency on drugs, can become so central an issue thatit, so to speak, assumes a life of its own, and even solving theunderlying conflicts may have no influence on the drug dependenceitself. An analogy may be drawn with a depressed person who in anattempt at suicide breaks his neck and becomes paraplegic.Psychotherapy may relieve his depression but will not restorefunction to his legs. Because drug use has been invested with such great importancein our society (an importance it did not always have) it isassumed that the intrapsychic events which cause, or contributeto it, are of equal magnitude. Hence the view, that since druguse potentially subjects the person to such serious consequences,the psychological problem he has must be equally big. Experiencewith drug users does not validate this view. Some do indeed haveclearly definable psychiatric problems, but many do not. Where itis sought, some subtle psychiatric defect can always be found, ashas been the case with addicts. Further investigation may clarifythis question. In the meantime a functional approach, handlingthe symptoms, educating and giving practical assistance as wellas offering psychotherapy in selected instances seem desirable.91 Multiple Drug Use. If a heroin addict is involved in the useof other drugs, methadone will do nothing about that use. Thereis evidence, however, that methadone patients do not increasetheir use of other drugs-a charge that has been made-althoughthey do tend to maintain it at about the same level. The SantaClara County Program found that, both before and after going onmethadone, about 20 per cent of the patients overused alcohol, 5to 10 per cent used amphetamines, 45 per cent used marijuana, and30 per cent used nothing. The only significant difference wasthat 20 per cent abused barbiturates before going on methadone,and only 6 per cent did so afterwards." Since barbituratescreate a dangerous addiction if used too much, this is animportant shift. We know of no other before-and-after study of drug use bypatients on methadone. A recent study of multiple drug use byheroin users, however," supports Dr. Goldstein's conclusionthat the use of other drugs does not increase. A sample of 422heroin users were asked whether they had used certain drugs morethan six times. The per cent who had done so were: marijuana-86per cent; cocaine-47 per cent; barbiturates-34 per cent; andamphetamines-33 per cent. (They were also questioned about otherdrugs, not recounted here.) In general, it had not been thoughtthat multiple use among heroin addicts was as high as this, andthere may have been some tendency to assume that multiple useamong methadone patients was a new pattern for them rather thanthe continuation of an old one. Leakage of Methadone. As more large methadone projects comeinto existence, it is reasonable to anticipate that some of themwill be lax in their control of methadone, permitting leakageinto the community at large. Several possible consequences ofsuch a development cause concern. First, there is a fear that thedrug will become available in an injectable form that is anacceptable, if not a totally satisfactory, euphoric substitutefor heroin. Secondly, the availability of even oral methadonewill create a new group of addicts. Thirdly, nonaddicts,particularly children, may take methadone and die. These fears have a sound factual basis. Indeed, methadone canalready be bought on the street in any major city, although it isunclear whether the source is diversion from the programs orindependent manufacture. The major concern is injectablemethadone. Many addicts regard it as a very good drug, and itcould result in a substantial addition to the present addictionproblem. This is probably a controllable problem, however.Methadone can be mixed with Tang or some other substance beforedispensation (as is true in almost all programs at present), sothat it is suitable for oral administration only. More important,the drug companies have developed a methadone disk that requiresa large volume of water for it to dissolve. This makes itdifficult, although not impossible, to inject." The second concern, the leakage of oral methadone, is morecrucial. The rapid expansion of methadone programs is highlyprobable. With this will inevitably come carelessness about staffand about control of methadone. If there is a market for thedrug, there will also be some corruption. It will be surprisingif there are not some major scandals involving the diversion ofmethadone from treatment programs. In some ways, leakage may not be very important. While thereare some methadone addicts who are not involved in treatmentprograms, oral methadone is not so euphoric as heroin, and fewcurrent heroin addicts would prefer it to heroin as aeuphorogenic. There is no reason to believe that methadone addiction isphysically more harmful than heroin addiction, and, if themethadone is pure, there is good reason to think it less harmful.There is substantial evidence to the effect that methadoneaddiction is psychologically less harmful than heroin addiction.In general, while a few addicts might make oral methadone theirdrug of choice, it is probable that the major market for illegalmethadone will consist of addicts who are on do-it-yourselfmethadone maintenance, who tide themselves over with methadonewhen they cannot get heroin, or who want the euphoric effects ofheroin only occasionally. In these cases, both society and theaddict are better off if they can get methadone to substitute forheroin. There is some possibility that methadone will make addicts ofpersons who would not otherwise have become addicted. Heroin hastwo major defects that may exert some deterrent effect onpotential experimenters: It often contains dangerous impurities;and it is not effective when taken orally. On the whole, however,it seems unlikely that these factors are very influential. Forthose who might not like to inject a drug, heroin can also besnorted. (This is, in fact, the usual method by which neophytestake the drug.) The impurities point might be valid, but it isdifficult to believe that anyone willing to get into the generallife-style of addiction is going to be deterred by the marginaladditional disadvantage of impure drugs. It does seem likely,however, that, as methadone becomes increasingly available, itwill be used as the drug of initiation by persons who wouldotherwise have tried heroin. More difficult to accept are the overdose deaths that arealready starting to occur-most poignantly, among children whofind and drink methadone-laden Tang. Recurrences could beprevented by insisting that methadone patients keep methadone ina locked box outside the refrigerator. The drug will keep a weekwithout refrigeration, so that this is perfectly feasible."Noninjectible methadone could also be given in a tablet form thatis too large and bitter for children. Other deaths occur among people who use methadone to achieveeuphoria. Because methadone is slower-acting and longer lastingthan intravenous heroin, even a veteran heroin addict may takemethadone, decide that the drug is not having an adequate effect,take more, and overdose when the peak comes two or three hourslater. Self-education within the drug subculture might keep suchincidents to a minimum. But some deaths will occur, and it isreasonable to expect that the more methadone available, the moredeaths it will cause. The only effective answer to this argument is to point to thelarge number of heroin deaths caused by overdose, disease, andinfection and to the other deaths caused by addict-committedcrime and by such practices as the sale of infected blood byaddicts. Almost certainly there will be an over-all decrease inopiate-related deaths as methadone replaces heroin in thecommunity. Side Effects." A number of possibly undesirableside effects of methadone have been hypothesized, ranging fromimpotence to damage to the bones and teeth. So far, clinicalstudies have found no evidence of birth defects and no indicationof physical damage. Drowsiness is a frequent complaint of programinitiates, but this is a natural consequence of an increase inthe opiate dose and disappears as the addict develops tolerancefor the new level. Some addicts continue to complain of the lossof libido, but the best evidence is that, for most, sexualperformance is better when they are on methadone than when theyare on heroin. In short, although it cannot be statedcategorically that there are no serious side effects, clinicalinvestigation so far has failed to find any. To date, however,research has concentrated on possible physical effects; there donot seem to be detailed studies of the effects of methadone onintellectual or motor functioning, and we do not know howmethadone affects a wide range of important functions, fromproblem-solving ability to the ability to operate a car or oftencomplex machinery. Since methadone is a powerful tranquilizer, itmay well have effects in these areas. It is also possible thattolerance to tranquilization develops, as may be indicated by thedisappearance of excessive drowsiness. THE FUTURE OF METHADONE It is virtually certain that methadone maintenance willincrease rapidly in the next few years. While many observers havereservations, the cost/benefit and cost/effectiveness advantagesof methadone have become obvious. Since the relationship betweenaddiction and crime has been widely publicized, politicalpressures to do something about crime are great enough so thatthe government will probably support methadone, and vigorously. While the federal subbureaucracies involved-the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, the Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs, and the Food and Drug Administration-have never been fondof methadone maintenance, its social and political advantagesshould now be obvious enough to induce large scale federalfunding in the near future. Most informed observers regard theAdministration's proposal to create a Special Action Office onDrug Abuse Prevention and to increase funding dramatically asconfirmation of this. At this writing, the Food and DrugAdministration is on the verge of liberalizing the rules underwhich methadone is approved for use. As the programs expand, several issues in addition to thosealready discussed will become important: Administrative Problems. There are clear differencesbetween operating small, experimental programs and operating massprograms. Such issues as the extent to which ancillary servicesshould be supplied, the extent of monitoring through urinalysis,high doses versus low doses, standardized doses versus individualones, and control of leakage will arise over and over. Inaddition, there will be the problems of recruiting and trainingstaff common to any expanding area. At present, there are notenough people experienced in methadone programs to double ortriple current programs. One can expect a period of raiding ofexisting programs (with a consequent decline in theireffectiveness) and increasing use of less qualified and lessdedicated people. The difficulties of hiring good staff willcompound the leakage problem. It will also create pressures touse the cheapest methods available. Most of the higher costs ofthe more expensive programs are caused by the increased staffrequired for added services; if the trained staff to providethese services is simply not available, they either will not beprovided or will be done poorly. Analysis of the impact of theseservices is therefore urgent. Community Problems. As noted, some black militants areopposed to methadone maintenance because they regard it as adevice to keep the black community "drugged andenslaved." Many of the rumors of side effects are alsobelieved. These fears can be countered as long as there appearsto be a possibility that methadone maintenance leads toabstinence; but, if experiments indicate that this is not areasonable hope, the situation may become more difficult. This isnot the type of problem that is amenable to rational solution, oreven advice. Methadone-program operators, however, can do atleast three things to meet the challenge: 1. Maintain close contact with various elements of thecommunity, to explain what they are doing and why it is good forthe addict and the community. 2. Provide facilities to ensure that any methadone patient whowants to try to become totally drug-free will receive the bestpossible support for his effort. 3. Involve the community in the staffing and administration ofthe project. Since these are all good policies irrespective of any militantreaction against methadone, programs should follow them whetheror not they foresee any problem. Some program operators believethat the fear of adverse community reaction is exaggerated and islikely to decrease over time. The area in which the addict lives,after all, bears the crime costs and the risk of a spread inaddiction. As a methadone program becomes operational, thesurrounding community comes to appreciate it, and strongopposition dissolves. Dr. Robert DuPont, of Washington's NarcoticTreatment Agency, has told us that methadone patients become thebest missionaries in the community. Long-acting Methadone. The effect of the methadone usedat present lasts only about 24 hours. Drug companies have beenexperimenting with a drug (acetylmethadol) that will last up tothree days, and it is expected that this will become generallyavailable soon." This will have several significant effectson methadone maintenance. It will cut costs by reducing theexpense of preparing and administering the drug. It will alsomake it more difficult for the patient to skip his dose and tryheroin. Another effect may be to allow the patient greatermobility and weaken the ties between the patient and the program.In the view of some, this will be a good thing because it willenable the patients to lead a more nearly normal life. Othersspeculate that it will be counterproductive, in that the routinedaily visit provides an important element of structure in thepatient's life and has positive therapeutic benefits. There is noway of resolving this dispute a priori. Changing Patterns of Addiction. There is consensus thatthe primary reason addicts volunteer for methadone programs, orstay in them once assigned by the law-enforcement system, is thatthey are tired of the life-style of an addict, with the constantneed to make a connection, the strains of criminality, the jailtime, and the risk of infection and death. Participation in amethadone program and abstinence from heroin become a moreattractive choice. Whether he procures methadone on the street orthrough a clinic, as long as it is cheap he can maintain hisopiate habit at low cost and then occasionally obtain the desiredeuphoria by skipping the methadone and using large amounts ofheroin. Since the data from existing programs indicate that manyaddicts do use heroin occasionally-anywhere from 10 to 50 percent, depending on the program and length of time intreatment-this may already be a common pattern. This problem presents a difficult choice to program operators.To eliminate this last increment of drug use might requireexpulsion of addicts for occasional heroin use. This wouldcertainly return some patients to the addicted life, with all thesocial and personal costs involved. If an addict is adjustingwell in other ways, this cost is not justifiable. Eliminating thelast vestige of heroin use in such a case is essentially ameaningless concession to moralism. There is a more serious question involved, however. There isno way of knowing the extent to which the negative aspects of theaddicted life have a general deterrent effect that keeps peoplefrom experimenting with heroin. Clearly, almost anyone exposed toheroin is also exposed to the addict community generally andknows the risks involved in becoming addicted. It -is possiblethat the existence of large methadone programs would indicate tosome portion of the nonaddict population that they could attainthe euphoria of heroin without having to adopt the life-style asa whole, and they might find this option more attractive thaneither abstinence or full-scale heroin addiction. Presentevidence indicates that there may be a curious gap of belief inpeople who become addicted to heroin. They know full well thatthe drug is addicting and that the life-style is terrible, butthey do not doubt their own ability to handle the drug withoutbecoming addicted. For all we know, the unattractiveness of thelife-style may be exercising a potent deterrent effect on otherswho are curious but more realistic about the danger of becomingaddicted. Opening up the methadone choice might make these peoplemore willing to run the risk. Since we know little about thecauses of addiction and even less about deterrent effects, we donot know whether this is a matter for real concern. If it turnsout to be an important phenomenon, it will create some painfulpublic-policy choices. Total Size of Methadone Programs. A final questionconcerns the portion of the addict population that is amenable tosuccessful methadone treatment. Any figure is only an educatedguess based upon the observer's estimate of the total number ofaddicts, observations about the results of existing methadoneprograms, and judgments about the criteria of success. Official U.S. Government calculations seem to agree that 25 to33 per cent of the addicted population will be helped bymethadone." This estimate may well be too low; some programoperators have estimated that their methadone programs drewalmost 50 per cent of the addicts in an area within a year or soafter beginning operations."' Considering that many addictsbelieve street rumors adverse to methadone, and that one wouldnot expect any program to reach its full potential right away, anestimate of 50 per cent probably represents a more realistic, butstill conservative, figure, if one assumes that"success" means "derives substantial benefit frommethadone maintenance." ANTAGONISTS Antagonists are drugs that prevent opiates from having anyeffect if the antagonists are administered before opiateinjection and that precipitate withdrawal if administered afterinjection. The possibility of using these drugs as a majortreatment modality has intrigued researchers for the last sixyears, but at present the antagonists remain experimental."' There are two basic antagonists currently in use for thetreatment of heroin addicts, cyclazocine and naloxone, but anexcellent survey by New York's Health Services Administrationnoted that there might be several hundred others already inexistence, as yet untested."' The most importantcharacteristics of these drugs are as follows: Cyclazocine produces unpleasant side effects, such as nauseasweating, a drunken feeling, anxiety, and hallucinations, buttolerance to these effects does develop. Naloxone does not appearto have significant side effects. Cyclazocine is effective whentaken orally and has a duration of action of 12 to 24 hours.Naloxone is effective when taken intravenously but is relativelyineffective when taken orally. There does not appear to be anyinformation on subcutaneous administration, though presumably itwould be less effective than intravenous but more effective thanoral administration. Small doses of an antagonist are effective.Thus, 4 mg. of cyclazocine will block the effects of 15 to 25 mg.of heroin for one day. Naloxone is even more powerful if usedintravenously: 1 mg. will block the effects of 25 mg. of heroinfor ten hours. (Taken orally, it requires 200 mg. to block theeffects of 25 mg. of heroin for six hours.) Cyclazocine hasaddictive qualities, in that an abstinent user will show somewithdrawal symptoms. Users do not crave the drug even when theyare in withdrawal, however. Naloxone does not have addictiveproperties. The antagonists do not reduce the "drughunger" felt by the opiate addict. Most experimentation to date has been done with cyclazocine,largely because the short duration and ineffectiveness of oralnaloxone makes it an unsuitable candidate for mass treatment. The NIMH Addiction Research Center is now experimenting with anew antagonist, EN-1639A. It is two to three times more potentthan the other two, is effective orally, and has a longerduration of action than naloxone .103 Besides the mechanical problems of dosage and delivery, thereare several major problems in using the antagonists as atreatment modality. Because they do not eliminate the "drughunger," the patient is constantly tempted to miss his doseand take heroin. As the HSA paper points out, the fact thataddiction to the antagonist itself is minimal means that it ispossible for him to do this. A methadone patient is tied to theprogram by his addiction; an antagonist patient is not. Becauseof this problem, and also because of the short duration of actionof many possible antagonists, a major search is under way for acapsule that could be implanted in the patient to release thedrug slowly over an extended period. It is likely to be some timebefore success is achieved, however."' The civil-libertiesquestions involved are also substantial. Two apparent disadvantages may be due to the experimentalnature of the programs. So far, the costs have been high ($3,000to $5,000 per addict per year), partly because of the need forinpatient care common to all experimental programs and partlybecause of the scarcity and high price of some of the drugs. Thesuccess rate so far is hard to calculate, but, at best, it hasbeen about 40 per cent over all, judged by the criterion ofremaining in the program."' However, some of the failuresmay reflect the fact that dosages had to be worked out andsupportive services developed. Future experiments may do better.One can, of course, argue the opposite-that future, largerprojects will be less successful because the Hawthorne effect ofparticipating in a new experimental program will be gone. Inaddition, there is some evidence that the success rate foroutpatients may be considerably lower than for inpatients. It is as yet unproved that the antagonists will ever be auseful treatment modality. Nor is there any reason at present tobelieve that the side effects of any antagonists would be lessadverse than those of methadone. It could easily turn out to bethe reverse, with the antagonists having more serious adverseeffects. If an addict is going to be dependent upon long-termchemotherapy, there appears to be no reason at present forpreferring that he be dependent on an antagonist rather than onmethadone. Under some theories of addiction, the antagonists could beuseful adjuncts to treatment. If one takes the view that it isimportant to extinguish reinforcement of the desire to useopiates, the antagonists may turn out to be successful. One canalso argue that the use of an antagonist, combined withsupportive services, would force the addict from the addictedlife-style and give him an opportunity to forge a new one.Finally, and probably most important, is the possibility that useof an antagonist might turn out to be the only practical way anaddict on methadone can become abstinent. If research shouldultimately show that opiate use does create a drug hunger thatpersists for a long period after obvious withdrawal is complete,then antagonists might be developed that would help the addictsurvive this period without readdiction. Dr. William Martin hasfound that secondary withdrawal symptoms persist in animals forat least six months after withdrawal from opiates. If the drughunger is such a symptom, and if it persists in humans in similarfashion, there is at present no way for an addict to leave amethadone program without enduring six months of craving opiates.As is obvious from the failure rates for abstinence programs, fewmanage to do this. If an antagonist could prevent relapses fromleading to readdiction during this period, it would bevaluable."' Dr. Martin is cautious about the antagonists. He states onlythat, if the research goals are achieved, "I believe thatcertain motivated addicts can be benefitted by this approach. . .. [They] may find a role in the treatment of the juvenileexperiment. Others are more enthusiastic, andsuggestions of mass inoculations are occasionally heard. Thewisdom of such ideas is questionable. MULTIMODAL PROGRAMS Several programs now contain components of all the differentmodalities. The Illinois Drug Abuse Project (IDAP), in Chicago,the Narcotics Treatment Administration, in Washington, D.C., andthe New Haven Mental Health Center, for example, includemethadone, therapeutic communities, detoxification, abstinence,and supportive services for all types of patients. The CommunityMental Health Center'in New Haven has an experimental naloxonegroup as well, and IDAP at one time tried cyclazocine on somepatients. While the approach is promising, rigorous comparison ofmultimodal and unimodal programs has not yet been done, and onecan only set forth the present arguments for and against themultimodal approach. The arguments in favor run along the following lines: Most observers believe that different programs work best fordifferent addicts, although the typologies are not worked out andno tool has predictive value at present. If a program has severalmodalities, an addict can readily transfer from one to another ifhe or the staff feels that his performance could be improved bythe change. In addition, failure in one modality does not meantotal failure, because the addict can try another with minimaldelay. Different modalities attract different types of addicts.Therapeutic communities, for example, may have more appeal toyounger addicts; methadone, to older. Differences in age,education, employment, or criminality may also be significant.But the modality that attracts an addict may not be the one inwhich he will ultimately do best. Combining the modalities makesone an intake center for each of the others, to the benefit ofall. In some cases, the modality to which an addict applies is anaccident of geography and personal contacts. Centralizedadministration can make this choice more rational and productive. Each modality has something to contribute to the others. Thegroup-therapy techniques and intense environment of thetherapeutic community may help methadone patients by encouragingthem to become abstinent or by improving their understanding ofthe factors that led them to addiction. They may also have animpact on abuse of other drugs by methadone patients. Conversely,TC residents and other abstinent patients may benefit fromknowing that there is a back-up program if they do not succeed inremaining abstinent. A multimodal program will find it easier to develop newstrategies for the treatment of addiction. For example, it may bepossible to have patients who are basically abstinent but receivelow doses of methadone if they feel the craving for drugs isabout to overwhelm them. This could be a particularly importanttechnique for teenagers. It would be difficult to operate such aprogram in connection with any single modality, because both theadministrative structure and the ambience would be against theexperiment. Politically, it is advantageous to combine the modalities, sothat they will stop fighting each other and unite to get moresupport from the government. The primary arguments against multimodal programs are asfollows: Most of the benefits to be gained from eliminating accidentalassignment, allowing rapid reassignment, and experimenting withnew programs may be achieved just as well by betteradministration and coordination of separate modalities. Multimodal programs have the basic problem that they transmitcontradictory messages to the patients. The ethos of most suchprograms is that abstinence is superior and that methadonepatients, while not so bad as heroin addicts, are definitelysecond-class. This lack of psychological support makes it morelikely that the methadone patient will fail. It may also make itdifficult for a patient who is not doing well on an abstinenceprogram to change to methadone-he may leave treatment entirelyrather than accept what be and his peers view as a demotion. Ifsuch an attitude does not pervade the project, the reverseproblem may occur: The abstinent patient may not see why heshould endure drug hunger while others are receiving methadone. In this view, faith is a very important part of everymodality. The evangelical nature of the TC has been discussed,for example, and it may be a necessary part of the therapy. Partof the success with methadone may be due to the fact thatpatients come to believe that they have a metabolic disease andare going to receive a medicine that will help them. In short,mixing different modalities may undermine all of them byconfusing the patient about the expectations and possibilities ofthe program. Resolution of this issue must await further research thatexplicitly compares the success of the different components ofmultimodal programs with that of comparable techniques usedalone. Since multimodality is a growing trend, such evaluationsshould be performed soon. HEROIN MAINTENANCE One treatment modality that is not used in the United Statesat present is maintenance of addicts on heroin or morphine. Whilemany, perhaps most, observers react negatively to the idea, thereare good reasons for trying it on an experimental basis. Themajor argument in favor is that heroin maintenance might attracttwo important groups of addicts: those who do not succeed onmethadone maintenance and those who do not volunteer for it inthe first place. If this were the result, addiction-related crimewould be decreased, because the costs of the heroin habit wouldbe eliminated and, as a benefit to the addict, the chances ofinfection, overdose, and imprisonment would be lessened. Inaddition, since remarkably little is known about the etiology ofaddiction or the effects of heroin, controlled clinicalexperimentation with heroin maintenance would allow someimportant questions to be studied. It is also possible thatheroin maintenance would break the market for heroin and removethe impetus for expansion caused by the high profits of illegaldistribution. (The English experience, described by Edgar May inStaff Paper 7, is, of course, instructive.) The most important objections to heroin maintenance are asfollows: The administrative expenses would be high. If the drug wereadministered in clinics, it would have to be made available aboutfour times a day. Also, because heroin is relatively ineffectiveorally, medical personnel might be required to give injections toensure a sterilized procedure. Both factors would increaseexpenses. If the English system were adopted and the heroin weredispensed from pharmacies on prescription, it would be difficultto control the dosages, track the patients, secure the heroin,and avoid infection and disease. Because of heroin's sharp peaksand short duration of action, it may be a difficult drug on whichto find and maintain a constant dosage even if the patientdesires stabilization. There is always physical pressure on thepatient to increase his dosage. To make this problem worse, amaintenance program would draw addicts who were not willing togive up the effort to attain the euphoria of heroin. Thus, theymight take their maintenance dose, buy more on the street, andthen demand that the clinics maintain the new, higher dosage.While there may be a pharmacological ceiling beyond which thedrug has no additional euphoric effects, this is not definitelyknown. Addicts on heroin maintenance might quickly reach levelsof 100 to 200 mg. of heroin per day, a dose higher than that ofalmost all present addicts. The physical effects of this dosageare not known. Many members of the black community would opposeheroin maintenance, interpreting it as a scheme to keep the blackcommunity tranquilized and quiet or as an indication that societyis concerned only with the crime caused by addiction, not withthe addicts themselves. Still others, who believe that continuinguse of heroin causes long-term organic damage, might regardheroin maintenance as a form of mass murder. The high doses that would tend to prevail in such a programwould tranquilize addicts and make them function ineffectively.This would make rehabilitation efforts impossible. Heroin maintenance might draw patients away from methadone,thus transferring them from a program with proved effectivenessfor rehabilitation to one that is probably counterproductive interms of reformation of the addict's life-style. The existence of heroin maintenance would remove an importantdeterrent to experimentation with heroin-the obvious degradationof the addicted life. These objections have force. It seems doubtful that societywould wish to move to a large-scale heroin-maintenance program atthe present time, especially if doing so would undercutmethadone. However, there are limitations on the effectiveness ofmethadone and on the extent to which it can eliminate theaddiction problem. If, for example, only 50 per cent of theaddicts are helped by methadone, the country may be left with asizable addiction problem even after methadone has reached itsfull potential. Despite the problems, it is likely that heroinmaintenance will begin to receive serious consideration. It wouldbe wise to start accumulating solid knowledge on its workings andeffects, and on the validity of the objections to it, beforeproposals for large scale programs make the matter urgent. Therewill not be time to do so afterwards. Careful experimentation isdesirable. TREATMENT OF USERS OF NONOPIATES Treatment of users of the amphetamines, barbiturates,hallucinogens, and cannabinols has two distinct aspects. Thefirst is (,crisis intervention"-emergency assistance tothose who are suffering from adverse effects of drugs. The secondconsists of longterm programs designed to prevent future druguse. CRISIS INTERVENTION Overdoses of opiates and barbiturates constitute a medicalemergency, and death results unless steps are takenquickly."' For other drugs, the adverse effects are morepsychological than physical-usually the user is having a severemental disturbance as a result of the drug and needspsychological support until the body clears the drug from thesystem."' Until recently, users of nonopiates suffering from adverseeffects of drug taking had nowhere to go except hospitalemergency rooms. Most users were reluctant to do this, bothbecause hospitals often felt compelled to report the illegal druguser to the authorities, and because emergency-room personneltreated them demeaningly. In addition, drug users came to believethat the treatment received in hospitals was not very helpful. Infact, the reaction of the medical personnel tended to intensifyand prolong the user's own panic. In the words of one observer,"Modern medical science can keep a panic reaction going forabout five days." The hospital use of strong tranquilizersis regarded by experienced drug users and drug-treatment doctorsas unnecessary and possibly damaging. Chlorpromazine, the usualdrug given, has strong side effects... and is unpleasant in itspsychoactive characteristics."' Free clinics, manned by interested professionals, experiencedyouths, and volunteer doctors, have sprung up in many cities. TheHaight-Ashbury Clinic in San Francisco seems to have been theprototype. The Langly Porter Youth Drug Unit at the University ofCalifornia is another. It is not known how many there now are,but it is probable that every large city has at least one, somehave several, and the movement is spreading rapidly to suburbancommunities. The treatment provided to drug users on a "bad trip"consists primarily of "talking down" the patient, whichcan be done by peers who have had similar experiences."Quiet rooms" for such "talk downs" have beenrecommended as a component for all emergency medical centers thattreat youthful drug users. The patient is not left alone and isconstantly reassured about who he is and where he is.Establishment of verbal contact with the patient is recommended,and there is little or no use of tranquilizers. Whentranquilizers are used, chlorpromazine is the most common, giveneither orally or, preferably, intramuscularly, which avoidsadverse gastrointestinal symptoms. Experimentation is going onusing short-term barbiturates instead. As of 1970, the BerkeleyFree Clinic claimed to have given only three tranquilizinginjections to "freakouts" since the clinic began; therest were talked down. Heavy amphetamine users and barbiturate addicts presentdifferent detoxification problems. The barbiturate addict needsto be withdrawn from his addiction under a carefully supervisedmedical regimen in an inpatient hospital setting, for thewithdrawal process itself is life-threatening."' Heavyamphetamine users are apt to suffer from paranoia, sometimesleading to violence; they need a quiet recovery room away fromstrangers whom they may consider enemies. They often shy awayfrom hospitalization for fear of arrest. Treating soft-drug users for adverse reactions is an importanthealth measure to prevent possible deaths, suicides, or bizarreand self-destructive behavior. Since most facilities that performthis service do not have a follow-up capacity, there is no way oftelling how many patients return to drug use and how many abandonit after experiencing adverse reactions. The treatment processitself is not concerned with abstinence but with the immediateproblem. Many of the patients seen in these clinics are onlyoccasional experimenters or sporadic-users. Before the drug legislation of 1970, there was no basis forfederal funding of these crisis clinics. The law now providesthat HEW can make grants for such partial services to drug users.Some of the clinics are not enthusiastic about federal backing,fearing that it will lead to greater conformity in approach and adecreased ability to utilize ex-drug users in new roles. Federalor state governments might also impose bureaucratic standards onstaff training and facilities without contributing enough moneyto meet the costs of these requirements. There is also a fearthat government backing will turn away some clients. LONG-TERM THERAPY While the crisis centers provide necessary emergency services,it is unlikely that they have much permanent impact on drugusers. There is therefore a movement to expand the centers toinclude programs that will have some effect on the drug-usingbehavior of patients. As a result, the crisis centers arebeginning to offer long-term therapeutic help as well asemergency services. This expansion is not limited to the treatment of drug users.Most clinic staff members view drug problems as only one aspect-and not always the most serious-of human malfunctioning forwhich help should be provided. For example, the Center forSpecial Social and Health Problems in San Francisco, according toits descriptive materials, is concerned with drug abuse, sexualproblems, violence and hatred, compulsive gambling, suicide,management of death and dying, crime and delinquency, inabilityto manage finances, obesity, and insomnia. While this list ismore ambitious than most, it illustrates the general trendtoward, broadening the scope of the crisis clinic. In a way,these organizations are becoming privately run communitymental-health centers. The techniques and operations of these programs are about thesame as those of the therapeutic communities and outpatientabstinence programs. Since, at present, there is no chemotherapyfor soft-drug use, no treatment comparable to the methadonemovement is possible. The basic problem with nonaddictive softdrugs is that continued use reflects the user's desire to keeptaking them or a psychological dependence on them, which can beeven more difficult to deal with than a physical craving. As onestudy points out, "Student drug users are, as a group,knowledgeable about the undesirable effects of drug abuse. Ingeneral, it is not difficult for most student drug abusers tostop. The issue is to get them to want toStop.11113 While some soft-drug users are in TC's, the majority of thosereceiving help are in some form of outpatient program, usuallythe same programs described in the section on outpatientabstinence for opiate users. Often, the patients themselves arethe same. A number of heroin addicts use other drugs as well, andyouthful drug users are increasingly experimenting with heroin asone of several drugs they try. Whether it is possible to sustaina pattern of sporadic heroin use without becoming addicted is asyet uncertain. The "speed culture" in theHaight-Ashbury section of San Francisco has produced someevidence that speed users, who first use barbiturates to ease the"crash," soon learn that heroin is an even smoother wayto achieve this purpose. Eventually they may abandon speedentirely and become heroin addicts. It is possible that a patternof multiple drug use that includes heroin is an intermediate steptoward full addiction."' It is even more difficult todetermine the success of these programs with soft-drug users thanwith narcotics addicts, in part because most experts believe thatyouths who become heavily involved with cannabis andhallucinogens do not usually stay involved for a long period oftime."' This fact, of course, increases the difficulty ofevaluating the impact of any drug program, because abstinence isa poor indication of the program's effect. Some work is going on in the area of chemotherapy. An effortis now being made to find antagonists to some of the more commondrugs. Researchers tentatively claim to have found a drug that isan antagonist to amphetamines, although it has not yet been fullytested, and some work is being done on antagonists to LSD.However, it is not clear whether these drugs, when and if theyare perfected, will have a significant impact on drug use, sincesoft drugs are taken without the spur of physical necessity.Unless a policy of forced implantation is followed, the drug userwill always have a choice about taking the antagonist, and inmost cases the choice would probably be to continue drug use. There are, however, two hypotheses under which the antagonistsmight be useful. The amphetamines appear to be physicallyaddictive to a limited extent, and this could exert some pressureon the amphetamine user to continue his use."' An antagonistmight prevent the constant renewal of this physical dependenceand give the user's body a chance to become free of it. Secondly,if one adopts a conditioning theory of drug use, an antagonistwould eliminate the reinforcing effect of gratification from druguse and might in time extinguish the conditioned response oftaking drugs. One of the most carefully evaluated methods of decreasing softdrug use is transcendental meditation. A Harvard Medical SchoolStudy gave questionnaires to 1,950 subjects who had beenpracticing transcendental meditation for three months or more. Ofthese, 1,862 completed the questionnaire. The decrease in druguse was quite striking. The study says: Following the start of the practice of transcendentalmeditation, there was a marked decrease in the number of drugabusers for all drug categories. . . . As the practice ofmeditation continued, the subjects progressively decreased theirdrug abuse until after practicing 21 months of meditation mostsubjects had completely stopped abusing drugs. For example, inthe 6-month period before starting the practice of meditation,about 80 percent of the subjects used marijuana and of thoseabout 28 percent were heavy users. Aftel practicingtranscendental meditation 6 months, 37 percent used marijuana andof those only 6.5 percent were heavy users. After 21 months ofthe practice, only 12 percent continued to use marijuana and ofthose most were light users; only one individual was a heavyuser. The decrease in abuse of LSD was even more marked. Beforestarting the practice of transcendental meditation, 48 percent ofthe subjects had used LSD, and of these subjects about 14 percentwere heavy users. In the 3 months following the start of thepractice of meditation, 1 1 percent of the subjects took LSDwhile after 21 months of the practice only 3 percent took LSD.The increase in the number of non-users after starting thepractice of meditation was similar for the other drugs: non-usersof the other hallucinogens after 21 months of the practice rosefrom 61 to 96 percent; for the narcotics, from 83 to 99 percent;for the amphetamines, from 70 to 99 percent; and for thebarbiturates, from 83 to 99 percent.117 As the researchers point out, these correlations are not proofof causation. "Involvement in other kinds ofself-improvement activities may also lead to decreased drugabuse. The motivation to start meditation may have influenced thesubjects to stop drug abuse. The subjects in the present studymay have spontaneously stopped, continued, or increased takingdrugs independently of transcendental meditation.""' Despite these necessary caveats, the results are striking,especially in an area in which, as the study delicately pointsout, "Existing programs for the alleviation of[non-narcotic] drug abuse usually involve education as to thedangers of the effects of drugs and sometimes provide personalcounseling or psychiatric care. The efficiency of these programshas yet to be established."' (Staff Paper 6, by Dr.Andrew Weil, deals with meditation and other nonchernical meansof achieving altered stages of consciousness.) CONCLUSION Few solid conclusions emerge from this morass of conflictinginformation. It is clear that methadone is a helpful treatmentmodality, but just how helpful is not yet known. It is equallyclear that its almost inevitable expansion will create newproblems, some of them predictable and some of them totallyunexpected. Not much can be said about the other treatmentmodalities and concepts. Those who favor them have not yet provedtheir case, but neither have those who are skeptical. On thewhole, it seems probable that they will turn out to have onlymarginal effectiveness as drug-treatment methods, although theymay have possibilities as a part of the more generalhuman-potential movement. The basic problem is that we lack anysolid theory or understanding of the nature and causes ofaddiction. As researchers have repeatedly pointed out, for mostdrug users the drugs are functional and adaptive mechanisms.Society cannot make long-term progress toward developing moreeffective treatment mechanisms without grasping and acceptingthis fact. At present, however, we have little choice but toproceed empirically. NOTES 1. Alfred Lindesmith, The Addict and the Law(New York: Vintage ed., 1967), pp. 105-6, 124. (Hereaftercited as Lindesmith.) 2. Charles Terry and Mildred Pellens, TheOpium Problem (Bureau of Social Hygiene, 1928), p. 627.(Hereafter cited as Terry and Pellens.) 3. Ibid., pp. 137-65. 4. Troy Duster, The Legislation of Morality (NewYork: Free Press, 1970), p. 15. 5. Terry and Pellens, pp. 30-32. These authorsare skeptical and believe that physicians would have reportedonly addicts under curative treatment. 6. Rufus King, The DrugHang-up-America's Fifty Year Folly (in press), MS. pp. 76-77. 7. Terry and Pellens, p. 866. 8. King, op. cit., note 6, MS. p. 57. 9. Norman Zinberg and John Robertson, Drugsand the Public (in press), MS. p. 40. 10. Lindesmith, pp. 99-134. For a brief reviewof relevant population estimates, see Arthur D. Little, Inc., DrugAbuse and Law Enforcement (A Report to the President'sCommission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice:1967), "Appendix C: History of the U.S. AddictPopulation." This report argues that "what is apparentis not the constancy of the addict and his habit, but rather thatthe addict deserts his habit quite easily" (pp. C-4 andC-5). It points to sources showing a decline from about 246,000in 1890 to 100,000 in 1926. These sources are criticized in thecited portion of Lindesmith. 11. Frances Gearing, "MethadoneMaintenance Treatment Program: Progress Report of Evaluation Through March 31,1970" (mimeograph, 1970), p. 1 1. (Hereafter cited asGearing, 1970.) 12. The studies are summarized in JohnO'Donnell, The Relapse Rate in Narcotic Addiction: A Critiqueof Follow-up Studies (New York State, Narcotic AddictionControl Commission Reprints, 1968) (originally published in1965). 13. William Martin, Statement in NarcoticsResearch, Rehabilitation, and Treatment, Hearings before theSelect Committee on Crime, House of Representatives, 92d Cong.,Ist sess., April 26-28 and June 24, 23, 1971 (GPO, 1971), Part 2,pp. 437-38. (A number of statements at these hearings are citedhereafter. They are footnoted as Hrgs. 14. These summary statements are drawn from alarge number of published sources and interviews. Some of themare discussed at greater length later in the paper, particularlyin the methadone section. For development and discussion ofpsychological characteristics, see Isador Chein, Donald Gerard,Robert Lee, and Eva Rosenfeld, The Road to H (New York:Basic Books, 1964), a book that equals The Opium Problem asa classic in the field. 15. David Smith, George Gay, and Barry Ramer,"Adolescent Heroin Abuse in San Francisco," ProceedingsThird National Conference on Methadone Treatment, November 14-16,1970 (GPO, 1971), pp. 89, 90. (These proceedings arehereafter cited as Third Meth. Conf.) 16. Howard Jones, Hrgs., p. 588. 17. George Gay, Alan Matzger, William Bathurst,and David Smith, "Short-Term Heroin Detoxification on anOutpatient Basis," International journal of theAddictions, VI, No. 2 (June, 1971), 241, 259-60. 18. Kramer, Hrgs., p. 668. 19. U.S. Comptroller General, Limited Use ofFederal Programs to Commit Narcotic Addicts for Treatment andRehabilitation (September 20, 1971), p. 6; Jonathan Cole,"Report on the Treatment of Drug Addiction," inPresident's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration ofJustice, Task Force Reports: Narcotics and Drug Abuse (GPO,1967), pp. 135,140-41. 20. O'Donnell, op. cit., note 12. 21. These are reviewed in Cole, op. cit., note19, pp. 135-36. 22. Duster, op. cit., note 4, p. 134.The description and statistics that follow are taken from Dusterand from John Kramer, Richard Bass, and John Berechochea,"Civil Commitment for Addicts: The California Program,"American Journal of Psychiatry, CXXV (1968), 816. 23. Kramer, Hrgs., p. 654. 24. Compare the descriptions of the twoprograms in National Institute of Mental Health, NationalClearinghouse for Mental Health Information, Directory ofNarcotic Addiction Treatment Agencies in the United States, 1968-69(GPO, 1970), pp. 5-6. (Hereafter cited as NIMH Directory.) 25.Jones, Hrgs., pp. 565, 584. The budget estimate iscalculated from the budget numbers given. It is not a statementof the Commissioner. 26. For a thoughtful critique based onobservation of five centers, see Community Service Society of NewYork, Committee on Youth and Correction, Observation on FiveResidential Facilities of the Narcotic Addiction ControlCommission (1971), pp. 89-101. 27. New York Times, October 4, 1970.See, also, the statement of the Health Policy Advisory Center: The program promises to return the addict to auseful life "through extended periods of treatment in acontrolled environment followed by supervision in an after-careprogram." The emphasis is on "controlled." Theaddict receives about as much rehabilitation as the criminalprisoner with about as much result-the recidivist rate foraddicts is much higher than for criminals. Moreover therehabilitation centers are run like prisons. There are guards,most of whom receive training for prison work-one guard for everytwo inmates, recalcitrant addicts are beaten and placed inisolation on reduced diets; inmates are sexually abused; there isno separation of the young from the old. The few rehabilitationprograms that do exist are staffed by instructors and therapistswho have received little or no training. For the 5,000 or soinmates in the 14 separate institutions there are only 4psychiatrists, 16 psychologists, and 78 teachers and vocationalinstructors. The prison-like atmosphere has caused a largepercentage of the addicts to try to escape. [Health PolicyAdvisory Council, Health/PAC Bulletin, June, 1970, pp.16-17.] 28. Carl Chambers, Hrgs., p. 566. 29. U.S. Comptroller General, op. cit., note19, pp. 12-17. 30. Information furnished by the Bureau ofPrisons. 31. The information on 1969 was furnished byNIMH. The 1971 information is from Bertram Brown, Hrgs., p.470. 32. Brown, Hrgs., p. 433. 33. U.S. Bureau of Prisons, "NarcoticAddict Rehabilitation Act: Progress Report" (mimeograph),February 22, 197 1. 34. These are difficult numbers to pin down.According to the NIMH Directory (p. 144), 40 programslisted themselves as therapeutic communities as of about 1968. Itis not clear how stringent the standards for inclusion were,however, and this may include some programs that are essentiallyoutpatient abstinence with group work. At the other end, itmisses some of the newer therapeutic communities. The population figure is also an educatedguess. Most TC's are in New York, and knowledgeable sourcesestimate that the Phoenix Houses (the city's TC program) hadabout 1,000 residents and private TC's about 1,400 in 1970.Synanon had about 1,400 residents (NIMH Directory, p. 32).These places account for the largest number of TC residents, butthere are many others with 10 to 100 residents scatteredthroughout the country. The estimate of 5,000 residents isprobably an upper limit. 35. A description of four of the New York Cityprojects is given in Community Service Society of New York,Committee on Youth and Corrections, The Long Road Back from aLiving Death: A Study of Four Voluntary Treatment andRehabilitation Programs for New York City's Narcotics Addicts (Part1) (1967). 36. Kramer, Hrgs., p. 667. 37. Ibid. 38. This study was given to us on ano-attribution basis. 39. NIMH Directory, passim. For adetailed description of two projects, see Community ServiceSociety of New York, Committee on Youth and Corrections, Lifelineto Tomorrow: A Study of Voluntary Treatment Programs for NarcoticAddicts (Part 11) (1 969). 40. Robert DuPont, Hrgs., p. 144. 41. D.C. Department of Corrections,"Performance of Corrections Referrals Under ThreeNarcotic-Addiction Treatment Modalities" (Research ReportNo. 42: mimeograph, July, 1971). 42. Friends of Psychiatric Research, Inc., UniformEvaluation of Programs to Combat Narcotic Addiction (Baltimore,1970). 43. Op. cit., note 39, pp. 93-94. 44. The data that follow are from S. B. Sellsand Deena Watson, "A Spectrum of Approaches in MethadoneTreatment: Relation to Program Evaluation," Third Meth.Conf., p. 17. 45. Vincent Dole, "Planning for theTreatment of 25,000 Heroin Addicts," Third Meth. Conf.,P. I 1 1. 46. NIMH Directory, p. 144; SecondNational Methadone Maintenance Conference, New York, October26-27, 1969, published in the International journal of theAddictions, V, No. 3 (September, 1970) (hereafter cited as.SecondMeth. Conf.); Third Meth. Conf. 47. Charles Edwards, Hrgs., p. 395. 48. Elmer Gardner, Hrgs., p. 397; Brown,Hrgs., p. 440. 49. Avram Goldstein, "Blind ControlledDosage Comparisons with Metha- done in Two Hundred Patients," ThirdMeth. Conf. (hereafter cited as Goldstein, 1970); RayTrussell, "Treatment of Narcotics Addicts in New York,"Second Meth. Conf., pp. 347, 352; Lynwood Holton, Hrgs.,pp. 600601. Governor Holton's statement is particularlyinteresting because it makes budget estimates within the contextof a comprehensive state treatment program. 50. Gearing Report 1970 and "Successes andFailures in Methadone Maintenance Treatment of Heroin Addictionin New York City," Third Meth. Conf., p. 2. 51. Goldstein 1970, p. 31. 52. DuPont, Hrgs., p. 173. 53. See, e.g., Gordon Stewart, "A Surveyof Patients Attending Different Clinics in New Orleans," ThirdMeth. Conf., p. 27. 54. The information on MMTP is drawn, exceptwhere otherwise indicated, from three sources; the GearingReport, 1970; the 1969 edition of the same report; and the paperpresented at the methadone conference, cited in note 50. 55. Carl Chamber and Dean Babst,"Characteristics Predicting Long-Term Retention in aMethodone Maintenance Program," Third Meth. Conf., p.140. 56. Herman Joseph and Vincent Dole, "Methadone Patientson Probation and Parole" (mimeograph) (New York: RockefellerUniversity Press, 1970), P. 9. 57. Chambers and Babst, op. cit., note67. 58. Joseph and Dole, op. cit., note 56. 59. The Second National Methadone MaintenanceConference had reports from New York, Chicago, Minneapolis, St.Louis, Baltimore, New Haven, Vancouver, New Orleans, and Miami.The Third National Methadone Treatment Conference had reportsfrom New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, New Orleans, Santa Clara,Philadelphia, Vancouver, Baltimore, Denver, and Washington aswell as from Sweden. 60. Henry Brill, "Methadone Maintenance: AProblem in Delivery of Service," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, CCXV, No. 7 (February 15,1971), 1148-50. 61. Goldstein 1970, p. 37. 62. The incidence of hepatitis among addictshas been described as "unbelievable." Some expertsthink the sale of blood by these addicts is creating a majorpublic-health problem. See Stewart, op. cit., note 53. 63. For a more detailed discussion, see StaffPaper 1. 64. Vincent Dole and Marie Nyswander,"Methadone Maintenance and Its Implication for Theories ofNarcotic Addiction," in Abraham Wikler, ed., TheAddictive States (Baltimore, Md.: Williams & Wilkins Co.,1968), p. 359, postulates an inherent neurological vulnerability.But, at the Second National Methadone Maintenance Conference, Dr.Dole was asked: "Apart from any psychological factors oremotional factors, is there a metabolic irregularity which causesa craving for drugs in the first place or does the metabolicirregularity come after the use of drugs or both?" Hisresponse was: "This is a very important question for which Ihave no adequate answer. I can only guess. My opinion is that aheavy exposure to heroin induces the metabolic changes. Accordingto this theory, the abnormal drug craving in man, like theinduced drug seeking behavior in animals, is a result of exposureto narcotic drugs and not the original cause of theaddiction." Second Meth. Conf., pp. 359, 370. 65. Dr. Dole seems to lean toward the idea thatthe metabolic change is permanent. He has stated: "I believeone has to reckon with the fact that heroin hunger is probably asymptom of a pharmacological imprint that may last for a man'slife." Vincent Dole, "Research on Methadone MaintenanceTreatment," Second Meth. Conf., pp. 359, 370. 66. See, e.g., Avram Goldstein, "BlindDosage Comparisons and Other Studies in a Large MethadoneProgram" (paper presented at the National Heroin Symposium,June 20, 1971, pp. 12-13; to be published in the Journal ofPsychedelic Drugs). (Hereafter cited as Goldstein 1971.) 67. William Martin, "Pathophysiology ofNarcotic Addiction: Possible Roles of Protracted Abstinence inRelapse" (unpublished paper, 1970), pp. 6-7, and privatecommunications. 68. Abraham Wikler, "Interaction ofPhysical Dependence and Classical and Operant Conditioning in theGenesis of Relapse," in Wikler, ed., The AddictiveStates, op. cit., note 76. The views of Wikler and Martin canbe merged into one coherent psycho-physical theory. See Max Fink,"Narcotic Antagonists in Opiate Dependence," Science,CLXIX (September 4, 1970), 1005. 69. The maturation hypothesis was firstproposed by Charles Winick in "Maturing Out of NarcoticAddiction," Bulletin on Narcotics, XIV, No. 1 (1962).Since then a number of researchers have looked at particulargroups of addicts to determine whether they do, in fact, matureout. The onethird figure is based on a number of these works aswell as on interviews. 70. See Cole, op. cit., note 19. 71. Goldstein 1970, p. 35. 72. Jerome Jaffe, "Methadone Maintenance:Variation in Outcome Criteria as a Function of Dose," ThirdMeth. Conf., p. 37. 73. William Weiland and Arthur Moffett,"Results of Low Dosage Methadone Treatment," ThirdMeth. Conf., p. 48. See also Hugh Williams, "Low andHigh Methadone Maintenance in the Out-patient Treatment of theHard Core Heroin Addict," Second Meth. Conf., p. 439. 74. Goldstein 1970, p. 24. 75. See, e.g., Gearing Report 1970, pp. 8-9. 76. Stewart, op. cit., note 64. 77. Goldstein 1970, p. 32. 78. Goldstein 1971, pp. 2-3. 79. Gearing Report 1971. 80. Gearing, op. cit., note 50. 81. For a general review of ambulatoryinduction, see the material from the different cities containedin Second Meth. Conf. and Third Meth. Conf. 82. Dole, op. cit., note 65, pp. 364,370, 386. 83. Jerome Jaffe, "Further Experience withMethadone in the Treatment of Narcotics Users," SecondMeth. Conf., pp. 375, 383-84, 386. 84. Goldstein 197 1, pp. 13-14. 85. Goldstein 1971, pp. 14-15. 86. Ibid., P. 14. William Vandervort,"Treatment of Drug Abuse in Adolescents," ThirdMeth. Conf., P. 87. 87. William Martin, "Commentary on theSecond National Conference on Methadone Treatment," SecondMeth. Conf., P. 545. 88. Quoted in Joseph and Dole, op. cit., note56, pp. 14-15. 89. See Gerald Davidson, Hrgs., pp.326-27. 90. See material in Second Meth. Conf. andThird Meth. Conf., which includes several papers on possiblepsychopathology. See also John Kramer, "MethadoneMaintenance for Opiate Dependence," California Medicine, CXIII,No. 6 (December, 1970), 6, 9. 9 1. Kramer, Hrgs., pp. 668-69. 92. Goldstein 1970, p. 35. 93. John Langrod, "Secondary Drug UseAmong Heroin Users," International journal of theAddictions, V, No. 4 (December, 1970), 61 1. 94. IvanBennett, "Development of a Newly Formulated Tablet forMethadone Maintenance Programs," Third Meth. Conf., p.143. 95. This statement was made by Dr. Goldstein at the ThirdMethadone Conference. It was not included in the printed version. 96. See the papers presented at the Second andThird Methadone Conferences. Many of them are directedspecifically at side effects. This section summarizes what seemsto be the general experience of the programs. 97. Edwards, Hrgs., pp. 393-430; WashingtonPost, November 2, 1971. For a discussion of some of theproblems, see "Oral Methadone Maintenance Techniques in theManagement of Morphine-type Dependence"; Combined Statementof the Council on Mental Health and Its Committee on Alcoholismand Drug Dependence, American Medical Association; and theCommittee on Problems of Drug Dependence, National ResearchCouncil, March 169 1971. 98. Jaffe, Hrgs., p. 2 1 0. 99. Brown, Hrgs., p. 455. 100. Stewart, op. cit., note 53;Goldstein 197 1) p. 5. 101. The antagonists were introduced as anexperimental addiction treatment modality in 1965. Max Fink,"Narcotic Antagonists in Opiate Dependence," Science,CLXIX (September 4, 1970), 1005. For a review of thepharmacology, see Jerome Jaffe, "Narcotic Analgesics,"in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, The Pharmacological Basisof Therapeutics, 4th ed., (New York: Macmillan, 1970), pp.237,264-71. 102. City of New York, Health ServicesAdministration, Narcotics Antagonists Research Program: TheCurrent State of Knowledge of Drug Antagonists for HeroinAddiction (mimeographed staff paper: 1971), p. 7. (Hereaftercited as HSA.) We have found that this is the best source writtenin a form comprehensible to laymen. 103. Martin, Hrgs., pp. 435-36. 104. HSA, pp. 3, 8-9. HSA said that theconsensus of researchers is that it would take three to fiveyears for a long-lasting antagonist or long-lasting depot vehicleto be ready for use, and, in any event, there is no guarantee ofsuccess. Other people we have talked to are skeptical about thefeasibility of the whole idea, and raise both pharmacological andsocial objections. 105. Fink, op. cit., note 101, saysthat, since 1968, 40 per cent of more than 450 adult male addictshave remained in cyclazocine treatment. 106. Martin, Hrgs., p. 435. 107. Ibid., p. 436. 108. Treatment for an opioid overdose consistsof immediate administration of an antagonist to prevent deathfrom respiratory depression. See Jerome Jaffe, op. cit., note101, pp. 237, 268. The treatment of barbiturate poisoning isconsiderably more complicated and requires more elaborate medicalfacilities. See Seth Sharpless, "Hypnotics and Sedatives: 1.The Barbiturates," in Goodman and Gilman, pp. 97, 117-18. 109. There are variations, of course. The userwho has taken an excess of hallucinogen or cannabinol is notdangerous. He requires support but rarely restraint. The user whohas taken too much metharnphetarnine may have paranoid delusions,and considerably more caution is indicated. 1 10. Side effects are not always encountered,but those that are, are (I many, varied,and can be quite severe." They usually occur only withcontinued use, however. See Charles Solow, "Drug Therapy ofMental Illness: Tranquilizers and Other Depressant Drugs,"in Richard Rech and Kenneth Moore, eds., An Introduction toPsychopharmacology (New York: RavenPress, 1970), pp. 289,299-301. 111. Chlorprornazine, although a powerfultranquilizer, is not a drug of abuse. See Staff Paper 1. 112. David Smith and Donald Wesson,"Phenobarbital Technique for Treatment of BarbiturateDependence," Archives of General Psychiatry XXIV(January, 1971), 56-57. 113. Herbert Benson and R. K. Wallace,"Decreased Drug Abuse with Transcendental Meditation: AStudy of 1,862 Subjects," in Hrgs., pp. 682, 684. 114. Smith, Gay, and Ramer, op. cit., note15. 115. William McGlothlin, "PoliciesConcerning Hallucinogenic Drugs," in Hudson Institute, PolicyConcerning Drug Abuse in New York State, 11 (HudsonInstitute, 1970), 27, 31-32. 116. See John Kramer, "An Introduction toAmphetamine Abuse," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 11, No.2 (1969), 1, 13. Dr. Kramer, commenting on treatment, states that". . . abstinence is probably the most important therapeuticdevice, and that may be difficult to attain. Many users whoattempt abstinence find it difficult because of the fatigue whichresults, extreme at first, gradually diminishing, but persistent,perhaps for months." 117. Benson and Wallace, op. cit., note113, pp. 683-84. 118. Ibid., p. 685. Ibid., p. 682. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT01-B32-4IA031-000652-B044-185http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131424 text/html 104372HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:14:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:59 GMTContent-length: 104153 Dealing With Drug Abuse - The Economics of Heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 4 The Economics of Heroin by John F. Holahan, with the assistance ofPaul A. Henningsen Production * Policy Options: What Can Be Done *Distribution * Consumption This paper applies economic analysis to theheroin market and to the effect of alternative governmentpolicies on this market. The principal concern is supply, butsome discussion of demand is included because the effects ofpublic policy on the supply of drugs cannot be adequatelyanalyzed without some knowledge of the effect on demand ofchanges in price, risk, and availability. The analysis must beconsidered tentative. Accurate information on the economicaspects of all drugs of abuse is scarce, that which exists isfrequently unreliable, and conclusions are often suspect. Thispaper is no exception. Much of the data used were taken from twostudies: (1) The World Opium Situation (October, 1970), bythe Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) IntelligenceStaff; and (2) Economics of Heroin Distribution (1970), byMark Moore. While these papers contain the most extensiveeconomic research available in this area, the information is notunimpeachable. This is not because of deficiencies in thestudies-which are excellent -but because of the inherentdifficulty of gathering accurate information on illegalenterprises or consumers of illegal commodities. The BNDD staff paper is the result of anextensive survey of opium production and consumption throughoutthe world. The paper provides considerably more data, in terms ofboth quantity and quality, than are available from the UnitedNations or from other publications. Unfortunately, it is notpossible to verify this information through other sources, nordoes it appear that it will be possible to do so in the nearfuture. The Moore paper provides a macroeconomicanalysis of the heroin distribution system, as well asconsiderable interview data on daily expenditures of addicts andsources of funds. The data are not derived from sufficientlylarge samples to allow precise estimates, but they do indicaterough orders of magnitude. Other data derived from interviewswith BNDD staff members or U.N. publications are subject to thesame general weaknesses. PRODUCTION SOURCES OF SUPPLY The production and distribution of opiatenarcotics at the international level are complex andlittle-understood matters. The crisis of heroin addiction thathas afflicted the United States in recent years has obscured thefact that the growing of opium is an age-old, legal occupation inmany areas of the world. Heroin addicts in the United Statesconsume only a very small amount of the total quantity of opiatesproduced worldwide. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsestimates that 10,000 to 12,000 pounds of heroin are sufficientto supply the entire addict population in the United States forone year.' Since, as is generally acknowledged, ten pounds ofopium are required to manufacture one pound of heroin, only100,000 to 120,000 pounds of opium are needed for illicit heroinuse in the United States about 2 per cent of the estimated worldproduction .2 Of the opium used by the U.S. heroin market, 80per cent comes from Turkey, 15 per cent from Mexico, and 5 percent from the Far East.' These are not precise figures, however,but assumptions rather generally derived from heroin seizures andknowledge of the international illicit drug-import routes.'Moreover, several recent developments may change the sources ofsupply for the U.S. market. On June 30. 1971, President CevdetSunay of Turkey decreed that all poppy cultivation and opiumproduction in that country will be forbidden beginning in thefall of 1972. Until that time, licit opium production will belimited to only four provinces and strictly policed. How wellthis policy will be enforced, and what ultimate effect it willhave on heroin use in the United States, cannot as yet bedetermined. However, already there has been considerablespeculation that the Far East supplies a greater amount than wasthought previously. The tighter controls now being imposed byTurkey and the increased contacts between the U.S. and SoutheastAsia caused by the Indo-China War have shifted the sources ofsupply somewhat. Raw opium itself is produced from the poppyplant (papaver somniferum-the sleep-bearing poppy), whichconsists of a thin main stalk, three to four feet tall, withseveral egg-shaped pods on top. Between June and July, the poppyblooms, and, 10 days later, when the blossoms lose their petals,the pods are ready for the opium resin to be extracted. Incisionsare made in the pods, and a milky fluid oozes out. At the end ofthe day, this substance is scraped off the pods by hand. It laterhardens into a brown gum and is pressed into cakes of raw opium.The amount of opium produced from a poppy crop will increase ifthis process is repeated once again, as in Turkey, or severaltimes, as in India, but the morphine content will be reduced witheach lancing.' Many factors affect the opium yield peracre-the quality of the soil, the temperature, rainfall, thequality of the seedirriga-tion, fertilization, and crop rotation.Intensive cultivation and a great deal of labor are required toproduce opium, particularly during harvest, when the pods must beincised and the raw opium collected by hand, but labor is alsoneeded during the growing season to thin the poppy plants. It isestimated that between 175 and 250 man-hours of labor arerequired to produce 1 kilo of opium.6 Because of thislabor-intensive production process, poppies tend to be raisedonly where labor is abundant and relatively inexpensive; butthere seems no clear reason, given a different set of relativeprices for labor and capital, that a more capital-intensiveprocess could not be employed. Most poppy cultivation occurs in a zonestretching from central Turkey through Iran, Afghanistan,Pakistan, India, Burma, Laos, Thailand, and southern China, withthe greatest concentration in India and Southeast Asia. Poppycultivation is legal in India, Turkey, the U.S.S.R., and Iran.Turkish licit poppy acreage was reported to be 29,600 acres in1970.1 According to U.N. figures, India has at least 86,500 acresplanted.' Iran, which abolished the production of opium from 1956to 1968, planned 29,600 acres of poppy cultivation for 1970. Inaddition, roughly 30,000-32,000 acres each are believed to beplanted in the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, andnegligible amounts of licit opium are produced in Yugoslavia andJapan.' According to figures reported to the UnitedNations by producing countries, the total licit world productionof opium is 1,0601,085 metric tons, or approximately 40-45 percent of the total produced. India is by far the world's largestlicit producer of opium, with a reported 750 metric tons in 1968.Turkey and the U.S.S.R. each contribute 115-120 metric tons oflicit production. An estimate of 75-100 metric tons was made forCommunist China, based on expected medicinal needs for itspopulation. The estimated totals for licit and illicit productionare presented in Table 4-1. Licit opium is used primarily in themanufacture of medicinal opiates. Legal morphine productioncurrently amounts to approximately 150 metric tons per year-asubstantial rise from around 85 metric tons per year in themid-1950's. This growth is due chiefly to the rising demand forcodeine, but a small portion of the licit opium is used foropium-maintenance programs in India, Pakistan, and Iran. The world's illicit production of opium isestimated at 1,2501,400 metric tons annually.10 The principalconcentration of illicit production is in the Burma-Laos-Thailandregion, which produces an estimated 700-750 tons. TheAfghanistan-Pakistan area produces another 250-300 tons ofillicit opium, and the illicit output of Turkey is estimated at 100 tons.Illicit cultivation of the plant also occurs in parts of Mexico,South America, and North Africa, althoughthe amounts produced there are negligible. While some illegalacreage is planted in Turkey, most of the illicit opium there isdiverted from the yield on legal acreage. On the other hand, allthe opium produced in Afghanistan, Burma, Laos, and Thailand andpart of the outputs of India and Pakistan are derived fromillegal acreage. About 40 metric tons of illicit Turkishproduction was thought to enter Iran in 1970; the remainder isexported to Western Europe and the United States. The Southeast Asian countries consume most oftheir own opium, but some is shipped to Hong Kong for use thereand for distribution throughout the Far East. A small amount,perhaps one or two metric tons, is shipped to the United States,although this figure has probably risen recently. India alsoconsumes the major part of its illicit production; and, althoughsome of the Afghanistan-Pakistan production is consumedinternally, approximately 200 metric tons is thought to enterIran. Iran is the largest consumer of illicit opium in the world,with an estimated 350,000 opium and heroin users. In 1969, Iranbegan controlled production of opium in order to maintain its ownaddicts. YIELDS, MARKET PRICES, ANDINCOMES Income from poppy cultivation is affected bythe opium yield obtained, the morphine content of the raw opium,and the current licit and illicit market prices. The reportedyields per acre in 1969 for four countries are presented in Table4-2, but, since these are government figures provided by thelocal farmers, both yields and acreage are probably understated.This is undoubtedly the case for the crop yields in Turkey andPakistan. Turkish yields are closer to 13.4-14.2 pounds per acre,with the nonreported amount diverted to illicit traders."Opium yields are estimated at 8.6-28.6 pounds per acre inSoutheast Asia" (probably closer to the lower figure"),and the Soviet Union reports yields of 27.5-32 pounds peracre." Prices for opium vary with quality. Themorphine content of Turkish opium, reportedly the highest in theworld, varies from 9 to 13 per cent, while in other producingcountries the morphine content varies from 4 to 12 per cent.Prices to farmers for raw opium are presented in Table 4-3.Because of its quality, the prices for Turkish opium are thehighest, with the exception of the Iranian price, which issupported by the government in order to discourage diversion toillicit traders. The licit prices are determined by the worldmarket price: the price at which the national opium monopoliescan sell to pharmaceutical companies. In Turkey, the illicitprice varies with the yield of the current year's harvest, theseason, enforcement efforts, and the demand for Turkish opiumfrom other countries, particularly Iran. The illicit price inIran is extremely high because of the strict enforcement of lawsagainst illicit trading. The absolute income per farm from opiumcultivation is greatest in Turkey, but the percentage of totalfarm income accounted for by opium increases as one moveseastward. In the late 1960's, there were an estimated 70,000farms producing opium in Turkey. If 120 tons are sold by thesefarms at the licit price of $11 per kilo 0 kilo=2.2046 pounds)and 100 tons on the illicit market at $25 per kilo, the grossincome from opium amounts to $3,820,000, or $55 per farm. Thisamounts to roughly 5-10 per cent of farm income in Turkey. InIndia, roughly 200,000 farms earn $70-75 from poppy cultivation,or 15-20 per cent of average total income per farm. Since theincome figures include income-in-kind (food, clothing produced onfarm), the income from opium provides an even higher percentageof cash income than we have indicated. Opium is probably theprincipal source of farm income in Burma, Laos, and Thailand;cultivation is said to be concentrated in areas controlled by guerrillainsurgents, who transport much of the output to Hong Kong and usethe proceeds for arms purchases.',' Licit production of opium is of minorimportance even in India and Turkey. India earned roughly $6-7million for exports of 530 metric tons in 1968, compared withtotal export earnings of $2 billion. Indian farmers earnedapproximately $7.7 million on production of 700 metric tons.Turkish exports of 120 metric tons yield approximately $1.7million, less than 0.3 per cent of total exports. Turkishproduction is also very small in relation to national income of$9 billion. On the other hand, opium sales are undoubtedly ofgreat economic importance to the producing regions of Burma,Laos, and Thailand. POLICY OPTIONS: WHAT CAN BE DONE Policies designed to attack the heroin problemat the source of supply devolve into two basic alternatives: (1)the purchase of entire opium crops, or (2) direct controls onproduction. Each of these proposals has problems difficult tosurmount at present. PRE-EMPTIVE BUYING The first alternative would be for the UnitedStates to purchase the total output of opium from those countriesthat supply the heroin entering its borders. The administrativesimplicity of this proposal makes it appear deceptivelyattractive. In time, however, pre-emptive buying wouldnecessarily involve purchases of both licit and illicitproduction in all countries where opium is currently grown. TheU.S. offer price would have to be raised above the maximum priceillicit traders are willing to pay; otherwise, the farmer wouldhave an incentive to sell to the higher bidder. If the offerprice is less than the illicit price, leakages into the illicitmarket would probably result, and the policy would therefore havelittle effect on the supply of opiates sent to the United States,especially since the amount is so small relative to total worldproduction. And, seemingly, the illicit trader would be willingto increase his offer price substantially, because, given thelarge markups at each stage of the distribution system, the priceof raw opium has relatively little effect on the ultimate retailprice in the United States (see Table 4-4). (For example, if thecurrent price to the farmer for 10 kilos of illicit opium is$250, and the retail street price for I kilo of heroin is$264,900, then raising the farm price 100 per cent would raisethe retail price only .09 per cent.) A pre-emptive buying policy would become verycostly, because opium producers would have a clear incentive toincrease their outputs, and other farmers would have a similarincentive to begin substituting opium for other crops. EugeneRossides, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement andOperations, has gone on record as strongly opposing any conceptof pre-emptive buying. He told a congressional committee that"it would simply stimulate production and it would take awaythe responsibility of each nation to handle the problem as partof the international community."" Moreover, without strict administrativecontrols, this policy would not only increase production in allcountries currently producing opium but might induce othercountries whose climate is suitable to begin production in thehope of sharing in the windfall. If this policy were directed at only one sourceof supply, such as Turkey, it would not prevent traders fromobtaining illicit supplies in other producing countries. The100,000-120,000 pounds of opium used by the U.S. market could begrown in an area of, at most, 11.2-23.2 square miles and thuscould easily be absorbed in another producing region." Infact, some experts believe that 35 pounds of opium could beproduced on a single acre of land if a capital-intensive processwere employed under controlled circumstances. -If this provedtrue, -generally, only 4.55.4 square miles would be needed tosupply the entire U.S. market. Consequently, a pre-emptive buyingpolicy, in the long run, could result in a change of location forthe source of U.S. supply with little or no effect on theaddiction problem. Pre-emptive buying within an individual countrymight prove effective in dealing with an internal addictionproblem if coupled with strict limitations on acreage and illicitimportation. Iran, for example, has discouraged export to illicitmarkets in other countries by purchasing its entire internalopium crop at a very high price, restricting production tocertain designated areas, and strictly enforcing its laws againstillicit markets. The legal opium purchased by the government isused by the state-run addict maintenance program, in which 50,000individuals are registered. The potential expense is one problemwith the high-support-price approach. If nearly all Iran's300,000-400,000 users and addicts entered the program, the costwould rise dramatically. Furthermore, even with severe penaltiesagainst smuggling and illicit trading, Iran still experiencesdifficulty in trying to prevent the importation of opiates. Somesuccess has been reported in eliminating illicit supplies fromTurkey, but imports from Afghanistan and Pakistan have not beenhalted. The mid-1970 price in Iran for Afghani opium was wellbelow the licit price, despite intensive law-enforcement efforts.It seems that the heavily armed mountain tribes operating out ofboth Afghanistan and Pakistan have not as yet been deterred byeither the border authorities or the death penalty on smuggling.On the other hand, the price of illicit Turkish opium in 1970 wasas high as $400 per kilo in Tehran-six to seven times thegovernment support price. As the Iranian example shows, the success of apre-emptive buying policy, even if accompanied by administrativecontrols, depends on whether government can effectively exert itswill over the producing regions. In fact, most of the world'sopium supply is produced in areas where little political controlexists. Administrative controls themselves are difficult toenforce, as we shall see. Therefore, because of the size of theworld market relative to U.S. heroin consumption, the highelasticity of supply, and the difficulty of control, it isunlikely that a policy of pre-emptive buying could be successful. DIRECT CONTROLS The application of administrative controlsalone is the other basic alternative to reduce opium supplies.This involves restricting the acreage on which opium can be grownand maintaining a low official price. A low official price mayreduce the illicit price, at least in the short run, and therebydiscourage illegal planting and crop diversion. Certainly, takenby itself, a low official price will not induce new production.But the most salient feature of direct controls is increasing therisks of illicit trading and consequently reducing theprofitability. Practically, however, continuous enforcement ofdirect controls is both difficult and costly, and the necessaryresources available to most producing countries are quitelimited. Especially in countries with weak central governments,controls present severe administrative problems. All countrieswith an illicit trade lack adequate numbers of both trained lawenforcement personnel and motor vehicles. Given the low wages inpublic-service jobs and the large profits in the opium trade,corruption of government and police officials is a widespreadproblem in most countries and is likely to continue. The bribesthat illegal importers are willing and able to pay areconsiderably higher than the amounts officials are currentlyaccepting for inaction or nonenforcement of the law. Widespreadsocial acceptance of opium use in many rural areas of Pakistan,Afghanistan, India, Burma, Laos, and Thailand is anotherdifficulty that makes enforcement of controls for the benefit ofan outside country appear especially burdensome. In Turkey, wherethere is reportedly little opium use, controls have beenextremely unpopular because of both the loss of an importantsource of farm income and the rising anti-American sentiment.While limitations on local financial resources could presumablybe eased by American aid, the administrative and politicaldifficulties severely limit the possibility of successfulcontrols. If, however, the desire and resources to do sowere present, controls could probably be applied successfully incertain individual countries. Communist China and Iransuccessfully eliminated production in the 1950's. Turkey hasrestricted legal acreage of poppy cultivation to 29,652 acresfrom 103,782 acres in 1960. In the process, illegal productionmay have been somewhat reduced, because illicit Turkish opium isbelieved to come principally from larger than declared yields onlegal acreage." Turkish officials seem committed to theirpledge to enforce a ban on all poppy cultivation by the fall of1972. The chances of this policy's success will be discussedlater. The major problem in curtailing opiumproduction is that most of the world's supply is produced inareas where no national control exists. The lack of control isvirtually complete in the producing regions of Burma, Laos, andThailand. Areas that are largely controlled by tribal groups areresponsible for opium production and distribution in Pakistan andAfghanistan. Therefore, it seems likely that attempts to controlor abolish opium production in Turkey would have little effect,as illicit traders turned to these areas for supplies. Indeed,the recent changes in Turkey do not seem to have caused anydecrease in total U.S. imports of illegal opiates. Still another difficulty is that of restrictingopium production in one country when neighboring countries donot, or cannot, restrict production. After twelve years ofprohibition, Iran returned to limited production, because itsaddicts were purchasing illicit opium from Turkey, Pakistan, andAfghanistan. Even in Turkey and India, control systems havefailed to halt the cultivation of illicit opium. Turkish farmersmake written declarations to the government of their licensedacreage and expected kilogram yields, selling the surplus to theillicit market. In 1969, for example, Turkish officials collected116 tons of licit opium from poppies in eleven provinces. But in1970, when nine provinces were allowed to produce, only 60 tonswere turned in. Presumably diversion accounts for some of thedifference. Some illicit production in Turkey has occurred fromunlicensed acreage, but this is relatively easy to discover ifsufficient efforts are made, since the poppies have a longgrowing season and are easy to detect, especially from the air.In India, on the other hand, the illicit opium output is producedprincipally on unlicensed acreage. Direct controls might be more effective if theywere combined with crop substitution, subsidies for production ofother goods, or direct payments for not growing poppies. But cropsubstitution is unlikely to be successful, since it is difficult,if not impossible, to find crops that yield as high a return perunit of land as opium. For example, attempts to substitute ahigh-yielding Mexican wheat in Pakistan failed because the cropprovided a return per acre roughly half that of opium, assumingopium is sold at official prices." In Turkey, there has been a sound agriculturalreason that crop substitution is difficult. Apart fromlow-income-producing grains, the poppy is the only autumn-sowncrop and is not easily replaceable by the higher-yielding springcrops, such as cotton, maize, sugar beets, tobacco, or melons.The opium produced is important to the small farmer, not onlybecause of the amount of income gained, but also because it isharvested before the grain and therefore provides expense moneyfor the main harvest. Furthermore, the harvest of opium occurs ina period when the farmer has little else to do and can spend histime on the lancing of the poppies and collection of the opium. Subsidies for production of alternative cropswould certainly be required if the substitute crops provided lessincome than opium. The cost of producing a unit of a substitutecrop would be reduced by a subsidy, and the transfer payment fromthe government would allow the grower to increase production and,in the process, bid resources, land, and labor away from othercrops, including opium. Because these inputs would become moreexpensive, the cost per unit of producing opium would increase. However, if demand for opium in this particularnational black market is relatively insensitive to changes inprice, opium production would be little reduced, and littlereduction in farmer income would result. A higher subsidy wouldbe necessary to raise the relative return on the alternativecrop. If the demand for opium varies with price," perhapsbecause of the availability of opium from other sources orsynthetic opiates, then the subsidy would probably reduce much ofthe country's production. Clearly, subsidies for output of other goodscould be set high enough so that the output of opium in a givencountry could be greatly reduced. This may come, however, only atgreat expense to the government or to the United States, if thelatter sponsors the program. The same types of administrativeproblems that exist in the crop-purchase proposal are repeatedhere. Basically, it may be difficult to determine howmuch of the production of the subsidized crop is actually landdiverted from opium. Similar administrative problems would result ifgovernments made payments to producers for not growing opium,since it would be difficult to determine how many farmers who donot grow opium now would demand payment. In 1972, when Turkey'scomplete prohibition on poppy cultivation goes into effect, thegovernment plans to pay farmers on the basis of the value on theinternational market of their whole opium crop sold the previousyear to state officials. But, if only those who were originally"licensed" to produce are given payments, and nopayments go to those who planted illegal acreage, there is noincentive for these growers to cease producing opium, nor isthere an incentive for nongrowers to resist the urge to produce.Furthermore, to be effective, payments must exceed the return onoutput sold illegally. Since the illicit price of opium isextremely low relative to the retail price of heroin in theUnited States, it could rise greatly without much effect on thefinal price to the addict. Therefore, payments would have to beextremely high to be effective and would make the program verycostly. Thus, it also seems unlikely that a policy of directcontrols on opium production, even if combined with cropsubstitution, subsidies for production of other goods, or directpayments for not growing opium, could be completely successful. General economic development in poppy-growingareas may eventually reduce the relative profitability of thiscrop. The usual process is for technological innovations inagriculture to increase the productivity of fanns to the pointwhere large surpluses of labor develop. Migration of labor to thecities occurs because of the availability of employment andpublic services. As industrial development increases the demandfor labor, real wages rise, and capital-intensive productionprocesses become more desirable. If no capital-intensive methodof cultivating opium can be found, then the return on poppy fallsrelative to other goods and opium cultivation is greatly reduced.Clearly, this ignores changes in the demand for opium; moreover,it is, at best, a long-run solution. This situation mayeventually develop in Turkey but is not likely for a very longtime in the East. DISTRIBUTION Several books and articles have described thesystem ky which opium is transformed into heroin and importedinto the United States. They are all in substantial agreement,possibly because the primary source of information on the subjectis the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. In the case of Turkish opium, growers eitherwithhold part of their output or plant illegal acreage.Small-scale entrepreneurs gather opium from the farms inrelatively small quantities and deliver it to syndicates in ornear Istanbul. At this point, the opium is transformed intomorphine, which cuts the volume by 90 per cent. This processformerly took place in Syria. but as relations between Syria andTurkey have deteriorated in recent years, border controls havebeen tightened and the morphine labs moved to the Istanbul area.From Istanbul, the morphine is transported overland throughBulgaria and Yugoslavia or by ship to its destination in southernFrance, where covert laboratories refine the morphine intoheroin. (One theory is that some of the heroin labs are locatedin trucks and are thus mobile and difficult to detect.) Oncerefined, the heroin is smuggled to the United States through NewYork, Montreal, or some other large port. According to somesources, shipments are also being sent to the U.S. via SouthAmerica through a Southern port. MARKET STRUCTURE The best available outline of the domesticheroin distribution system, at least for New York City, wasdeveloped by Mark Moore of the Hudson Institute." Hisoutline relies, in turn, on earlier analyses by John Casey andEdward Preble" and information from the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs. Moore suggests that heroin passes through sixlevels of distribution: the importer, the kilo-connection, theconnection, the weight dealer, the street dealer, and, finally,the juggler or pusher. Table 4-4 shows the outline of the systemand includes estimates of the prices and value added to theheroin at each level. Before reviewing the operation of thespecific segments of the system, it is important to discuss theover-all market structure of the business. The key questions hereare: How tight is vertical organization? How competitive is thesystem at the various levels? How much increase in risk would berequired to make it unprofitable for large operators to stay inbusiness? For many years, conventional wisdom held thatthe heroin business was monopolized by organized crime, perhapsby the Mafia. BNDD now seems to believe, probably as a result ofrecent arrests of South Americans at relatively high levels, that10 or 12 large wholesalers with varying degrees of connection toorganized crime now control the distribution process in theUnited States. It seems clear that many economic principlesoperating in society at large must also apply to illegalenterprises," since the business of supply and distributionof illicit drugs is presumably subject to the same generaleconomic laws, and responds to the same general set ofincentives, as prevail in more open industries. There are, ofcourse, some crucial differences caused by the fact of illegalityand also by the moral problems associated with dealing in many ofthese drugs-for example, the need to minimize the risk ofdetection of the origin of the distribution system. The Hudson monograph argues that the objectiveof the industry is to maximize profits within the constraint ofthe risk of arrest and imprisonment, and that this objective ismost likely to be attained if the industry is organized intoseveral small distribution units separated vertically from oneanother, if higher levels in the system are monopolized, and iflower levels are competitive with some elements of market power(monopolistic competition). The small distribution units in theheroin industry are separated from one another by restrictinginformation at one level about the identity and activities ofother levels. Risks are limited by close supervision anddiscipline of employees, thus reducing the probability ofinformation leaks, and by the fact that penetration of one levelwill not result in penetration of another. The primarydisadvantage of small, separate distribution units is theirinability to adjust to large changes in demand; suppliers end upwith either excessive or deficient inventories. Moore argues that a monopoly could mostefficiently perform the functions required of the high levels inthe distribution network. The top levels in the system must: (1)restrict the total supply of heroin to maintain high marketprices, (2) regularly and reliably supply an amount of heroinfairly close to the realized demand, (3) manipulate supplyconditions above them with a minimum of explicit planning andnegotiation, and (4) adjust to errors in supply with aminimum of negotiation and activity. A centralized organizationwould be more effective in handling each of these problems. Amonopolist can restrict the total supply, allowing high pricesthroughout the system. In addition, he is in a position to havean efficient ordering policy, thus successfully accommodatinguneven deliveries and lead time. Agents can be coerced intoholding inventories or resupplied when short of heroin. Tightcontrol can be maintained over the circulation of information.Finally, a monopolist can maintain a monopoly position inrelation to producers.. thus reducing lead times, unevenness, andquality deterioration. In contrast, a competitive market would be lesslikely to ensure a smooth, restricted supply, adjusting to errorsin a discreet, efficient manner. In a more competitive situation,it is more difficult to pool shipments or parcel out unevendeliveries of heroin. With many suppliers at the top, there aremore transactions, more explicit negotiations, more occasions ofshort supply or large inventories, more information circulatingfreely-and thus a greater probability of arrest. A monopoly,therefore, is logically the most efficient type of organizationalstructure at high levels. But a successful monopoly requires theexistence of some type of leverage or barrier to entry, such as(1) special knowledge unavailable to others, (2) total controlover some vital raw material, or (3) total control over themarket as to make the cost of entry prohibitive, especially ifentry requires a large fixed investment. It is doubtful that anyof these considerations applies to the heroin traffic. Theknowledge required to refine opium into heroin is certainly notdifficult to acquire. It is also doubtful that the knowledge ofmethods of conducting illegal activities-such as smuggling-is solimited as to allow any firm to maintain a monopoly. There are nosubstantial fixed costs other than the investment in aninformation system, needed to offset the high level of risk inthe trade. However, the difficulty, and thus the cost, ofdeveloping such an information network may be a formidablebarrier to entry. Trusted personal relationships with Turkish orFrench syndicates may have put some organizations in a monopolyposition for Turkish opium. However, it would be in the interestof the Turkish or French firms to sell to as many importers aspossible, forcing them to bid against each other and thus raisethe price of heroin. A firm desiring to enter the businessshould, therefore, be able to establish the necessaryconnections. It is possible, of course, that the suppliersare not profit maximizers; they may not wish to accept increasedrisks for the sake of increased profits. Instead, afterestablishing an acceptably low level of risk, they may seek tomaximize profits within this constraint. Such an approach wouldsacrifice many of the benefits of competition among buyersbecause of the need to limit the number of people who know thesupplier's identity. (This factor also operates as a barrier toentry at other high levels of the distribution system.) If thebarriers to entry in the market for Turkish opium are too great,however, a potential importer could go to Hong Kong,Bangkok, Karachi, or Saigon. Finally, as noted, trying to erect a barrier toentry by attempting to control the raw material does not seemfeasible. The U.S. market relative to total world production issimply too small to prevent other supplies from becomingavailable. Also, the retail product is homogeneous and easilydivisible, making it difficult to hoard. However, for an illegal business, there areadditional techniques of monopolization. Violence is the mostlikely method of securing market control; illegal operators canreadily hire agents or firms willing to kill quietly andefficiently. If a heroin-distribution monopoly became establishedearly and acquired both a large organization and a sophisticatedinformation system, it could make it extremely dangerous for arival to compete. First of all, it might have the key advantageof knowing who is trying to enter the business before its ownprior presence can be discovered. Since rivals would find itdifficult to purchase a comparable intelligence service secretly,this acts as an important barrier to entry. Another way ofenforcing monopoly of an illegal product is to control the use oflegal force-corrupting police officials to serve one's own ends.An effective use of corrupt police would be to have one's rivalseliminated via arrest; sufficient arrests would satisfy thepublic and allow the police to refrain from attacking themonopoly itself. It is in the interest of the police, in turn, toeliminate competition, protecting the source of their payoffmoney while appearing to be effective law enforcers. Thesymbiosis between criminal enterprise and elements in lawenforcement is well known and has occupied many investigatorycommissions without being eliminated." A firm could also obtain police cooperationwithout police corruption. If one organization has betterintelligence than any other, and better intelligence than thepolice, it could simply inform the police of the competing ringand possibly provide the evidence necessary to break it up. The BNDD believes that 10 or 12 large wholesaleoperations exist in the United States today. Thus, the potentialbarriers to entry have apparently not been strong enough to allowany one firm to enforce a monopoly. The system has probablydeveloped into an oligopoly or cartel, with each firm maintaininga type of monopoly control of firms below it in the lowerdistribution levels. It is not clear what agreements, if any,exist among these firms with respect to prices or market areas,but the risk of detection may limit the mobility of distributorsbetween top-level suppliers, thus allowing firms at the top tomaintain vertically integrated supply systems. At lower levels in the system, there are manycompetitive suppliers, strict monopoly being impossible becauseof the difficulty of disciplining customers. At these levels,most customers are addicts who are highly motivated to maintainrelations with as many suppliers as possible. Low level suppliersare arrested much more frequently than those in higher levels,because they deal more often and more openly. Thus, relationshipsbetween consumers and suppliers are constantly breaking up andbeginning again. Furthermore, addicts are always trying to breakinto the lower levels of the system, and, given the small amountof trust, skill, and capital needed, personnel and organizationschange rapidly. Nevertheless, some elements of monopoly controlremain. Information is often unavailable to consumers, thusrestricting the number of markets in which they can buy. Also,addicts find it useful to restrict their purchases to dealers whoconsistently provide a high-quality product and who give themlower prices as loyal and trusted clients. Thus, limitedinformation and product differentiation maintain elements ofmonopoly advantage even for suppliers at low levels. COSTS AND PROFITS Existing analysis of the economics of eachsegment of the heroin industry is fragmentary because of thenature of the business. The best available analysis is again thatof Moore, and most of the comments in this section are derivedfrom his model of the system. For the importer and kilo-connection at thehigher levels of the distribution system, the operatingcosts-principally wages and inventory finance costs-are estimatedto be a much greater percentage of value added than at lowerlevels (50-55 per cent versus 30 per cent). Importers needskilled employees for the smuggling process and periodicallyrequire large amounts of capital to finance transactions withproducers and processors. Kilo connections have relatively largewage costs because of the elaborate organization needed forexchanges and maintaining inventories as well as disciplininglower-level suppliers. Financing costs are also high at thislevel because of the need to store inventories for uncertainperiods of time. Operating and finance costs are more moderatefor connections. Although they need to employ agents to developnew markets, discipline customers, dilute heroin, and makedeliveries, there is a much faster turnover of inventories atthis level. The rate of turnover minimizes financing, butconnections may be forced to accept it from sources higher in theorganization. Weight dealers, street dealers, and jugglers are,for the most part, self-employed; inventories are turned overquickly, and individuals at these levels rarely have financingproblems. In contrast to operating costs, expendituresfor bribes as a per cent of value added appear to increase as onemoves from high to low levels (2 per cent versus 5 per cent). Atthe importer and kilo-connection levels, well-placed bribes cansecure considerable immunities at relatively low costs. Expensesfor bribery increase at the connection level, because they aremore vulnerable to arrest, engaging in a relatively more visibleactivity. They must also frequently make payments to othercriminal organizations for "protection." Weightdealers, street dealers, and jugglers become even more vulnerableto extortion and will also have to pay rather large bribes (as aper cent of value added) to law-enforcement agencies. Profits are great at each level of thedistribution network but decrease as a per cent of value added atlower levels of distribution. Gross profits include (1) afinancial return equal to what could be made in the firm's nextbest alternative line of business (its opportunity cost), (2) areturn to compensate for the risk of arrest and incarceration,and (3) a return to monopoly power. The kilo-connection at the top level ofdistribution is probably the single most powerful component inthe system. At this level, gross profits are high and aremaintained by a large degree of monopoly power. Economic theorysuggests that the firm's profits must be at least as high as thereturn from other attractive illegal opportunities, such asloansharking or gambling. While risk-the probability of arrest-isrelatively low, the combination of monopoly power and highopportunity costs makes profits at this level high. For theimporter, profits are probably less than those ofkilo-connections. His risks are low, because, being high on theladder, he is difficulty to identify. Opportunity costs are low,because, with the substantial investment in building hisinformation network, an importer can make more money dealing inheroin than he could make elsewhere. Some monopoly power existsbecause the personal-relations network operates as a barrier toentry, but this is probably limited by the encouragement bykilo-connections of free-lance importers. Gross profits of connections are less thanthose of the two upper levels. The restricted access toinformation about operations allows some degree ofmonopolization, but risks become greater as visibility increasesand the police become more successful at arrest and conviction.At this level, opportunity costs are low because of the largeinvestment in personal relations, which are not valuable unlessthe connection is engaged in the heroin trade. Connections canaccept lower profits, and still find the business more profitablethan alternatives. The remaining levels are characterized byrelatively high risk and low opportunity costs. All three levelsof operation are -relatively visible, have relatively higharrest rates, and thus require adequate compensation for risksincurred. On the other hand, opportunity costs are low becausefew operators on this level have the skills required in othertypes of enterprise. At the weight dealer level, a small degreeof monopoly is maintained, because access to information islimited. At the street-dealer and juggler levels, monopolyprofits are minimal. Analyzing operating costs and profits at eachstage of heroin distribution carries important implications forlaw-enforcement policy. In summary, if a firm's costs are high,and it has little monopoly power or attractive income-producingalternatives, it may be quite easy to increase the risk enough sothat the firm leaves the industry. If these conditions do nothold-if profits are high and protected by monopoly, or if fewgood alternative profit opportunities exist-the firm might wellabsorb the cost of the increased risk. These factors largelydetermine the outcome of possible law-enforcement strategies. EFFECTS OF -POLICE -PRESSURE Increased police pressure on the distributionsystem can clearly increase the risks' and operating costs ofthose involved. Evidence does not show, however, that any onefirm is large enough or monopolistic enough so that itsdestruction or neutralization would have an important impact onthe total distribution system and thus on heroin use at thestreet level. During the last few years, the arrest of even majordistributors and traffickers has had no significant impact on theprice or availability of heroin. On the international level, forinstance, in the first six months of 1971, BNDD participated inthe arrest of 113 major traffickers outside the United States,seizing large quantities of drugs in the process. Federalofficials face an almost impossible task of trying to stop thesmuggling of drugs at the border. About 250 million people enterthe country every year. Approximately 65 million cars and trucks,306,000 planes, and 157,000 ships entered in 1970." If thiswere not enough, customs officials state that, on anaverage-size ship arriving at the Port of New York, there are30,000 places where heroin can be hidden. Domestically, thesituation is not much different. A study of the undercover unitof the New York City police narcotics division revealed that, in1970, agents made 7,266 buys of narcotics that resulted in 4,007arrests. However, only 4.97 pounds of highly adulteratedheroin were seized in these actions, at a total cost of $91,197,and with no appreciable effect on heroin distribution citywide. In such a situation, law enforcement must relyon the indirect effects of general deterrence rather than ondirect disruption. But it is far from clear how firms operatingin the field regard a successful attack on another firm.Possibly, such an attack will cause them to reassess their ownrisks and assume that they are in greater danger than theybelieved before. On the other hand, it may be that existing firmswill simply assume that the destroyed operation was incompetentor lacking in security and see no need to reassess their ownrisk. To the extent that police are successful inincreasing a distributor's probability of arrest, one wouldexpect the chain to lengthen as each supplier attempts to dealwith fewer buyers and places more distance between himself andthe street. Suppliers would invest more time and absorb greateroperating costs in designing more complex delivery systems tobetter conceal their activities. The risk involved in holdinginventories would cause suppliers to hold less in reserve, thusincreasing the time and complications involved in arrangingpurchases and sales. However, police pressure might also increasea monopoly's hold on the system. A monopoly can absorb theincreased risks more easily and is also likely to be betterprotected. Markets might become even more centralized. Because ofhigher costs and lack of competition, prices could be expected torise. For all these reasons, it seems clear that lawenforcement can raise the price of heroin. The effects of higherprices, and thus the ultimate impact of law enforcement, areuncertain. They depend heavily on how total demand reacts to thechanges. One hypothesis is that demand is inelastic,that an addict is dependent on heroin and will try to maintainhis level of consumption regardless of price. If this is so, thenlaw-enforcement policy will have little effect. The added costsof greater risks will be shifted to consumers, and the revenuesof the industry will increase. So will the social costs of theactivities addicts engage in to support the habit. (A logicalquestion is why firms are not already maximizing profits-that is,if prices and revenues could be raised before the increased costwas incurred, why did this not, in fact, take place? This may bedue to concern with public reaction. Higher heroin prices causehigher crime rates, which increase the public's demand for strongpolicy measures against the heroin traffic. Therefore, firms mayattempt to maximize profits, given the -constraint of maintaininga low level of risk. This calls for keeping prices low enough sothat the crime needed to support it remains"tolerable." Competition might also play apart.) A second theory is that demand is elastic, thata price rise does cause a disproportionate decrease inconsumption. If so, then the suppliers would have to absorb theincreased cost of higher risks or raise the price and accept adecline in total revenues. While it is commonly believed that theaddictive nature of heroin causes the demand for it to beinelastic, it might, in fact, be elastic, for two reasons: First,the development of methadone during the past few years hascreated a low-cost alternative for addicts that did not existbefore. Secondly, over the last thirty years there has been asubstantial long-term rise in the price of heroin relative to theprice of other consumer goods. This may have produced a situationin which most addicts are maintaining their habit at the highestprice level they are able to support. If the price increasedfurther, these addicts would have no choice except to decreasethe quantity of heroin used, because they would be unable toraise their income enough to meet the new cost. If the demand is elastic, a law-enforcementpolicy could be effective. If the price of heroin increased andmethadone was necessarily substituted, the social costs ofaddiction, including crime, would decrease. If addicts chose toadapt by using less heroin for the same cost, however, the crimecosts would not be decreased. It could be argued, on the otherhand, that increasing the cost of being an addict hastens thetime when the addict voluntarily leaves the addicted life. The firm attempting to maximize profits,subject to the constraint of maintaining a low level of risk, maychoose to absorb the risk as increased operating costs ratherthan attempt to shift it to the consumers. This, of course,results in a lower rate of return and reduces the attractivenessof heroin distribution. In the heroin business, the gross profitsof a firm (revenues minus operating costs) must be at least equalto the return the firm could earn in an alternative investment(its opportunity cost). Profits that exceed opportunity costs can beconsidered a return to a monopoly position or compensation forrisk. Gross profits must exceed opportunity costs by at leastenough to compensate the firm for the risks it undertakes. Ifgross profits, less opportunity costs, exceed the compensationrequired for risk, the firm will stay in the business.Alternatively, if gross profits, less opportunity costs, are lessthan the return required for undertaking risk, the firm will notbe willing to absorb the risk and will leave the industry. Risk for an illegal firm can be viewed as equalto the probability of punishment, as the firm perceives it, timesthe cost of certain punishment to that firm. The cost of certainpunishment is equal to the amount the firm would be willing topay to avoid it.26 The probability of punishment can be affectedby public policy and by the firm's own actions, because itdepends on the probability of being apprehended and successfullyprosecuted. Changes in the criminal-justice system are essentialif high-level distributors are going to be put out of business.These include more sophisticated training of police personnel,higher salaries to lessen the temptation of bribes, and higherbudgets for purchasing information. In reality, law-enforcementagencies have been unable to raise the level of risk anywherenear what would be required to make this criminal enterpriseunprofitable. The cost of the expected punishment to theillegal operation can also be influenced by changes in judicialprocedures and increases of sentences. Currently, many defendantsin narcotics cases forfeit bail, become fugitives, and, ifapprehended, are more likely to be tried for violating theconditions of bail than for the original charge. If convicted,this means a lesser sentence. The economic cost in such acase-the amount the offender would pay to avoid detection-shouldbe equal to the amount of bail, plus the probability of beingarrested while. at large, times the penalty for jumping bail.This cost would be increased if a change in public policy raisedthe amount of bail or the penalty for violating its conditions .21 On the other hand, the probability ofpunishment can be reduced if the illegal operation spends more onbribes and devising elaborate, less conspicuous pickup anddelivery systems. If increased amounts are spent to reduce risks,however, the illegal firms reduce their gross profits at the sametime. A firm will expend these sums if in doing so it can keepits gross profits (minus opportunity costs) above the 'cost ofescaping imprisonment. If it is impossible, through furtherspending, to reduce the expected risk below gross profits, lessopportunity costs, firms will leave the business. Alternatively,firms could limit sales to trusted buyers, thereby reducingrevenues and gross profits but also reducing the chances ofgetting caught. According to Moore's analysis of thedistribution hierarchy, gross profits are considerable at everylevel. However, for the kilo-connection, high-yieldingalternatives are the greatest, and it is possible that monopolyat this level could be broken. BNDD appears to believe that themonopoly has already been broken, and that the industry is nowoperating as an oligopoly with ten or twelve firms. But,conceivably, an oligopoly or cartel could develop techniques forsupplying the total market as efficiently as a centralizedorganization. If satisfactory agreements can be reached, theamount of explicit communication necessary to guarantee avoidanceof frequent shortages or surpluses would be minimal. However, themarket becomes more unstable with a cartel, because there isalways an incentive for one firm to increase its sales at theexpense of another. If one firm does try to improve its position,the others are likely to follow. If all try to do so, oversupplydevelops, attempts to expand the market increase, prices decline,and profits fall. In the process, higher levels of thedistribution system become more visible to the authorities, andthe probability of punishment increases. A kilo-connection maythen find one of his high-yielding alternative opportunities moreattractive and leave heroin distribution. Thus, there is alwayssome incentive for the police to attempt to infiltrate thenetwork at higher levels. Arrests made at this level reverberatethrough the system, making arrests easier at all levels. It is far from clear, however, that such apublic policy is altogether sound. While it could have a highpayoff in terms of seizures of heroin and arrests, it would leadto considerable market expansion and increased heroinavailability. The elimination of monopoly would permit theentrance of new firms; a competitively organized industry willalways provide more goods at lower prices than will a monopoly.Market expansion would occur if lower prices increase the demandfor heroin, and, in fact, this may be occurring. Two very largeseizures by BNDD in May and June of 1970 reportedly had no effecton price. No panics occurred following the seizures, as one wouldexpect, and the short-term trend over the year was one ofdeclining prices. Theoretically, the best allocation of policepower is at the levels of the distribution hierarchy, where theincremental gains from their actions (in terms of reduced socialcosts) are equal to the incremental costs of the enforcementefforts. This clearly requires employment of more resources atsome levels than at others. While the payoff from attempts toinfiltrate higher levels may be large, this policy is also veryexpensive. And, again, it is possible that such a policy wouldlead to a larger, less organized trade. Use of police resourcesat lower levels has less potential for large payoffs but is lesscostly. It is much easier to interrupt the heroin traffic at theretail level, because firms engage in more transactions,concealment is more difficult, and information is more available. On the other hand, risks must be increasedconsiderably before it becomes no longer profitable for low-leveloperators to remain in the industry, because their opportunitycosts are low-i.e., they probably could not earn nearly so muchdoing something else. Police are continually eliminating theselow-level operators through arrest, but, given the high profitpotential, others still find it worthwhile to enter the businessbecause of their low opportunity costs, mistaken perceptions ofthe probability of punishment, or the low value placed on beingincarcerated for a given period. In addition, most street dealersand pushers are themselves addicts. Being in the business keepsthem near the source of supply, giving them an income sufficientto finance their own consumption and enabling them to buy theirown drugs wholesale. Clearly, if heroin demand becomes relativelyelastic at some point as prices rise, the police could eventuallybe successful in eliminating the industry. However, to accomplishthis, it is probable that society would have to allocate anextraordinary amount of law-enforcement resources. Society mightprefer to reduce the industry to the "optimum" size,where the costs imposed by heroin use are just equal to theadditional cost required to reduce it further. CONSUMPTION The consumption of heroin imposes costs on therest of the community, because most purchases are financedthrough criminal acts such as theft. Because of these involuntaryredistributions of existing wealth, the community spendsresources to prevent crime and to apprehend, try, punish, andrehabilitate criminals. This includes private expenditures onlocks, alarms, lights, and security guards and publicexpenditures on police, courts, and correctional systems. To theextent that these human and material resources would be employedelsewhere in the absence of heroin addiction, they are properlycounted as costs of addiction. Social costs also include themedical expenses and foregone productivity of individuals injuredin crimes and the lost productivity, medical expenses, andpremature deaths of addicts. Finally, one must also include thefear and anxiety, avoidance of normal activity, disruption ofcommunity life, and use of less efficient and more expensivemodes of transportation that are unquantifiable but nonethelessvery real costs of crime and drug addiction. This sectionexamines the direct cost of heroin consumption and estimates theamount of crime required to finance it. The most elementary question in determining thedirect costs of heroin consumption is the total cost of theheroin consumed that is, how much money do addicts need tosupport their addiction? But this calculation depends on severalunknowns: the number of addicts, the average number of days peryear heroin is consumed, and the average cost of heroin per day,with an adjustment for the amount of heroin "earned"from profits on sales to other addicts." This information isessential for determining the magnitude of the problem and thebenefits from any investments designed to control or reduce it. THE ADDICT POPULATION The actual number of heroin addicts in theUnited States is unknown and probably can never be determinedprecisely with present techniques of estimation. Addicts becomeknown to officials only through death, arrest, or participationin treatment programs. It is difficult to estimate the size ofthe addict population from the number of deaths or arrests,because each of these figures depends on other variables as wellas sum totals. For example, the ratio of addict deaths to addictpopulation will vary not only with the number of addicts but alsowith the probability that a decedent will be medically identifiedas an addict. Similarly, the frequency of addict deaths fromoverdose will vary with sudden changes in the concentration ofpure heroin in the local supply. The ratio of addict arrests tonumber of addicts can vary with the intensity of police effortsin certain areas. The ratio of addicts in treatment to totaladdicts can vary with the addicts' perception of the value oftreatment or the short-term availability of heroin. Because of these difficulties, most estimatesof the addict population are mere guesses. However, there are twomethods that may ultimately prove useful, although both havepronounced weaknesses at present. One is the "Baden"formula, developed in New York City by Dr. Michael Baden of theMedical Examiner's Office, and frequently applied elsewhere. NewYork is unique in having a register of local heroin addicts asreported by medical and police sources. The formula was computedby comparing the number of addicts on the registry to the numberof overdose deaths and the number of deaths among persons namedon the register." Baden found that 50 per cent of the heroinaddicts who die are on the Narcotic Addict Register. On thisbasis, he estimated that the total addict population numbersabout twice the registry total. In 1968, for example, the NewYork Register had 42,500 addicts listed; it was thereforeconcluded that the total addict population was approximately85,000. This method has several problems, of which itsoriginators were well aware and are quick to acknowledge. Theywere seeking a way of making a quick estimate of the totalpopulation that would be more adequate than the register alonewithout incurring expenses for research time. (It is ironic thatDr. Baden is sometimes castigated for defects that he was thefirst to point out.) First, it is assumed that addicts who are onthe register have the same probability of dying as those who arenot. If registered addicts are heavier users and thus moresusceptible to disease, such as malnutrition and hepatitis, theywould have a higher probability of dying. On the other hand, ifaddicts not on the register are less experienced users they maybe more likely to die of overdose. Either, both, or neitherhypothesis could be correct, and it is impossible to determinethe net effect. Secondly, since the register is cumulative overa five-year period, some on the list will no longer be addictsbecause of successful treatment, abstinence, or incarceration. Tothe extent that this is the case, the estimate will exceed theactual total by twice the size of the error in the register. Third, the probability that an addict is listedon the register is, in part, a function of his age and length ofaddiction. A thirty year-old addicted for ten years is morelikely to be listed than an eighteen-year-old addicted for oneyear. A sophisticated application of the technique requires atleast an age breakdown, and possibly other distinctions as well.Baden himself works with such distinctions, but others who usethe method often do not. Serious difficulties develop whenofficials attempt to use the Baden formula in other cities or atother points in time. Statistical analysis of one set ofcircumstances is rarely transferable to different situations. Inother words, heroin addicts in different places, for whateverreasons, probably do not die at the same rate. Furthermore,differences in diagnostic method change the probability of adecedent's being identified as an addict. For example, inWashington, D.C., during the eighteen months preceding July,1970, diagnostic drug screens were performed on only 6.3 per centof all autopsied deaths; during the last six months of 1970, drugscreens were performed on 51 per cent of all autopsieddeaths." This frequency can also vary between cities, and asmall variance, when using Baden's formula, would change theestimated population greatly, because the number of addicts whodie in any given year is likely to be only 1-2 per cent of thetotal register." And New York has by far the best registerof any city. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs hasdeveloped a somewhat similar approach in estimating the totaladdict population. It multiplies the number of known users whocould be rearrested by the ratio of total heroin arrests to thenumber of known users included in these arrests." On thebasis of this method, BNDD unofficially estimates that there areat present 315,000 addicts nationally. This method also has several problems. First,known addicts are voluntarily reported to BNDD by local policedepartments. Reporting practices can vary considerably withlocality, as can intensity of enforcement efforts. Secondly, the probability of any addict's beingarrested in period 2 is assumed to be the same regardless ofwhether he had been arrested in period 1. This hypothesis isunproved. It may be that addicts already known to the police areheavy users and commit more crimes or are under greatersurveillance. Therefore, the probability of their rearrest wouldbe greater, and the estimate of the total addict population wouldbe less than the actual. On the other hand, if the addictsunknown to the police are younger, and therefore more recentlyaddicted, the probability of their arrest may be higher, becauseyounger addicts tend to commit riskier crimes, such as robbery.In this case, the estimate would be too large." Thirdly, it is difficult to determine thenumber of addicts reported in period I who remain active usersand are therefore eligible for arrest during period 2.Statistical adjustments must be made for the probability that aknown user will be in jail during period 2, will die, will becomeabstinent spontaneously, or will be in a treatment program. BNDDhas thus far adjusted satisfactorily only for the probabilitythat an addict will be in jail. Some of the problems involved in theseadjustments are shown by the difficulty of estimating theprobability of death. BNDD made its adjustments on the averageprobability that any individual over twenty-five will survive tothe next year. But the mortality rate for addicts is undoubtedlyhigher than that of other individuals of the same age. On theother hand, there may not be many addicts over forty, and thusthe mortality rate as originally calculated was biased upward bycalculating an average probability for all individuals overtwenty-five. Without knowing the true mortality rate, it isdifficult to make the proper adjustments to the estimates. Some addicts do mature out of addiction as theyage, but the number is not known. Even active addicts may haveweeks or months of abstinence, but again no numbers areavailable. Work on these problems is going on, and the resultswill probably reduce the estimate below the present 315,000.However, since reports from various urban areas indicate that thenumber of addicts is still increasing, we will use alternativeestimates of 250,000 and 350,000 for the total addict population. Some officials make a "best guess"estimate and then attempt to test the reasonableness of thefigure by comparing it with the total population. For example,the Narcotic Treatment Agency in Washington, D.C., has apopulation of 95 per cent black, 85 per cent male, and 85 percent between the ages of fifteen and thirty four. Assuming thatthe addict population not in treatment has the samecharacteristics, one can make an estimate of the penetration ofaddiction into the total population with these characteristics.If there are 15,000 addicts in Washington, 10,296 are black malesbetween the ages of fifteen and thirty-four. According to 1970Census data, there are a total of 83,158 black males betweenfifteen and thirty-four in Washington, D.C. Thus, 12.1 per centof this population is addicted under the assumption of 15,000addicts, and 8.2 per cent is addicted under the assumption of10,000 addicts. The problem with these projections is that 8.2per cent and 12.1 per cent seem equally 'reasonable" If anestimate approached 25 per cent or 30 per cent of a givenpopulation, one would suspect exaggeration. Penetrationprojections appear to have little value except as very roughassessments. DAILY EXPENDITURES FOR HEROIN Addicts vary in the amounts of heroin theyconsume per day and the per cent of time spent actively using thedrug. Some addicts can afford to increase their habits as theirtolerance to the drug grows; others cannot. There is also greatvariance in vulnerability to arrest and incarceration as well asin the frequency of "vacations" from addiction inhospitals or treatment facilities. These periods of treatmentalso serve to reduce the size using interviews with ex-addictsand police, developed a breakdown of the addict population of NewYork City." From their data, presented in Table 4-5, one canestimate that an average addict is an active user 70 per cent ofthe time, or 255 days per year per addict. The frequently quoted estimates of the dailycosts of supporting an addiction are often exaggerated. Many arederived from interviews with addicts who regard large habits asstatus symbols and commonly overstate the level of their own use.In general, the amounts of heroin consumed by addicts varywidely, and reports of these amounts are unreliable. To say thatan addict has a $50 habit does not mean that he will spend thissum day after day. Ideally, an addict would like to use as muchheroin as he needs to "get high." In fact, however, theincreasing difficulty of obtaining the necessary money to pay forincreasing dosages imposes an upper limit on most addicts'habits. But if an addict cannot consistently obtain large enoughdosages of heroin -to get high, he can use smaller amountswithout feeling acute withdrawal symptoms. In effect, the habitsize of a long-time heavy user is often not at the level ofeuphoria but only at a level sufficient to suppress withdrawal orto keep the withdrawal mild. Moreover, while there are manyaddicts with expensive habits, there are also many addicts in theearly stages of dependence whose habit requires only $10-15 perday. These factors should be kept in mind when interpreting anyestimates of the total cost of addiction. The price, and quality, of heroin needed by anaddict determine his cost per day. Retail prices were obtained byBNDD -for December, 1970, for several U.S. cities, and are listedin Table 4-6. The considerable variation in price is probably dueto differences in local supply and demand, risks taken bysuppliers, and, probably, nonrandom buying procedures. Theunweighted average price-except in Chicago, where it isextraordinarily high for unknown reasons-is about $0.55 permilligram. The average quantity used per day is probablyabout 55 milligrams of pure heroin." At $0.55 per milligram,this results in daily expenditures of approximately $30 per dayfor the average addict, representing the amount paid on thestreet by the addict who buys solely for his own consumption.Some earn their heroin through services rendered as a distributorof heroin-i.e., pusher; thus, the price paid by the ultimateconsumer includes the payment for that service. Heroin"earned" in pushing, therefore, means that feweraddicts have to steal from the community, or that some percentageof the addict population supports the rest by theft,prostitution, or legitimate work. The Hudson Institute studyestimated that 45 per cent of the heroin consumed is used bythose involved in its distribution and profit from its sale. Ifother factors remain the same, the total social cost of heroinaddiction will be less if the percentage of consumed heroin"earned" from pushing is increased. A rough estimate of the annual cost of heroinpurchases can be made using the information presented in thepreceding pages. The assumptions are that (1) addicts spend 70per cent of the . SOURCES OF FUNDS FOR HEROIN PURCHASES The high cost of heroin requires most addictsto resort to crime to finance their habits. Estimates of thevarious sources of funds for the support of heroin addiction canbe made with data obtained by the Hudson Institute fromex-addicts in New York City. As discussed previously,approximately 45 per cent of the heroin consumed by the addictpopulation is obtained by selling heroin. This does not mean that45 per cent of all addicts are pushers but that 45 per cent ofthe heroin used by addicts is obtained in exchange for servicesrendered in the distribution network. The remainder of the addictpopulation finance their own habits and those of pushers byvarious means, including robbery, burglary, shoplifting,prostitution, and legitimate work. Most addicts employ acombination of means, legal or otherwise, in their constant questto obtain funds." The breakdown of sources of fundspresented in Table 4-7 was developed from the Hudson material.These figures represent the funds used to purchase the 55 percent of heroin consumed that is not financed by renderingservices in the distribution network. It is assumed that shoplifting, burglary, andlarceny yield real property, and that pickpocketing, robbery, andconfidence games yield cash. Therefore, the total property stolenin these crimes can be roughly divided into 80 per cent realproperty and 20 per cent cash." It is assumed thatreal property is fenced at one-third its value, so that an addictmust steal, on the average, property worth $2.60 to obtain $ 1.00with which to finance his habit." The data needed to estimate the funds obtainedthrough property crime, prostitution, and legal sources used forheroin purchases can be summarized as follows: Number of addicts (N) 250,000; 350,000 Per cent of year in active use (T) 70 Average daily expenditure (X) $30 Per cent of heroin earned through pushing (d)45 Proportion of funds obtained through propertycrime (a) .62 Reciprocal of fencing discount (average) (f)2.6 Proportion of funds obtained throughprostitution (b) .31 Proportion of funds obtained through legitimatesources (w) .07 The estimates of funds obtained from each ofthe three alternative sources of funds are presented in Table4-8. Clearly, any of these data could be biased in eitherdirection and thus limit the usefulness of the estimates derivedfrom them. CONCLUSION The economics of heroin distribution has beenexamined for whatever assistance such analysis may bring tofuture policy considerations. Can heroin use be curbed? Can it beeliminated? What are the most efficient methods of attacking theproblem? In the marketing of any product, there are twosides to a transaction-supply and demand. Our examination hasshown that public policies dealing with the production of opiumand the domestic distribution of heroin-the supply side-willnever be completely successful in eliminating heroin use in theUnited States and the consequent street crime. Indeed, pastreliance on law-enforcement measures has accompanied an epidemicgrowth of the heroin-addict population. It is ironic that ournational policy, by resorting almost exclusively to criminalsanctions to eliminate addiction, has breda thriving illegal market that can be sustained only by criminalactivity. Two factors primarily impede public policydesigned to suppress the supply of heroin. First, the amount ofopium needed to supply the demand for heroin in the United Statesis only a minute portion of total world production. It isprobably impossible to curb all opium production, licit andillicit, everywhere in the world. Secondly, the profits earned indomestic distribution are so great that it is unlikely the riskscan be raised high enough to force dealers out of business. Asone former distributor has stated: "If you put me away,somebody else is going to stand in my spot."" Clearly, more effort and greater resources mustbe spent to curb the demand for heroin. For example, more addictsmust be treated and rehabilitated. Education to prevent drugabuse must be expanded and made more meaningful. Finally, theenvironmental factors that breed and sustain addiction must bemore successfully attacked. John Ingersoll, Director of theBureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, has stated before acongressional committee that law enforcement is the first-aidagency of society. It is not the curative, not the doctor, and itdoesn't eliminate causes of these problems. Our society hasgotten itself into an unfortunate state of affairs regardingdrugs because it has assumed that by passing laws and enforcingthem, the problem will go away. So it seems to me that while you can expectlaw-enforcement agencies to do the first-aid work, if you want acure, then we have got to go back to the basic causes and findout what can be done from that end. We have to look to improvedand increased rehabilitation programs. We have to find out moreabout drugs and why people use them, knowing of the debilitatingconsequences .42 No policy, of course, will. be successful if itaddresses only a part of the problem. There appears to be, forinstance, a causal relationship between strict law enforcementand the number of addicts in treatment programs. If theprobability of arrest is increased, more addicts are induced toenter treatment. Conversely, if more hard-core addicts entertreatment programs, pushers must seek out new, less reliableclientele; they become more visible and thus more vulnerable toarrest. Development of an effective policy combining efforts tosuppress supply and inhibit demand for heroin necessarilyinvolves close scrutiny of the economic system and the relativebenefits and costs of various alternatives. In choosing betweenpolicy alternatives, cost-benefit analyses can illuminate theprobable reduction in the social costs of addiction to be derivedfrom one policy as compared with another. If our public moniesare to be spent efficiently, it is imperative that such choicesbe illuminated by full-scale studies of this nature. NOTES 1. BNDD Staff. Interviews, November, 1971. Thisassessment is based on two other estimates: the total number ofaddicts in the United States, and the quantity of pure heroinconsumed by each addict per day. The accuracy of these estimateswill be analyzed later. But just one year ago, BNDD believed thatonly 5,000-6,000 lbs. of imported heroin was sufficient to supplythe U.S. market. The current estimate should be interpretedaccordingly; the actual total is probably somewhat less than10,000 lbs. 2. BNDD Intelligence Staff, The World OpiumSituation (unpublished paper), October, 1970, p. 13(hereafter cited as WOS). This assumes that the illicitproduction estimates are accurate, 3. Ibid., p. 16. 4. Select Committee on Crime, Hearings intoNarcotics Research, Rehabilitation and Treatment, U.S. Houseof Representatives, 92d Cong., 1st sess., Serial 92-1, 1971, p.358. 5. WOS) p. 6. 6. Ibid. 7. Ibid., p. 4. 8. International Narcotics Control Board,"Statistics on Narcotics Drugs for 1967." InternationalNarcotics Control Board (New York: United Nations, 1970), p. viii. 9. WOS, p. 5. This publication is thechief source of the data in this section. 10. It is extremely difficult to estimateillicit production and consumption. Except for Turkey, illicitproduction estimates were made on the basis of domesticconsumption. Some allowance for exports is included but isprobably subject to error. The BNDD staff considers the estimatesto be accurate within a confidence interval of 20 per cent. 11. BNDD Staff, interview, March, 1971. Indianopium is often adulterated with seed, leaves, and other foreignmatter. Indian yields are also higher because of additionallancing. 12. United Nations Survey Team, "The HillTribes of Thailand and the Place of Opium in Their SocialEconomic Setting," Bulletin of Narcotics, XX, No. 3(July-September, 1968). 13. WOS, p. 7. 14. G. Shulzin, "Cultivation of the OpiumPoppy and the Oil Poppy in the Soviet Union," Bulletin ofNarcotics, XXI, No. 4 (October-December, 1969). 15. BNDD Staff, interview, March, 197 1. 16. Select Committee on Crime, op. cit., note4, p. 68. 17. These figures are approximate. In fact, thenecessary land area could be considerably less, depending on thenumber of total addicts and the opium yield per acre. The11.2-23.2 square-mile estimate is obtained from the data in Table4-2. For example, if the yield per acre is assumed to be 8.07Ibs. (the approximate reported yield in Turkey), then the arearequired to produce 100,000 and 120,000 lbs. of opium isapproximately 19.4 square miles and 23.2 square miles,respectively. (If 1 acre yields 8.07 lbs., then 12,391.5 acreswill yield 100,000 lbs. This acreage is approximately 19.4 squaremiles.) On the other hand, if the true Turkish yield, assuspected, is approximately 14 Ibs. per acre, then the arearequired to produce 100,000 and 120,000 lbs. is approximately11.2 and 13.4 square miles, respectively. 18. WOS, p. 32. 19. WOS, P. 8. 20. If demand is price-elastic, the percentagereduction in quantity sold exceeds the percentage increase inprice. thus reducing farm revenues. 21. Mark Moore, Policy Concerning Drug Abusein New York State, Vol. III: Economics of Heroin Distribution (Croton-on-Hudson,N.Y.: Hudson Institute, 1970), pp. 67-73. 22. John Casey and Edward Preble, "TakingCare of Business: The Heroin User's Life on the Street," Internationaljournal of the Addictions, IV, No. I (March, 1967),12, 23. T. S. Schelling, "Economics andCriminal Enterprise," The Public Interest, No. 7(Spring, 1967), 61-78. 24. Ibid. 25. Select Committee, op. cit., p. 3. 26. R=pV, where R is the cost of risk to thefirm, p is the probability of punishment as perceived by thefirm, and V is the value, or cost, of the expected punishment tothe firm. 27. Select Committee on Crime, Hearings intoCrime in America: Heroin Importation, Distribution, Packaging andDistribution, U.S. House of Representatives, 91st Cong.,1970, pp. 52-91. 28. The annual cost of heroin consumption canbe stated by this equation: CH=365 [N (1-d) TX], where CH=net annual expenditures for heroin; N =number of heroin addicts; d =the percentage of all heroin consumed by theaddict population, which is obtained for services rendered in thedistribution network-i.e., pushing; * =average percentage of the year heroin isconsumed by addicts; and * =average cost of drugs per day to the addictpopulation. 29. Baden's formula is: N = D - n, where d A N=estimated total addict population; D =total number of deaths of addicts in givenyear; n = number of addicts on Narcotic Register in given year;d=number of deaths of addicts on Narcotic Register in given year;and N =actual total addict population. 30. Robert J. DuPont, "Profile of a HeroinAddiction Epidemic," in Select Committee on Crime, op.cit., pp. 4,167. 31. For example, the derived n inBaden's formula for New York City d has been used to estimate the number of addictsin Washington, D.C. The equation becomes: n N D, where A N =estimated total addict population in D.C.; n =number of addicts on New York City NarcoticsRegister; d= number of deaths of addicts on New York CityNarcotics Register in given year; and * =total number of addict deaths in Washington,D.C.; and * =actual total addict population inWashington, D.C. The problem here is that differences incapabilities for identifying narcotics n n n overdose deaths can make 7 vary among cities.If d in DC > d in New n York City, then N < N; alternatively, if inD.C. < n in New York City, d d then N > N. Clearly, similar problems arisewith efforts to use n for time d period I to estimate the addict population inperiod 2 with the total number of deaths in period 2. 32. BNDD Staff. Interviews. Included are onlythose important features of the method necessary for clear description.Their equation is: A t T = N - , where n A T =the estimated total addict population inperiod 2; N=the number registered with BNDD in period 1, who could bearrested in period 2; t =the total number who are arrested in period2; n=the number registered with BNDD in period 1, who arearrested in period 2; and T =the actual number of addicts in period 2. Once it is known how many addicts have beenarrested in period 2 (t), and what the number of these previouslyregistered with BNDD in period 1 (n) is, then N can be used toestimate T. 33. As discussed in the text, the BNDD methodassumes n = t But, if m N T. is the number of addicts arrested in 2 who werenot arrested in 1, and if M is the total number of addicts notregistered with BNDD in period 1, then n . m must hold for the method toyield true estimates. If n > m then N M N M A T < T; similarly, if n < mthen @ > T. N M If n = M a particularly useful featureof this method would be the fact N Mthat new entrants in thecurrent period do not bias the estimate of the total population. 34. Moore, op. cit., note 21, p. 66.These estimates were made on the basis of a relatively smallnumber of interviews and should not be interpreted strictly.However, this table provides the best available information onthese aspects of addict behavior. 35. This estimate, while lower than severalothers, may still be too high. First, the Hudson Instituteaverage of 55 milligrams includes an estimate that large-habitdealers (I 1 per cent of the total user population) use 180milligrams per day. While heroin dealers might have the income tomaintain such a large habit, it seems unlikely that they could beactive entrepreneurs and at the same time use such quantities ofthe drug. The Hudson estimate was also derived from interviewswith addicts, who reportedly exaggerate estimates of use. So,too, there may be less than 10 mg. of pure heroin per bag. 36.The amount of funds obtained from each of three alternativesources of funds (property crime, prostitution, legal sources)can be estimated with the following equation: C=365 [ U -d) NTX (af +b+w) where d, N, T, andX have the same meaning as in the equation in footnote 28. C --the gross -amount uf -funds ubtained-annually -from various -sources -for heroin purchases; a=the proportion of funds spent on heroin thatcomes from property crime; b= the proportion of funds spent on heroin thatcomes from prostitution; c=the proportion of funds spent onheroin that comes from legitimate sources-i.e., work, publicassistance, family, or friends; f =the factor by which the amount stolen must exceed the amountyielded by a property crime. (A stolen good must be transferredfrom the thief to a fence to a final consumer. The thief receivesonly a fraction of the market value of the good. To obtain agiven target yield, an addict can be expected to steal a givenamount, depending on the fencing discount, and the proportion ofvalue stolen that is property and not cash.) The amount of money annually spent by addicts for heroin can beestimated with the equation in footnote 26. The cost to victims of property crime committedby addicts can be estimated by this equation: Cv = 365 [ (I - d) NTX (af) where C, =cost to victims of property crime. 37. These estimates are also weakened by theinterview technique em- ployed and thus should not be considered aprecise reflection of addict behavior. 38. The value of property stolen cannot becounted totally when the costs to society are added. Somepercentage of the value of goods stolen accrues as a type ofsubsidy to people who, knowingly or unknowingly, purchase stolengoods because the price they pay is significantly below themarket price. This factor reduces the cost of crime to allsociety by the value of real property stolen multiplied by thereduced resale value (the fencing discount). However, in ascertaining how large anadjustment to make, it is difficult to compare the utility ofgains to the purchaser with the utility of the losses to thevictim-is it greater, less, or the same? In addition, from thepoint of view of the community, the loss to the victim may begiven more weight than the gain to the ultimate consumer. Theitem may, in fact, lose "value" because it is a stolengood. Objectively, although a stolen television set may stilloperate as well as before, the purchaser may feel that it isworth less than the market value because of the risk of holding astolen good. 39. '80 +.20 ($ 1) = $2.60 1/3 40. The net annual addict income from propertycrime can be estimated by the following equation: PC= 365 [ (1 - d) NTXa] where d, N, T, and X have the same meaning asin footnote 28 and PC= net annual addict income from propertycrime. The cost to the victims of the stolen propertyis determined by multiplying the net addict income from property crimes bythe reciprocal of the average fencing discount. 41. Select Committee on Crime, op. cit., note27, p. 238. Ibid., note 4, p. 367. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT01-B32-5IA031-000652-B044-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131441 text/html 61219HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:14:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:03 GMTContent-length: 61001 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Federal Expenditures onDrug-Abuse Control Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 5 Federal Expenditures onDrug-Abuse Control by Peter B. Goldberg and James V. DeLong Availability of Information * Total FederalExpenditures * Federal Activities AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION Comprehensive, reliable information on federalexpenditures on drug-abuse programs is difficult to obtain. Nodetailed program budget describing the allocation of federalresources in this area has ever been made public or possibly evencompiled. Although both the Office of Management and Budget andthe Council on Executive Reorganization have made efforts to puttogether information, the results have been closely held. Thefigures used in this paper are based on budget requests andamendments, accounts of congressional hearings and otherdocuments issued by the government, and interviews withgovernment officials. The accuracy of this information is sometimessuspect. Government cost accounting has never been known for itsrigor, and, since drug abuse is now receiving high-priorityattention at the highest levels of government, there is anincentive for agencies to find a drug-abuse rationale forprograms that may have only a peripheral relationship to thefield. There are also technical problems. The LawEnforcement Assistance Administration, the Department of Housingand Urban Development, and the Social and Rehabilitation Serviceof HEW all award block grants to states and cities. (Block grantsare funds that can be used for any specific projects chosen bythe recipients within a given area of activity.) It is only afterthe close of the fiscal year that the portion of these fundsspent for drug abuse can be determined. For these programs thereis no information on fiscal 1972 at the present time. On June 17, 1971, President Nixon announced anew drug abuse program, including a supplemental budget requestof $155,655,000 for fiscal 1972. Shortly thereafter, thePresident stipulated that there was to be a 5 per cent.across-the-board -reduction in government personnel as part ofthe anti-inflation effort. Some federal agencies are still unsurewhich of these directives will take precedence. There are obvious differences among budgetrequests, congressional authorizations, appropriations, andactual expenditures; however, these distinctions are not madeconsistently in this report. Generally, appropriations are usedfor fiscal 1970 and 1971 and budget requests are used for fiscal1972, but some amounts are agency allocations within largerappropriations. Usually, the figures are fairly close to theactual amounts that were or will be spent for the activities ineach year. However, in some areas, such as research, expendituresmay lag somewhat behind appropriations. Some agencies, such as the Department ofDefense and the Internal Revenue Service, have specific fundingallocations for drug abuse activities in fiscal 1972, but did nothave such allocations in fiscal 1971. Because of these problems, some of the figuresgiven here represent judgment and estimate rather than certainfact. TOTAL FEDERAL EXPENDITURES Table 5-1 shows federal expenditures for fiscalyears 1970, 1971, and 1972 broken down by agencies. Table 5-2shows the same expenditures broken down by functional categories.Table 5-3 shows therequested budget for fiscal 1972 before and after the President's supplement request. As the tables indicate, the government willspend about $417,601,000 on drug-abuse activities in fiscal 1972,almost double the amount spent in fiscal 1971. Several agenciesthat could not provide a breakdown of funds spent in fiscal 1971 could do so for fiscal 1972.To avoid undue exaggeration of the increase, we have made roughestimates of the fiscal 1971 totals. Table 5-4 compares the project estimate of thefiscal 1972 budget with the latestavailable official government estimates.' The Project's figuresare higher. The difference can be attributed to a number offactors, but probably the most influential is that the data forour estimate were compiled in September and October, 1971, ratherthan in June, and thus the agencies had moretime in which to survey their activities. This seems especiallyimportant for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration. FEDERAL ACTIVITIES LAw ENFORCEMENT Four federal agencies have law-enforcementresponsibilities: the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs(BNDD) and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA)in the Department of justice; and the Bureau of Customs and theInternal Revenue Service (IRS) in the Treasury Department. Infiscal 1972, these agencies will spend $115,822,000 enforcinglaws against the illegal importation, manufacture, distribution,and possession of narcotics and dangerous drugs. As the product of a 1968 merger between theTreasury Department's Federal Bureau of Narcotics and theDepartment of Health, Education and Welfare's Bureau of DrugAbuse Control, BNDD has the widest mandate. It is primarilyresponsible for most of the federal government's national andinternational police operations. BNDD also works with state andlocal officials on cases of major importance to the totalillegal-distribution system. During fiscal 1972, BNDD will receive$66,689,000.' This will represent a doubling of itsappropriations in two years. Personnel has increased almost asrapidly-from 1,465 in fiscal 1970 to 2,319 in fiscal 1971 to2,718 in fiscal 1972. The number of actual agents has alsoincreased from 884 in 1970 to 1,437 in 1971.' (Data for fiscal1972 are not available.) Over 90 per cent of BNDD's money, or$61,971,000, will be spent on law-enforcement activities in 1972 .4 BNDD's principal predecessor, the FederalBureau of Narcotics, was often accused of over concentrating itsefforts against users and street dealers of narcotics and notbeing seriously concerned with the higher levels of distribution.In 1970, BNDD claimed that it had reversed this policy and wasconcentrating its efforts on the higher levels of the marketingstructure. Appearing before a House Appropriations subcommitteein March, 1970, Director John Ingersoll stated: The new operational plan is a systematicapproach to developing prosecutable cases and obtainingconvictions on specifically identifiable individuals and groupswho are responsible for most of the illicit drug traffic in thiscountry. The shift in emphasis of federal narcotic anddangerous drug law enforcement from the addict, abuser, and smalltime street peddler to the important illicit traffickers andillegal supply sources will undoubtedly result in fewer totalarrests. But those made should have a greater impact on thesupply of narcotics and drugs available for distribution to theconsumers in this country than a larger number of lesssignificant arrests.,5 Statistics on BNDD's output confirm this shiftin policy to some extent. One would expect that such a changewould result in fewer arrests per agent because of the increasedinvestigatory work required. Table 5-5 shows that this appears tobe the case. Consistent with this shift in priorities, BNDDhas begun analyzing the distribution systems for the variousdrugs and identifying organizations and individuals involved. Theagency claims that so far it has identified nine principal and129 secondary international drug-distribution systems and hasimmobilized 870 of the 2,150 individuals identified as havingmajor importance in them.' For several years, there has been aconflict between BNDD and the Bureau of Customs over operationsin foreign countries. In February, 1970, President Nixon declaredthat BNDD would be the accredited agency "in dealing withforeign law-enforcement officials on narcotics questions. Thisannouncement apparently resolved the dispute. During the last two years, there has been amajor expansion of BNDD's foreign operations. The Bureau had 13foreign offices in fiscal 1969, 16 in 1970, and 28 in 1971.During these three years, the number of agents assigned toforeign posts rose from 26 to 27 to 6111 Of the 50 new agentsrequested in the original 1972 budget, 15 will be assigned toforeign offices, and new offices will be opened in South Americaand the Far East.' From President Nixon's supplemental budgetrequest, $1 million will be allocated to BNDD for internationaltraining and technicalassistance activities." TABLE 5-5 BNDD OUTPUT MEASURES Fiscal 1969 Fiscal 1970 Fiscal 1971 Drugs removed from the domestic market Heroin (lbs.) 140 427 226 Cocaine Obs.) 73 197 427 Marijuana (lbs.) 8,825 17,401 12,723 Hashish (lbs.) N.A. N.A. 1,054 Hallucinogens (dosage units) N.A. 7,127,7423,697,737 Depressants (dosage units) N.A. 2,339,590319,006 Stimulants (dosage units) N.A. 7,196,48110,319,923 Arrests-BNDD-caused BNDD, direct 2,265 1,600 2,212 BNDD, foreign, cooperative 214 207 281 BNDD, state and local, cooperative 1,713 9002,247 TOTAL 4,192 2,707 4,740 Arrests per agent Number BNDD agents in the field 644 757 1,236 Average arrests per agent ' 6.5 3.6 3.8 SOURCE: BNDD Fact Sheet. One of the chronic difficulties of lawenforcement in the drug field is corruption, and the old FederalBureau of Narcotics had a substantial problem. In the words ofAttorney-General John Mitchell: There was considerable lack of integrity on thepart of many of the agents of predecessor organizations. . . .Some of them have been indicted. Others have had administrativeprocedures instituted against them, and a lot of them have left.I believe that it is being overcome." However, because there is so much money in thedrug trade, internal corruption will undoubtedly continue to be aproblem. Indeed, the pursuit of higher-level (and richer)traffickers will increase the stakes and the temptations. So far,BNDD has not been involved in any major scandals-a considerableaccomplishment. The Bureau of Customs is responsible for theprevention of smuggling. In fiscal 1972, the Customs budget forantidrug activities will be $40.5 million, $15 million of whichwill come from the supplemental budget request." Customsofficials state that they will actuallyspend about $52 million in this area during fiscal 1972. Thisestimate is based on a performance-measurement system that usesrandom time-sample analysis to determine the allocation of effortof Customs personnel. Based on this same measurement system,Customs estimates that $31,600,000 was actually spent on antidrugactivities during fiscal 1971.1' The results of Customs activity,as measured by the quantity of material seized and the number ofarrests made, is shown in Table 5-6. For all categories except dangerous drugs, thequantity of material seized in fiscal 1971 exceeded that of theprevious year, with heroin and cocaine showing the most dramaticincreases. Customs officials say that about 5 per cent of theirseizures are made as a result of tips and 95 per cent as a resultof "cold searches'@--situations in which suspicions werebased on conduct at the time of entry rather than on advanceinformation." The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration(LEAA) was created in June, 1968, under Title I of the OmnibusCrime Control and Safe Streets Act. Its stated purpose is tooffer "large scale financial and technical aid to strengthencriminal justice at every level throughout thenation."" LEAA is thus a major link between federalfunds and technical expertise and state and local narcoticslawenforcement. The major types of financial aid to states andcities are as follows: 1. Planning grants-allocated to statesaccording to population for the creation of statewide,comprehensive law-enforcement improvement plans. 2. Block-action grants-allocated to statesaccording to population to carry out specific improvement plans. 3. Discretionary action grants-awarded atLEAA's discretion for anticrime programs, with emphasis onspecial aid to cities. Some information on drug-abuse expenditures isavailable for the block-grant and discretionary-grant programs.Some of the planning funds are undoubtedly spent in this area aswell, but the amount is not obtainable. Block-grant funds awarded to state governmentsare normally spent in accordance with the comprehensivelaw-enforcement improvement plans formulated by the recipient.The amount allocated to drug-law enforcement in part reflects thejudgment of the states as to the severity of their drug-abuseproblems. The discretionary-grant program represents LEAA's ownallocation of resources to antidrug activities. The agencyemphasizes attempts to improve upon interjurisdictionallaw-enforcement techniques, particularly in metropolitan areaswhere city-suburban cooperation is important. To some extent, itseems to try to fill a gap left by BNDD, as that agency nowfocuses increasing attention on national drug-trafficking systemsrather than on smaller local groups. In fiscal 1971, the states allocated $3,172,879of block-grant funds to 26 programs designed to improvelaw-enforcement techniques and efforts, and LEAA used $2,713,206of its discretionary funds." Information on the fundinglevels for LEAA-financed, drug-abuse programs during 1972 willnot be available until after the close of the fiscal year, sincethe grantees of the block grants do not have to file detailedreports until then. LEAA has not, apparently, analyzed thecomprehensive plans to provide any prediction. Nor has the agencyyet finalized its own plans for the discretionary-grant program.(In the tables we have presented, it is assumed thatLEAA-financed, antidrug expenditures will remain constant in1972.) The Internal Revenue Service has long had amore general law enforcement role, in that tax laws arefrequently used against organized crime and other specialoffenders. Undoubtedly, the IRS has spent money on investigationsand prosecutions related to drug abuse in the past. However, the$7,500,000 proposed for IRS in President Nixon's supplementalbudget represents the first funds clearly earmarked for thispurpose. The money is to be used to hire 541 new auditors andinvestigators and to pay the incidental expenses of theirinvestigations." (The 5 per cent reduction in governmentpersonnel has thrown this plan into uncertainty.) Other federal agencies are involved in lawenforcement to a limited extent, as described below. The President's supplemental budget containedthe first specifically identifiable funds for drug-abuse-relatedactivities in the Department of Defense. It is not yet possibleto determine the proportion of these funds that will be used forenforcement purposes, but it will probably be small. TheDepartment already has its own enforcement system for violators.(The tables in this chapter do not include any estimate forDepartment of Defense law enforcement.) During fiscal 1971, the Department ofAgriculture conducted an experimental marijuana-eradicationprogram in eleven Midwest counties. The cost of this project($55,000) was assumed by BNDD. It has not been determined whetherthis program will be expanded or dropped in fiscal 1972, or, ifit is continued, which agency will fund the program. The federal government is also placingconsiderable emphasis on foreign crop eradication. In fiscal1970, the Agency for International Development (AID) gave $1million to Mexico to buy three light planes, five helicopters,remote sensing equipment, and chemicals and other eradicationequipment. Similar grants totaling $627,000 were made in 1961 and1965, without apparent effect." It is not clear whetheradditional sums have been spent since, but it seems probable. Similar emphasis is placed upon persuadingTurkish farmers to substitute other crops for opium. According togovernment officials, both loans and grants tied to this purposehave been made, and BNDD has stated that in 1970 AID had $3million to spend on it." In 1971, major U.S.-Turkey agreements weremade, whereby Turkey would phase out opium production over theensuing years." No monetary quid pro quo has beenpublicly announced, but presumably it is substantial. Morerecently, on September 28, 1971, the State Department signed aU.S.-Thailand Memorandum of Understanding that will make U.S. aidavailable to Thailand for the purpose of controlling drug trafficin that country." Again, no funding level has beenannounced. The United Nations has established a Fund forDrug Control, supported by voluntary contributions fromgovernments and individuals. Before the Fund came into being, theUnited States pledged an initial contribution of $2million." Presumably, this has been paid, but it is notclear which agency paid it or whether it is an annualcontribution. In the tables, it is allocated to StateAID forfiscal 1971 contributions to international organizations. It hasnot been annualized. It is difficult to know how to handle theseassistance funds. To carry them at zero is clearly an error, butany specific number is a guess. A recent newspaper report statedthat the total cost of the program in Turkey would be $35 millionover four years, and that the United States would pay $20 millionof it." Project staff believe it likely that the UnitedStates will also absorb at least part of the other $15 million insome form, and that cost overruns are always possible. Given allthe uncertainties, we have estimated State-AID expenditures at$10 million per year, starting in fiscal 1972. This is probably alittle conservative. TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION The principal federal agency concerned withtreatment and rehabilitation is the National Institute of MentalHealth (NIMH) within HEW, which operates four types ofdrug-treatment programs." For three of theseprograms-community Assistance, NARA inpatient, and NARAaftercare-funding levels are known: they were $42,445,000 forfiscal 1971 and will be $99,798,000 for fiscal 1972. Under thefourth program, the Community Mental Health Centers Act, drugusers are only one of a number of categories of people treated,and an accurate calculation of expenditures cannot be made. The Community Assistance Program has expandeddramatically in recent years. From a budget of $3.1 million infiscal 1970 and $21.3 million in fiscal 1971, it has grown to$76.8 million under the revised fiscal 1972 budget. In hissupplemental budget request, President Nixon asked for $67million more for NIMH than was contained in the original budget;of this, $49.8 million will be channeled into the CommunityAssistance Program. The increased emphasis on the CommunityAssistance Program reflects NIMH's belief that it is mosteffective and efficient to treat addicts in their homecommunities rather than in a central isolated facility. Treatmentis not confined to any one method. Different centers usedifferent approaches or combinations of approaches. The modalitychosen for any particular center is the result of the community'ssuggestion and NIMH's ratification. During fiscal 1971, 13,258 patients wereadmitted to the 23 operational centers. NIMH estimates that about10,000 remained enrolled. At the very end of fiscal 1971, 22additional centers were funded; these did not accommodate anypatients during that year but will add substantially to the totalcapacity in fiscal 1972. As funding more than triples in fiscal1972, it is reasonable to expect even more increases in thenumber of operational centers and enrolled patients. Under the Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of1966 (NARA), NIMH operates both inpatient and aftercare civilcommitment facilities. Originally, there were two centralinpatient facilities, one at Lexington, Kentucky, and the otherat Fort Worth, Texas. These facilities were generally underused,and now, consistent with the emphasis on community treatment,NIMH has dissociated from Fort Worth and is in the process ofopening a series of smaller, geographically dispersed incareservice facilities. The central facility at Lexington will remainoperational and will serve patients for whom no local facilitiesare available. At present, about 700 people are in the inpatientphase of civil commitment. The second phase of civil commitmentis community aftercare on an outpatient basis. NIMH hascontracted for these services with 144 different communityprograms. These units are generally small. Together, they serve apopulation of about 1,250. The treatment at each of these centersis determined by NIMH personnel. Under the Community Mental Health Centers Act,NIMH is funding some 450 centers designed to treat people withbasic psychological problems. Many of these centers handledrug-abuse treatment under this general mandate. Information isnot available on the number of drug users served by these centersor the amount of money involved. (No estimate is made in thetables.) The Social and Rehabilitation Service (SRS) ofHEW, also funds rehabilitation programs through grants to statevocationalrehabilitation agencies. In fiscal 1971, an estimated$1,915,000 was spent for 1-000 "rehabilitations," and,in fiscal 1972, SRS expects to spend $3,093,000 for 1,600"rehabilitations." The criterion for rehabilitation isthe ability to secure and maintain employment." Because of the increased focus on drug-use inthe military, the Veterans Administration is accelerating itsdrug-rehabilitation program. In fiscal 1971, the VA inauguratedits first five drugabuse treatment units. Originally, the VA hadplanned to open 13 more centers in fiscal 1972 and another 14 infiscal 1973. However, the President's supplemental budget requestincluded $14.1 million to enable the VA to open all 27 new unitsthis year." Each of these units will be located in a VAhospital and will accommodate approximately 15 inpatients. Theprimary treatment modality will be methadone maintenance, withpatients inducted for four to six weeks in the hospital and thencontinued on an outpatient basis. VA officials say that theyexpect to treat about 6,000 patients under this program duringfiscal 1972. As of July 1, 1971, the Office of EconomicOpportunity (OEO) had 20 active grants budgeted at $12.3million." OEO concentrates its treatment and rehabilitationactivities on programs for young drug users and assistance tocommunity groups. OEO funded treatment modalities range fromtherapeutic communities to methadone maintenance. Some of theprojects also include an education component, but it is notpossible to extract the amount of money spent by OEO for thispurpose. For fiscal 1972, OEO has requested $18 million fordrug-abuse-related expenditures. The neighborhood health-centerconcept would receive increased attention under this plan,according to OEO. Some Model Cities funds from the Department ofHousing and Urban Development have been used to operatedrug-treatment and rehabilitation centers. Because the fundingmechanism is the block grant, the only information available fromHUD is on fiscal 1971 expenditures-no accurate estimate can bemade for fiscal 1972. The majority of these treatment andrehabilitation programs are directed toward young users. Servicesat the different centers range from outpatient counseling tocomprehensive inpatient care. In fiscal 1971, there were 21treatment and rehabilitation programs run in 13 states, theDistrict of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands at atotal cost to HUD of $9,343,000. The Job Corps, part of the Department of Labor,will spend $200,000 in fiscal 1972 on three drug-demonstrationprojects. "The purpose of the . . . projects is to developeffective program models for man-power training programs toprevent and control drug misuse by disadvantagedadolescents."" Total LEAA expenditures for treatment andrehabilitation in 1971 amounted to just over $16.6 million. LEAAestimates that it allocated over $4.5 million of its own fiscal1971 discretionary funds to treatment and rehabilitationprograms, and the states spent $12.1 million of the block-actiongrants for similar purposes. LEAA officials say that the funding rationaleis the relationship between drugs and crime. The medical andpsychological needs of addicts must be treated to eliminate theircriminal acts. These treatment and rehabilitation programscontain a strong crime-prevention component, most observable inthe treatment and rehabilitation centers run for predelinquentaddicts. Treatment varies from the use of antagonist drugs totherapeutic communities, and many of the centers offer bothinpatient and outpatient clinical care. The Bureau of Prisons runs two similartreatment and rehabilitation programs. First, under Title 11 ofthe Narcotics Addict Rehabilitation Act (NARA), inpatient andaftercare treatment are provided. The budget for fiscal 1972 is$2,118,924. The program has the capacity to treat 600 inpatientsfor an average of 18 months apiece. The actual population intreatment, as of August, 1971, was about 375." The Bureau of Prisons does not dispense anymaintenance drugs. Rehabilitation programs center on educationaland vocational training, individual, group, and familycounseling, and "milieu therapy." The Bureau also runsa "para-NARA" program, which serves drug-dependentpersons who, for one reason or another, do not qualify under NARATitle 11. This program, operationally similar to NARA, will bebudgeted at $655,955 in fiscal 1972, and the five centers willeventually treat a total population of 250. Four of the centersare now operational, and 104 people are enrolled. The fifthcenter is about to inaugurate operations with an initialpopulation of 39. These figures are exclusive of the Fort Worthfacility, which the Bureau of Prisons has just recently takenover from NIMH. It is expected that this facility will increaseNARA and para-NARA capacity by only 200. The additional budgetaryallotment required was not available. The President's supplemental budget requestincluded the first large-scale identifiable funds for Departmentof Defense drugabuse activities. The total request for thedepartment was $34,255,000, but a functional breakdown of thisbudget is not available. The Army will receive $19,699,000, theNavy $3,231,000, and the Air Force $11,295,000. Of the Army'sfunds, $18.2 million will be channeled into a new program-theAlcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Program. Theobjectives are defined as follows: Prevention of alcohol and drug abuse Identificaton of drug abusers Detoxification of drug abusers Rehabilitation of drug abusers, either shortterm in Army facilities or long term under the VeteransAdministration Suppression of illegal drug distribution Collection of statistics and dissemination ofinformation How much money is to be allocated for eachobjective is not known, but it is likely that the primaryemphasis will be on treatment and rehabilitation. The Navy andthe Air Force will establish similar programs, funded,respectively, at $2.8 million and $11.1 million. The remainder ofthe DOD funds will probably be used for research." RESEARCH The National institute of Mental Health is theprincipal vehicle for government research on drug abuse. Asconcern about the problem has mounted, so has the NIMHdrug-research budget. The growth curve is shown in Table 5-7,prepared for the House Select Committee on Crime by the directorof NIMH. Probably the most important of the "otherdivisions" mentioned in the table is psychopharmacology,which is concerned primarily with the use of drugs in thetreatment of mental illness. The supplemental budget presented by thePresident in June, 1971, increased the total amount fordrug-abuse research in fiscal 1972 to $30.7 million. Theallocation of this amount is not known. NIMH research covers a variety of drugs,including marijuana and the opiates, amphetamines, barbiturates,and hallucinogens. In fiscal 1970, the only year for which wehave figures, the distribution was as follows: Drugs $ in millions Barbiturates 5.3 Opiates 3.8 Amphetamines 2.8 Marijuana 2.3 Hallucinogens 1.8 Other .3 TOTAL 16.3 This total is higher than the total shown inTable 5-7, which notes only $15.6 million for 1970. Probably thematerial presented to Congress is correct, and the information inthe breakdown by drugs represents preliminary estimates. Drug research draws on the disciplines ofchemistry, pharmacology, sociology, psychology, psychiatry, andepidemiology, alone or in combination. There are no breakdowns bydiscipline, but NIMH does have a basic categorization of theareas within which it makes grants and contracts: 1. Systematic, controlled evaluation ofcurrently promising treatment-program techniques 2. Development of treatment agents/devices foruse in the treatment of drug dependence 3. Clinical studies of the effects of treatmentdrugs and abuse drugs 4. Surveys and instrument development todetermine incidence, prevalence, and patterns of drug abuse: a. among students b. among other groups (hippies, psychiatricpatients, etc.) c. New York City Narcotic Addict Register Psycho-sociological studies of drug abuse and the abuser to determine the motivation for use, environmental influences, effects on personality, characteristics of drug-using subculture, etc. 6. Legal aspects of controlled drugs to explore alternative types of legal control systems 7. Genetic studies to determine effects ofdrugs on chromosomes and offspring: a. marijuana b. LSD c. amphetamines and barbiturates 8. Use of animal models for studies of abusepotential of drugs 9. Exploration of mechanisms of action of drugson the brain at the biochemical, neurophysiological, andbehavioral levels: a. opiates b. marijuana c. amphetamines and barbiturates d. LSD 10. Improved chemical methods for systematicand reliable detection of drug abuse 11. Chemical studies of plant alkaloids todetermine presence of hallucinogenic properties; to determinegeographic origin of opium 12. Development of methods/preparation ofnatural and synthetic marijuana 13. Development of materials/methods forcampaign on prevention and education of drug abuse 14. Training 15. Fellowships and scientist developmentawards. 31 Many of these categories include only a smallnumber of projects. The Addiction Research Center (ARC) inLexington, Kentucky, budgeted at about $0.8 million per year, isNIMH's major facility for intramural drug research. It has twomajor functions -the investigation of the addiction potential ofvarious drugs before they reach commercial channels, and thedevelopment of antagonists to opiates. Basic research into thenature of drug action, abuse, and dependence is not a primaryfunction, although ARC has some highly respected researchers whohave done distinguished work in these areas." In the last two years, there has been a majorpush to do research on marijuana. The total expenditure has gonefrom $1.5 million in fiscal 1969 to $2.8 million in fiscal 1971.Fiscal 1972 data are not available. Much of the past expenditure($1.1 million in fiscal 1971) is done on contract, a procedure"utilized by the NIMH when it is important that thegovernment define precisely what needs to be done, how it shallbe done, and what the product will be." Between 1968 and1972, NIMH did not use contracts for research in any area of drugabuse except marijuana." The Social and Rehabilitation Service, also apart of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, plans toallocate approximately $400,000 for research in fiscal 1972. Thebulk of this money will be used to investigate techniques bywhich the vocational and social services performed by this agencymay be better utilized to facilitate therapeutic programsdesigned for young drug abusers .14 The National Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse was officially established on March 22, 1971, for atwo-year period. It has a dual purpose: First, it is currentlyanalyzing the marijuana situation and will, in March, 1972,recommend any desirable modifications of public policy. Duringits second year, the Commission will explore some of the broaderaspects of drug usage under a mandate to investigate the causesof drug abuse. The budget for fiscal 1972 is estimated to beabout $1 million, allocated entirely to general expenses andresearch. The President's supplemental budget allocated$2.1 million to the Agricultural Research Service of theDepartment of Agriculture. The money will be used to developtechniques to detect and destroy illicitly grownnarcotic-producing plants without causing adverse ecologicaleffects." Two other federal agencies, LEAA and BNDD-bothwithin the Justice Department-conduct research programs,primarily to improve law-enforcement techniques. LEAA research funds come from the block-actiongrant and discretionary-grant programs discussed above and fromprograms conducted by LEAA's National Institute of LawEnforcement and Criminal justice (NILECI)." During the pasttwo fiscal years, the funding levels for research and educationwere as follows: Figures for fiscal 1972 are not yet available.The discretionary grants program has not been finalized, and moststates have not yet submitted their plans for the fiscal 1972block-action grants. In the tables, we assume that the fundingwill remain the same as in fiscal 1971. LEAA-funded research has emphasized two projectareas: investigation of possible relationships between drug useand aggressive behavior and crime, and evaluations ofLEAA-funded, community-based treatment and rehabilitationprojects. It can be expected that LEAA research programs willretain this thrust in fiscal 1972. BNDD research is limited to projects directlyrelated to law enforcement, such as the abuse potential ofparticular drugs or the market characteristics of thedrug-distribution system. In fiscal 1971, BNDD had a researchstaff of 20 and a total research budget of $1,383,000. For fiscal1972, BNDD originally asked for a research budget of $1,467,000;the increase, however, would have covered only the cost ofannualization of positions, and would not have resulted in anyadditional activities." The President's supplemental budgetallocated an additional $2 million to BNDD "for developmentand implementation of new technology for detection, surveillance,communications and automatic data processing as tools in theenforcement of drug laws."" Other federal agencies are conducting researchinto nonlawenforcement aspects of drug abuse. For the most part,however, the following programs are limited in scope andperipheral to the central goals and purposes of the agencyinvolved. The Job Corps has budgeted $120,000 for anational drug survey of 16 Job Corps centers in fiscal 1972, toobtain information about knowledge,attitudes, and patterns of drug use among different subculturalgroups of Job Corps enrollees." The Department of Transportation has beenconducting research on the effects of drugs on drivers anddriving. DOT says that in fiscal 1972 it will spend an estimated$250,000 on the following studies: Incidence of drugs in people admitted to auniversity clinic after auto accidents Investigation of a sample of 1,000 fatallyinjured drivers for drugs Incidence of drugs in drivers who are notinvolved in accidents Simulation studies of drug effects A study of the driving record of heroin addictsbefore and after addiction and while on methadone In fiscal 1972, the Veterans Administrationplans to spend $250,000 for a general research program concernedprimarily with the biological and behavioral aspects of drugaddiction and to be conducted in Veterans Administrationhospitals." The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) isinvesting a limited amount of funds in drug-abuse-relatedresearch. A budget breakdown is not available, but the agencyestimates that these projects will consume four and a halfman-years of time in fiscal 1972. Two of FDA's most importantactivities in this area are reviewing methadone-treatmentprograms for medical soundness and reviewing proposals to marketmethadone as a proven rather than an experimental drug. Finally, part of the Department of Defense'ssupplemental budget will be used for research activities. TheArmy will get $1.5 million for research, development, testing,and evaluation in fiscal 1972; the Navy and Air Force will begiven lesser. amounts." Information on specific projects isnot yet available. EDUCATION, PREVENTION, AND TRAINING It is not always possible to distinguishsharply between this category and other categories. For example,funds for BNDD programs to educate local law-enforcement officersare included under law enforcement; treatment and rehabilitationprograms undoubtedly include some money for training theagencies' own workers; and the line between prevention andenforcement is not always clear. Programs in this section includethe following types of activity: Efforts to alert the general public to thedrug-abuse problem and to explain its scope and significance Efforts to reach actual or potential drugabusers and to explain the effects and dangers of drug abuse Programs to train education workers NIMH programs to train rehabilitation workers(because of the scope of NIMH rehabilitation programs, thetraining activities are sufficiently large to warrant separation) Information services for persons interested inthe drug field In fiscal 1971, the Office of Education (CE)budgeted approximately $6 million for drug-education programs. Ofthis, $2 million was allocated to state departments of educationto train educational personnel. The other major OE endeavors infiscal 1971 were 26 community programs, 11 drug-educationprojects initiated by local school districts, and 20college-based pilot programs initiated and operated by studentsprimarily for fellow students but sometimes with acommunity-outreach component." For fiscal 1972, the Office of Educationoriginally requested a budget of $6 million to continue existingprograms." As a result of a supplemental request, however,OE will receive $13 million for drug-abuse-related programs. Themajor new undertaking will be a training program called"Help Communities Help Themselves": Eight regionalcenters will be inaugurated to train community people on how todevelop and maintain community education and informationprograms; in the first year, OE hopes to train about 2,500people. This project will cost about $6.5 million. For fiscal 1972, NIMH has budgeted $2,571,000for public information services, a nominal increase over thefiscal 1971 amount of $2,563,000. Part of this money will be usedby the National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, whichanswers general inquiries for information by sending out NIMHbrochures and fact books. More specific requests are answered byinformation specialists, who send out reprints of publishedarticles. The Clearinghouse has also developed a fairlycomprehensive standard bibliography as well as a computerizedinformation system that lists, indexes, and abstracts publishedarticles in the field and conducts searches in response toindividual requests. The NIMH and the Department of Defense andJustice are cosponsoring a special advertising campaign designedto counteract peer pressure to use drugs. This campaign, in thesecond of three years, has an annual cost of $150,000 equallydivided between the sponsors. In fiscal 1972, NIMH will spend $6.9 million ontraining, compared with $2.1 million budgeted in fiscal 1971.Part of this increase will be absorbed by the expansion of aprogram to develop educational materials and to train lawyers,ministers, and others who spend part of their time working withdrug-dependent persons." The Office of Economic Opportunity has awardeda $420,000 grant for fiscal 1972 for the inauguration of aNational Training Institute in Washington, D.C., to provide sixmonths of intensive training for former addicts working on localprojects, with follow-up training, if necessary." In fiscal 1971, $3,066,000 of HUD's ModelCities funds were used for 37 programs in the area of education,prevention, or training. Within this broad category, the stateshave programmed many diverse projects. Some have used their fundsto develop curricula for drug-education programs in the schools;others have funded workshops for teachers and counselors; stillothers have directed their efforts toward the general community.At least one program has been run for law-enforcement officers. The job Corps, within the Department of Labor,will spend $40,000 in fiscal 1972 to develop, collect, anddistribute educational material deemed appropriate and relevantto the job Corps population." This project will also helpJob Corps staffs improve their understanding of the problems ofdrugs and drug abusers. BNDD also operates a public-education campaign.In fiscal 1971, this division was staffed by 26 people at a costof $1,215,000. The education division responds to requests fromthe general public for information on the drug problem andpreventive programs. This division also provides materials andfilms upon request and arranges for speakers for national, state,and regional programs. In fiscal 1971, BNDD personnel made 1,500speeches to an estimated audience of 150,000. They also made 191radio and television appearances. These figures representsignificant declines from the preceding year, apparently theresult of a policy decision to place highest priority onaddressing groups of people capable of establishing ongoingdrug-prevention programs rather than the public at' large. Infiscal 1972, this division will again consist of 26 people but ata cost of $1,251,000. This budget increase, however, will coveronly annualization of positions." LEAA estimates that approximately $20.2 millionof its fiscal 1971 funds were spent on education, prevention, andtraining, more than was spent in any other drug-abuse category.The major objective of LEAA's program is "to providestudents and adults with the knowledge necessary to makeintelligent decisions concerning the personal use of addicting orhabituating drugs and other harmful substances." LEAA hasdeveloped the concept of a "concerned community" thatmust be made aware of the nature and magnitude of the problembefore it can respond. The agency stresses four programs: 1. Coordination of local and state publiceducation and information programs to attain maximumparticipation and efficiency 2. Implementation of health-informationprograms in every school at the earliest feasible grade level 3. Development of educational programs,seminars, and work- shops designed to provide accurate informationfor adults 4. Predelinquent counseling services throughthe use of neighborhood information centers." The funding level of these programs in fiscal1972 is not yet known. THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE In his special message to the Congress on June17, 1971, the President proposed the temporary establishment of aSpecial Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention accountabledirectly to the President. Pending congressional approval, thePresident, through an executive order, instituted the position ofSpecial Consultant for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to fulfill,to the extent legally possible, the duties of the proposedSpecial Action Office. Under this revised organizational plan, itwould become the responsibility of the Special Action Office tocoordinate and direct all the drug-abuse activities of thevarious federal agencies, with the exception of those dealingwith the problems of law enforcement." The President hasrequested $3 million in fiscal 1972 for the staff andadministrative costs of the Special Action Office." NOTES 1. Latest White House estimate as reported inthe National journal, July 3, 197 1, p. 1417. 2. House of Representatives Document No.92-133, Amendment to Budget Fiscal Year 1972, Drug AbuseProblem, June 21, 1971, p. 4 (hereafter H.R. 92-133). 3. U.S. Congress, Hearings onAppropriations, House of Representatives, 92d Cong., 1stsess., 1971 (hereafter App. Hrgs. 1971), justice, Pt. 1,p. 333; H.R. 92-133; U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau ofNarcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Fact Sheets, unpublished,1971 (hereafter BNDD Fact Sheets). 4. This figure is arrived atby subtracting BNDD appropriations for research and for education, prevention, andtraining from the total requested budget. 5. U.S., Congress, Hearings onAppropriations, House of Representatives, 91st Cong., 2dsess., 1970 (hereafter App. Hrgs. 1970), Justice, Pt. 1,pp. 987-88. 6. App. Hrgs. 1971, Justice, Pt. 1, p.868. 7. National Journal, July 3, 197 1, p.1422. 8. These figures come from the BNDD FactSheets. At the House Appropriations Hearings in March, 1971,however, the agency stated that total staff of foreign officeshad risen from 34 to 70 in 1970. BNDD Fact Sheets; App. Hrgs.1971, Justice, Pt. 1, pp. 848, 868. 9. App. Hrgs. 1971, Justice, Pt. 1, p.848. 10. H.R. 92-133, p. 4. 11. App. Hrgs. 1970, Justice, Pt. 1, p.220. 12. Information supplied by the Bureau ofCustoms. 13. Ibid. 14. App. Hrgs. 1970, Treasury, Pt. 2, p.583. 15. Department of Justice, Law EnforcementAssistance Administration, A Program for a Safer, More Just America, p.3. 16. Information supplied by LEAA. 17. H.R. 92-133, p. 5. 18. App. Hrgs. 1970, Foreign Assistanceand Related Agencies, Pt. 2, p. 11. Mexico's total legitimate exports are about$1.1 billion, and the marijuana trade may be worth an additional$100 million in foreign exchange. Some experts have estimatedthat 500 kilograms of marijuana per day go from Mexico to theUnited States. This comes to about 400,000 pounds per year. Anaverage price of $25 per pound F.O.B. Mexican border does notseem unreasonable, based on many sources of information. Theexact figures depend, of course, on one's estimate of marijuanause and average price. A case can be made for almost any figurebetween $70 million and $120 million. 19. App. Hrgs. 1970, Foreign Assistanceand Related Agencies, Pt. 2, p. I 1; John Ingersoll,"New Horizons of Narcotic and Dangerous DrugEnforcement," Speech at the Law Enforcement ExecutiveConference, Williamsburg, Virginia, July 22, 1970, p. 8. 20. U.S., Congress, House of Representatives,Select Committee on Crime, Narcotics Research, Rehabilitationand Treatment, Hearings, 92d Cong., Ist sess., 1971, pp.70-73. 21. U.S., Department of State, U.S.-ThaiMemorandum of Understanding, September 28, 1971. 22. App. Hrgs. 1971, Justice, Pt. 1, p.372. 23. Washington Evening Star, November 4,197 1. 24. NIMH's Division of AdministrationManagement and Financial Management provided much of theinformation in this section. 25. Information supplied by SRS. 26. Veterans Administration, Alcohol and DrugDependence Service, Progress Report, August 19, 1971, p.1. 27. Office of Economic Opportunity, DrugRehabilitation Projects Status Report, July 1, 1971. 28. U.S., Department of Labor, Job CorpsDrug Task Force Projects, 1971, p. 1. 29. Information supplied by the Bureau ofPrisons. 30. H.R. 92-133, p. 3. 31. National Institute of Mental Health, Centerfor Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse, Memorandum, ProgramDevelopment Goals with Grants and Contract Supported ActiveDuring FY 1969, August 13, 1969. 32. App. Hrgs. 1970, U.S., Department ofHealth, Education and Welfare, Pt. 1, pp. 448-50. 33. U.S. Congress, op. cit., note 20,pp. 474, 476-77. 34. Information supplied by SRS. 35. H.R. 92-133. 36. Information on LEAA supplied by LEAA. 37. App. Hrgs. 1971, justice, Pt. 1, p.845. 38. H.R. 92-133, p. 4. 39. U.S., Department of Labor, job CorpsDrug Task Force Projects, memorandum, August 31, 197 1, p. 1. 40. Veterans Administration, Alcohol and DrugDependence Service, Progress Report, August 19, 1971, P.3. 4 1. H.R. 92-133, p. 3. 42. Congressional Record, July 26, 1971, p. E8287. 43. App. Hrgs. 1971, Office of Educationand Related Agencies, Pt. 1, pp. 975-76, and information suppliedby the Office of Education. 44. Information supplied by NIMH. 45. Office of Economic Opportunity, DrugRehabilitation Projects Status Report, July 1, 1971, P. 3. 46. U.S., Department of Labor, Job CorpsDrug Task Force Projects, p. 1. 47. App. Hrgs. 1971, justice, Pt. 1, p.845; App. Hrgs. 1970, Justice, Pt. 1, pp. 924, 979, 998. 48. Information supplied by LEAA. 49. See Message from the President to theCongress of the United States June 17, 1971. 50. H.R. 92-133, p. 3. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT01-B32-6IA031-000652-B045-28http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131454 text/html 40474HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:14:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:42 GMTContent-length: 40256 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Altered States of Consciousness Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 6 Altered States of Consciousness by Andrew T. Weil, M.D. The Pharmacology of Consciousness-altering Drugs Altered States of Consciousness, Drugs, andSociety THE PHARMACOLOGY OFCONSCIOUSNESS-ALTERING DRUGS The single most important fact to emerge fromresearch on consciousness-altering drugs in this century is thatindividual responses to them result from set and setting as muchas from the drug itself. Occasionally particular combinations ofset and setting completely reverse the "pharmacologicalaction" of a drug as described in a text on pharmacology.For example, with proper suggestion and in a restful setting,amphetamines can produce sedation. Drug, set, and setting,therefore, appear to be interdependent in shaping drug responses;no one factor seems vastly more determining than any other. This principle is logical enough. Nophysiological event takes place without a corresponding event inthe central nervous system. Therefore, every "bodily"response is actually a psychosomatic response. In the case ofmedical drugs like digitalis and atropine, no one is very muchinterested in the psychic component of response, so that we havecome to think of these substances as producing constantphysiological responses (although there is still enough variationfrom patient to patient to make their clinical administration aticklish business). In the case of "psychoactive" drugslike heroin and LSD, the psychic component of response becomesthe focus of attention; but, because we do not understand itaccording to present models of consciousness, we try in vain tomake these drugs, too, fit our simplistic conceptions ofpharmacology. How nice it would be if we could derive a method ofpredicting an individual's response to a psychoactive drug frompurely pharmacological considerations. But we cannot do so. Two upsetting conclusions follow from this lineof reasoning: First, it is impossible to talk meaningfully aboutthe effects of psychoactive drugs, except by reference to theireffects on specific individuals on specific occasions; andsecondly, pharmacology is not a useful approach to understandingthe effects of these drugs either on individuals or on society. Apharmacologist, of course, would disagree with me, but his viewof things would be as biased in its own way as that of thelaw-enforcement officer who favors continued efforts to stoppeople from using drugs by means of the criminal law. Most ofwhat is written about LSD and heroin in pharmacology texts ismeaningless in this sense: It says nothing about what will happento you if you take LSD at eight o'clock tonight; gives you nopower to help me if I come to you for assistance in breaking aheroin habit; and is quite irrelevant to any considerations ofwhat the United States ought to do about the continuing increasein negative use of these drugs. What we need is a new science of consciousness,based on subjective experience rather than on objectivephysiology. The materialistic psychology that has dominatedWestern thought about consciousness is no longer adequate to thetask of explaining the mind in terms that are useful to us. (Anespecially galling aspect of the drug problem for the medicalprofession is that psychologically ignorant users of drugs appearto have more practical information about their effects thandoctors have.) I predict that, from an experiential viewpoint,many unifying principles of drug states will become visible. Inthe pharmacological model, there is some unity; for example,alcohol, barbiturates, and minor tranquilizers are groupedtogether as sedative-hypnotics-a useful grouping, because italerts us to the danger that drugs like chlordiazepoxide(Librium) and meprobamate (Equanil) produce a dependenceresembling dependence on alcohol. But pharmacology offers no cluewhy the psychological changes of a marijuana high have much incommon with those of an LSD trip, or why heroin users may be ableto satisfy their need for a certain experience by inhalingnitrous oxide, a general anesthetic. In the following pages, I will review brieflywhat is known and what is not known about the majorpharmacological classes of psychoactive drugs-briefly, because,in view of the limited usefulness of this scheme ofclassification, it is not worth discussing, except at the mostgeneral level. SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS Alcohol and the barbiturates are associatedwith stubborn forms of drug dependence, marked by relativelyconstant, doserelated physiological changes, some of which becomeirreversible over time. These changes include tolerance (probablythe clinical correlate of the induction of degradative enzymes inthe liver) and withdrawal (a syndrome that persists untilmetabolism readjusts to its predrug state). Unlike narcotics,alcohol and barbiturates cause life-threatening reactions whenthey are withdrawn from addicted persons. Chronic use ofsedative-hypnotics is associated with structural damage to thenervous system; this association is stronger than for any of theother classes of drugs discussed below. Alcoholism isparticularly associated with chronic liver disease, possiblybecause alcohol is directly toxic to liver cells. Barbituratesare often implicated in accidental selfpoisonings, becausetolerance to the lethal dose does not develop as fast astolerance to the hypnotic dose. The minor tranquilizers have beenpromoted as anti-anxiety agents, but they behave just like mildsedative-hypnotics. Most persons use sedative-hypnotics to reduceanxiety by substituting a "high" state of consciousnessthat permits sleep, relaxation, or the mild disinhibition valuedin certain social encounters. These drugs are associated with dependencebecause (1) they do not affect the source of anxiety; (2) thedevelopment of tolerance encourages more and more frequent use;(3) their use in our culture is strongly linked to destructive(especially self destructive) behavior patterns; and (4) peoplein our society do not know how to make use of altered states ofconsciousness. The pharmacological model of- these drugsoffers no hope of cure or prevention of dependence onsedative-hypnotics. It can, however, offer treatment of acutetoxic episodes and withdrawal reactions. It seems unlikely thatelucidation of the exact metabolic derangements underlyingdependence will open the way to any pharmacological means ofintervening in the course of the disease. Nothing important is known about the action ofthese drugs on the mind. Since their major action is depressionof neurological activity in the central nervous system, it hasbeen assumed that the "paradoxical stimulation"observed with low doses (the high that precedes the stupor ofalcohol intoxication) is the result of inhibition of inhibitorybrain centers (which are conveniently postulated to respond tolower doses). However, some researchers have suggested that lowdoses may have direct excitatory action on nerve cells. That thiskind of debate should still be going on in 1970 suggests how farwe are from understanding conscious experience in physiologicalterms. (If alcohol intoxication were looked at by an experientialscience of consciousness, it might turn out that the high is notcausally related to the drug, which might be a pure depressant,after all.) It is ironic that we have chosen our onesanctioned intoxicant from this class of drugs. In no other classis pharmacological action (in this case, on liver and nerve-cellmetabolism) so clearly related to long-range physiologicaldeterioration. NARCOTICS Like sedative-hypnotics, narcotics are centraldepressants that produce stubborn dependence. Unlikesedative-hypnotics, they are not directly associated withlong-range physiological damage or life-threatening withdrawalreactions. Tolerance to narcotics develops faster than toleranceto sedative-hypnotics; hence, visible dependence develops faster.Because narcotics are illegal, their use is much more bound upwith antisocial, negative, and, often, self-destructive behavior. "Addiction" to and"withdrawal" from narcotics have become stereotypes inthe public mind, but reality does not often conform to theseconceptions. Far from being a physiological constant, dependenton dose and frequency of administration of a drug, the physicalcraving for narcotics is very much a matter of set and setting.Some individuals, when they find tolerance appearing, work out amethod of spacing injections of heroin so that they never becomereally "hooked," even though they use the drugregularly for years. (The number of such persons is unknown butmay be greater than the number of hooked addicts; they often leadstable lives and may never come to the attention of groupsconcerned with narcotics.) Other people seem not to be able tohandle the development of tolerance and quickly go on toexperience strong physiological dependence. Similarly, withdrawalreactions from narcotics are strongly shaped bynonpharmacological factors. In a supportive setting with strongpositive suggestion, a heroin addict can undergo comfortablewithdrawal with no medication other than aspirin. Narcotics do not affect the primary receptionof pain or other sensory stimuli; rather, they alter secondaryperception. A person in pain, given morphine, might say,"The pain is still there, but it doesn't bother me." Inother words, the pain is perceived through an altered state ofconsciousness. Pharmacological research on narcotics has beenunproductive. In the first place, no real success has beenachieved in separating the analgesic and addicting properties ofthis class of compounds. Secondly, the metabolic changesaccompanying narcotics dependence are beyond our presentunderstanding; even if they were understood, there is no reasonto think our difficulties with addiction would be any fewer.Thirdly, no purely pharmacological method of controllingaddiction has come along. The problems associated with heroin (death fromoverdose; hepatitis; crime; mental and physical deterioration)appear to have no causal relationship to the pharmacologicalaction of the drug. Rather, they correlate better with featuresof the social context in which heroin exists in our country. Infact, the discrepancy between pharmacology and experience is bestillustrated by phenomena accompanying dependence on drugs of thisclass. AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED DRUGS Drugs that stimulate the central andsympathetic nervous systems include the amphetamines (a chemicalclass), several drugs that are chemically but notpharmacologically distinct from the amphetamines (likemethylphenidate-Ritalin; and phemnetrazine-Preludin) , andcocaine. These drugs cause the release of norepinephrine fromadrenergic nerve endings. Tolerance to them develops veryquickly, but withdrawal from them, although sometimes apsychological ordeal, has few physiological accompaniments incontrast to withdrawal from sedative-hypnotics or narcotics. Little is known about the neurologicalconsequences of chronic, heavy use of amphetamines. Speed freakswho take enormous doses of amphetamines intravenously develop aparanoid psychosis that looks suspiciously organic and may becorrelated with depletion of the body's stores of norepinepbrine.(It may just as well be correlated with the prolonged wakefulnessinduced by these drugs.) To date, there is no firm evidence ofactual neurological deterioration resulting from any of thesedrugs, including cocaine. Although low doses do not change eatingbehavior in most people (contrary to the claims ofpharmaceutical-industry advertising), very high doses do shut offthe hypothalamic hunger center and can result in severemalnutrition. The high incidence of hepatitis among amphetamineusers has led to speculation that the drug may be directly toxicto liver cells. (If this hepatitis is, indeed, chemical, it mayalso be due to a common contaminant of black-market methadrine.) Until recently, amphetamine dependence wasconsidered less serious than narcotic dependence, because it was"Iess physiological." In fact, however,amphetamine dependence is more serious, because it is inherentlyless stable. When a person begins to use a tolerance-producingdrug, he must soon face the problem of trying to stabilize hisuse in order to keep his life from being disrupted. More than anyother class of drugs, the amphetamines foil a user's attempt toreach equilibrium with his habit, because they induce suchpowerful and unrelenting tolerance. Consequently, users developerratic patterns of use, such as "spree shooting" andalternation with barbiturates and, eventually, with heroin. Thehigh correlation of amphetamine use with impulsive and violentbehavior is consistent with this pharmacological instability. Abusive oral use of diet pills may beassociated with serious psychological problems but is notaccompanied by the physical changes associated with intravenoususe. HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens stimulate the central andsympathetic nervous systems (some are simple derivatives ofamphetamine) but, in addition, induce perceptual changes and thekinds of mental states associated with trance, mystic rapture,and psychosis. Except for the visual hallucinations (inparticular, the everchanging, geometric patterns seen onsurfaces), most of these effects are common in altered states ofconsciousness unrelated to drugs. The hallucinogens differ fromone another only in duration of action and in relative prominenceof stimulant versus psychic effects. Pharmacological researchtells us little more about them than about the amphetamines; itoffers no satisfactory explanation for the effects ofhallucinogens on consciousness. No one takes these drugsfrequently enough to get into pharmacological trouble with them.(Tolerance is so rapid that regular consumption is impractical;you can't stay high on LSD for too long at one stretch.)Therefore, the pharmacological body of data is quite irrelevantto our understanding of the difficulties people get into withhallucinogens. Also, there is no indication that use of thesedrugs is associated with physical damage of any kind, in eithershort- or long-term use. Most bad trips on hallucinogens arenonpharmacological panic reactions. Others are nonspecific toxicpsychoses-overdose reactions that disappear when the drug wearsoff. MARIJUANA Marijuana differs from the hallucinogens in twoways: It does not cause hallucinations, and it is not astimulant. In fact, marijuana has virtually no significantpharmacological actions, which probably accounts for itspopularity. It provides a high with minimal physiologicalaccompaniment, so that people who are anxious about it can easilypretend to themselves that they have done nothing to their bodiesor minds. For the same reason, it is useless to study marijuanain the pharmacological laboratory, because there is nophysiological handle on the phenomenon under consideration. Except for the possibility of lung diseaserelated to chronic inhalation of the drug, there is no evidencethat marijuana is physically harmful in short- or long-termusage. No other drug is like marijuana in having so fewphysiological effects. For this reason, it seems wise to think ofmarijuana as a class unto itself, no more closely related to thehallucinogens than to the sedative hypnotics. Its unique chemicalstructure is consistent with this idea. TOXINS, GENERALANESTHETICS, AND SPECIAL SUBSTANCES Persons who enjoy the altered state ofconsciousness called delirium (actually, a nonspecific responseof the brain to a toxin) will occasionally induce it by inhalingvolatile solvents and petroleum distillates such as glue.Repeated use of defiriants appears to be correlated withstructural damage to the central nervous system. In addition,petroleum distillates are frequently toxic to the liver,especially when taken with alcohol. Delirium is characterized byconfusion, disorientation, and hallucination; it is sometimescalled "acute brain syndrome" or "toxicpsychosis," and it can also occur in response to overdosesof any of the classes of drugs mentioned above, includingmarijuana. General anesthesia is an altered state ofconsciousness induced by a heterogenous class of chemicals, someof which (ether and nitrous oxide) are occasionally taken fornonmedical purposes. It is instructive to reflect that nosatisfactory theory has been proposed thus far to explain generalanesthesia in pbarmacological or neurophysiological terms, eventhough millions of persons have been put into this state underclose observation. Because the psychic phenomena of generalanesthesia can be reproduced nonchemically (by hypnosis, forexample), it is tempting to speculate that this altered state ofconsciousness, too, would be better understood from the point ofview of subjective experience rather than from the point of viewof objective pharmacology. Drug users who are deprived of their usualdrugs sometimes resort to special substances like nutmeg andmorning-glory seeds to get high. Many natural products of verydiverse pharmacology have been so employed, and it seems likelythat set and setting determine whether they produce pleasantaltered states of consciousness, sickness, or, indeed, no effectsat all. ALTERED STATES OFCONSCIOUSNESS, DRUGS, AND SOCIETY The general thesis of this paper is that drugexperience can be understood only if it is viewed as an alteredstate of consciousness rather than as a pharmacological event. Asubthesis is that this approach will make it possible for societyto reduce significantly the problems now associated with the useof psychoactive drugs. All of us experience occasional states ofconsciousness different from our ordinary waking state.Obviously, sleep is such a state. Less obviously, perhaps, aredaydreaming and movie watching unusual modes of awareness. Otherdistinct varieties of conscious states are trance, hypnosis,psychosis, general anesthesia, delirium, meditation, and mysticrapture. In our country, until recently, there has been noserious investigation of altered states of consciousness as such,because most Western scientists who study the mind regardconsciousness as annoyingly nonmaterial and, therefore,inaccessible to direct investigation. Their research has focusedon the objective correlates of consciousness instead of onconsciousness itself. In the East, on the other hand, wherenonmateriality is not seen as a bar to direct investigation, muchthought has been devoted to altered states of consciousness, anda science of consciousness based on subjective experience hasdeveloped. It would make sense to study all forms ofnonordinary consciousness together, because they seem to havemuch in common. For example, trance, whether spontaneous orinduced by a hypnotist, is in many ways simply an extension ofthe daydreaming state in which a person's awareness is focusedand directed inward rather than outward. Except for its voluntaryand purposeful nature, meditation is not easily distinguishablefrom trance. Zen masters warn their meditating students to ignoremakyo-sensory distortions that often take the form of visionsseen by mystics in rapturous states or hallucinations similar tothose of schizophrenics. And, curiously, the state of being highon drugs shares many characteristics with these other forms ofaltered consciousness, regardless of what drug induces the high. It is my contention that the desire to alterconsciousness is an innate psychological drive arising out of theneurological structure of the human brain. Strong evidence forthis idea comes from observations of very young children, whoregularly use techniques of consciousness alteration onthemselves and one another when they think no adults are watchingthem. These methods include whirling until vertigo and collapseensue, hyperventilating and then having another child squeezeone's chest to produce unconsciousness, and being choked aroundthe neck to cause fainting. Such practices appear to beuniversal, irrespective of culture, and present at ages whensocial conditioning is unlikely to be an important influence (forexample, in two- and three-year-olds). Psychiatrists have paidlittle attention to these common activities of children. Freud,who did note them, called them "sexualequivalents"-which they may be, although that formulation isnot very useful for our purposes. As children grow older, they soon learn thatexperiences of the same sort may be had chemically-for instance,by inhaling the fumes of volatile solvents found around thehouse. General anesthesia is another chemically induced alteredstate of consciousness that many children are exposed to in theirearly years. (The current drug-using generation was extensivelytonsillectomized, by the way.) Until a few years ago, mostchildren in our society who wanted to continue indulging in thesestates were content to use alcohol, the one intoxicant we makeavailable legally. (Incidentally, there are some good reasonsthat alcohol may not be a wise choice for sole legalintoxicant-apart from its devastating medical effects.) Now,large numbers of young people are seeking chemical alterations ofconsciousness through a variety of illegal and medicallydisapproved drugs. It is possible to see this change as primarilya reaction to other social upheavals-and, certainly, much hasbeen written about the social causes of drug use. It may be moreuseful, however, to consider what many drug users themselves say:They choose illegal drugs over alcohol in order to get betterhighs. There is no question that social factors influence theforms of drug use in a society, or that changes in patterns ofuse of intoxicants go along with major cultural upheavals, but wemust remember that every culture throughout history has made useof chemicals to alter consciousness.* Instead of looking forexplanations of drug taking in a foreign war or in domestictension, therefore, perhaps we should pay more careful attentionto how we allow people to satisfy chemically their innate driveto experience other states of awareness. Most societies, like our own, are uncomfortableabout having people go off into trances, mystic raptures, andhallucinatory intoxications. Indeed, the reason we have lawsagainst possession of drugs in the first place is to discouragepeople from getting high. But innate, neuropsychological drivescannot be banned by legislation. They will be satisfied at anycost. And the cost in our country is very great, for, by tryingto deny young people these important experiences, we maximize theprobability that they will obtain them in negative ways-that is,in ways harmful to themselves and to society. Why are altered states of consciousnessimportant? Primarily because they seem to be doorways to the nextstages of evolutionary development of the human nervous system.We commonly assume that a major division of our nervous system(the autonomic system) is involuntary-beyond our consciouscontrol -and that this leaves us open to many kinds of illnesseswe can do nothing about (for example, cardiovascular diseases).Yet, hypnotized subjects often show an astonishing degree ofautonomic control, to the extent of developing authentic blisterswhen touched with cold objects represented to them as being redhot. And Yogis frequently demonstrate voluntary control of heartaction and blood flow that astonishes physicians; they themselvesascribe their successes to regular periods of meditative effort,asserting that there is no limit to what consciousness can effectthrough the "involuntary" nervous system. In addition,creative genius has long been observed to correlate well withpsychosis, and much of the world's highest religious andphilosophic thought has come out of altered states ofconsciousness. At the very least, altered states ofconsciousness appear to have potential for strongly positivepsychic development. Most Americans do not get the chance toexploit this potential, because their society gives them nosupport. The prevailing attitude toward psychosis isrepresentative. We define this experience as a disease, compelpeople who have it to adopt the role of sick, disabled patients,and then ply them with special kinds of sedatives that we call"antipsychotic agents" but that simply make it hard forthem to think and to express their altered state of consciousnessin ways disturbing to the staffs of psychiatric hospitals. Theindividual learns from early childhood to be guilty about, orafraid of, episodes of nonordinary awareness and is forced topursue antisocial behavior patterns if he wants to continuehaving such episodes. Negative drug taking has become a popularform of this kind of behavior. I implied earlier that alcohol may not fulfillthe need for alteration of consciousness as well as other drugs.Like all psychoactive drugs, it does induce a high with positivepotential. (A vast body of prose, poetry, and song from all agestestifies to this "good side" of alcohol.) The trouble,however, is that an alcohol high is difficult to control; indrinking, one slips easily into the dose range where the effectsbecome unpleasant (nausea, dizziness, uncoordination) andinterfere with mental activity. Marijuana, on the other hand,maintains a "useful" high over an extremely wide doserange and allows a remarkable degree of control over theexperience. But, as with other drugs, set and setting determinethe effects of marijuana by interacting with the drug's pharmacologicalaction. Unfortunately, current social factors create stronglynegative sets and settings, thus increasing the likelihood thatusers will be drawn into the negative side of consciousnessalteration instead of being encouraged to explore its positivepotential. By focusing our attention on drugs rather thanon the states of consciousness people seek in them, we developnotions that lead to unwise behavior. Users who think that highscome from joints and pills rather than from their own nervoussystems get into trouble when the joints and pills no longer workso well (a universal experience among regular consumers of alldrugs) : Their drug use becomes increasingly neurotic-more andmore frequent and compulsive with less and less reward. In fact,this misconception is the initial step in the development of drugdependence, regardless of whether the drug is marijuana orheroin, whether it produces physiological dependence or not. Anddependence cannot be broken until the misconception isstraightened out, even though the physiological need isterminated. (Hence the failure of methadone to cure addicts ofbeing addicts.) By contrast, a user who realizes that he has beenusing the drug merely as a trigger or excuse for having anexperience that is a natural and potentially valuable element ofhuman consciousness comes to see that the drugged state is notexactly synonymous with the experience he wants. He begins tolook for ways to isolate the desired aspect of the chemicallyinduced state and often finds that some form of meditation willsatisfy his desire to get high more effectively. One sees a greatmany experienced drug takers give up drugs for meditation, butone does not see any meditators give up meditation for drugs.This observation has led some drug educators to hope that youngpeople can be encouraged to abandon drugs in favor of systemslike the transcendental meditation of Maharishi Mahesh. Society labors under the same delusions asdependent users. It thinks that problems come from drugs ratherthan from people. Therefore, it tries to stop people from usingdrugs or to make drugs disappear rather than to educate peopleabout the "right" use of drugs. No drug is inherentlygood or evil; all have potential for positive use, as much as fornegative use. The point is not to deny people the experience ofchemically altered consciousness but to show them how to have itin forms that are not harmful to themselves or to society. Andthe way to do that is to recognize the simple truth that theexperience comes from the mind, not from the drug. (Once you havelearned from a drug what being high really is, you can begin toreproduce such state without the drug; all persons who accomplishthis feat testify that the nonpharmacological high is superior.)Ironically, society's efforts to stop drug abuse are the veryfactors causing drug abuse. There really is no Drug Problem atall, rather a Drug-Problem Problem. And it will continue growinguntil we admit that drugs have a positive potential that can berealized. Many non-Western societies have experimentedwith this alternative. The primitive Indian tribes of the Amazonbasin, for example, make free use of drugs but have no problemsof abuse. That is, although these groups use a multitude ofhallucinogenic barks seeds, and leaves, no one takes the drugs toexpress hostility toward society, to drop out of the socialprocess, to rebel against his parents or teachers, or to hurthimself. These Indians admit that their world contains substancesthat alter consciousness; they do not try to make them go away orto prevent theiruse. They accept the fact that people, especiallychildren, seekout altered states of consciousness. And, ratherthan attempt to deny their children experiences they know to beimportant, they allow them to have them under the guidance ofexperts in such matters, usually the tribal shamans. Recognizingthat drugs have potential for harm, the shaman surrounds theiruse with ritual and conveys the rationale of this ritual to hischarges. Furthermore, the states of consciousness induced bydrugs in these remote areas are used for positive ends, and arenot just lapsed into out of boredom or frustration. Some drugsare used only by shamans, for communing with the spirit world orfor diagnosing illness; others are used by adolescents incoming-of-age rites; still others are consumed by the whole tribeas recreational intoxicants on special occasions. I am not suggesting that we return to aprimitive life in the jungle, but I do think we have much tolearn from these Amazonian peoples. One reason we are so lockedinto wrong ways of thinking about drugs is that no one can see agoal worth working for, only problems to work against. The Indianmodel is an ideal -not something to be substituted overnight forour present situation, but something to be kept in mind as thedirection to move toward. Let me list the three chief features ofthis ideal system as proposals for our own society: 1. Recognition of the importance of alteredstates of consciousness and the existence of a normal drive toexperience them. There is a considerable lack ofenlightenment in scientific circles concerning the nature ofconsciousness, in both its ordinary and its nonordinary forms,and there would doubtless be resistance from the professionalcommunity to these propositions. But, because consciousness is,above all, a matter of inner experience, most laymen are quitewilling to accept these ideas. Many adults have simply forgottentheir childhood experiences with altered states of consciousnessand recall them vividly as soon as they try to. Therefore, Ithink the possibilities for re-education are good. As thinking about drugs moves in thisdirection, society will become less and less inclined to try tofrustrate the human need for periods of altered awareness, sothat the role of the criminal law in this area should diminish.At the same time ' there may be a culmination of the presentefforts of younger scientists to bring the study of alteredstates of consciousness into the "respectable"disciplines and institutions. A very great body of informationexists on these states; it simply needs collecting and arranging,so that we can begin to correlate it with what we knowobjectively about the nervous system. 2. Provision for the experience of alteredstates of consciousness in growing children. Rather thandrive children to seek out these states surreptitiously, we mustaim to do as the Indians do: let children learn by experienceunder the watchful guidance of an elder. "Drugeducation" in the United States means thinly disguisedattempts to scare children away from drugs. True education wouldlet those who wanted to explore consciousness do so without guiltand with adult support and supervision. Such explorations shouldinclude drug experience, because drugs are legitimate tools foraltering awareness. Because they have a potential for negativeuse, they cannot be used wantonly but must be used in certainprescribed ways, at certain times, and for certain purposes.Thus, we must develop a "ritual" for drug experienceanalogous to the Indian tribal rituals. We will also need analogsof the shamans-persons who, by virtue of their own experiencewith altered states of consciousness, are qualified to supervisethe education of the young. 3. Incorporation of the experience intosociety for positive ends. It is not enough that we come totolerate alterations of consciousness. We must put them to usefor the good of individuals and society. We have come to think ofdrug experience as an escape from reality; but, if it is so inour society, we have made it so. People who can openly andpurposefully spend time away from ordinary consciousness seemsuperior when they function in ordinary consciousness.They are healthier, both physically and mentally; they lead moreproductive lives; and they can become numerous enough toconstitute a great natural resource in any society. In addition,they may be utilizing their nervous systems to their fullestpotentials goal most of us are far from reaching. To these three aims, I would add a fourth, notderived from the Indian pattern: 4. Encouragement of individuals to satisfytheir needs for altered consciousness by means that do notrequire external tools. Any tools used to alterconsciousness-not just drugs-tend to cause dependence, becausethey delude people into believing that the experience comes fromthem rather than involuntarily from within the mind. To guardagainst this tendency, therefore, we must educate people and nottry to do away with the tools. Our goal should be to train peopleto live safely in a world where there are things with potentialfor both harm and good, to show them that inimical forces can bechanged into friendly ones. To do this, we should not try toshield young people from things that may harm them; they mustlearn by experience. Perhaps it is possible to convinceadolescents that meditation is better than drugs as an approachto altered consciousness, but they will not believe it unlessthey have been through drug experience and seen its limitationsfor themselves. I will conclude by affirming my belief thatthis system is a real possibility and not a hopeless,unattainable ideal. As such, it is well worth working toward. Thefirst step need be nothing more than to stop what we are nowdoing to prevent us from reaching the goal. And that is nearlyeverything we are doing in the name of combating drug abuse. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT01-B32-7IA031-000652-B045-65http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131505 text/html 126734HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:14:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:28 GMTContent-length: 126515 Narcotics Addiction and Control in Great Britain Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 7 Narcotics Addiction and Control inGreat Britain by Edgar May Background * The Clinics * Law Enforcement *Research * The Statistics * Results * Personal Observations After a decade of spiraling narcoticsaddiction in England, the trend was reversed in 1970. The British narcotics problem admittedly isminor when compared with that of the United States. England hadnever counted more than 3,000 narcotics addicts; estimates in theUnited States range from 150,000 to 250,000. However, whileAmerican drug experts warn of a continuously growing number ofaddicts, Britain's Home Office recently reported a drop of almost8 per cent, the first since the drug problem became a seriousnational concern. The slowdown had already begun in 1969, whenthe annual increase of addicts was held to a trickle, one yearafter the government tightened its narcotics policies by limitingthe prescribing of heroin to staff physicians of government-rundrug clinics. Previously, any general physician was permitted toprescribe heroin. Until the clinic system had been operating fora year, the number of narcotics addicts in England doubled every-sixteen months. The reversal of this trend has been accompaniedby a significant drop in new addicts. In 1968, a total of 1,476previously unknown cases were reported. In 1969, the figure was1,030, and by 1970 it had dropped to 711. These encouraging figures, however, concernonly a part of the British drug-abuse problem, albeit thetoughest and the one over which there is the most public concern.But addicts and abusers of amphetamines and barbiturates are notincluded in this count. Furthermore, there is a far greater andincreasing army of marijuana and hashish users, for which thereis no accurate tally. But, while the latest statistics may give theEnglish drug scene a more optimistic appearance than it deserves,the bizarre anecdotes that have been published in both theEnglish and American press may have colored the past picture withmore despair than is justified. In the twitching kaleidoscope that isPicadilly Circus, the scene is as harsh and distorted as theelectric letters that flash their spasmodic messages from highabout the throng. The pallid young addicts, staggering out ofdoorways to panhandle enough for a fix, casting furtive glancesat passersby while pills or other drugs are exchanged . . . a jabof a needle in the toilet of the Underground ... a hypodermicprotruding between the toes of a grimy, infected foot . . . aspurt of fresh blood on a soiled shirt . . . a young girlcollapsing in a doorway after taking a barbiturate injection.It's all there and more. These scenes may have become part of thetourist attractions of London's Times Square, but they don'treflect accurately the addiction problem in England. Although itis risky to offer findings in the complex and often-disputedfield of drug addiction, some basic trends are clear: Heroin addiction is no longer the major"hard" drug problem in England. The rising tide of newheroin addicts has been stopped and, in fact, has significantlyreceded. The quantity of heroin prescribed in government clinicscontinues to decline. Methadone is the most frequently used drugin England today and is replacing heroin. But the drop in heroinis not fully matched by the rise in methadone. New addicts tendto be addicted to methadone rather than heroin, but the number ofnewcomers addicted to anything is smaller than in previous years. Methadone maintenance generally is notpracticed in England as it is in the United States, in that farmore English addicts inject methadone than take it orally. British hard-drug users often are polyaddicts,injecting a variety of drugs, obtained both legally andillegally. The most recent craze is the injection ofbarbiturates, a particularly damaging habit that has raised theconcerns of all those working in the British drug field. Although the backbone of the English drugprogram is the government-sponsored clinic, where addicts obtainfree drugs, the phrase "British clinic system" ismisleading. There is very little system to the clinics beyond thefact that they all prescribe narcotics. Clinics vary widely inservices offered, treatment approach, staff, and facilities.Nevertheless, the clinics are credited widely with curbing theheroin problem, while the degree of their contribution to theproblem of methadone addiction is debated. Furthermore, clinicsare considered to have had an impact on improving the totalhard-drug picture, but evidence for this generally is subjectiverather than objective and statistical. Although there is some black-market activityin all drugs, it appears to be on neither a major nor a veryprofessional scale. No one interviewed claimed that there was avast, hidden opiate-addict population supplying itself from theblack market. No one in England saw any correlation betweendrug addiction and a rise in crime. Finally, the commonly held view in the UnitedStates that heroin addiction automatically turns the user into acompletely antisocial, unproductive misfit is simply not sharedin England. Many English addicts hold regular jobs. Estimates ofemployment of all known addicts range from 40 to 50 per cent. But perhaps to find the most glaringdifference between the two countries, you have to go back to thehurlyburly of Picadilly Circus. There, in a locked cabinet on amedicine shelf at Boots the Chemist, which attracts adisproportionate number of addicts because it is open all night,you can find heroin tablets in small bottles. A printed-in-redretail price list says: Heroin 100 tablets 18 S. At the 1970 rate of exchange, this is $2.16.On New York's streets, the retail price for the same amount ofheroin can run as high as $1,000. BACKGROUND Unlike the United States, England hasconsistently treated drug addiction as a medical problem. Evenwhile moving toward more restrictive policies in the drug-abusefield, the nation has never wavered from this medical point ofview. "The addict should be regarded as a sick person, heshould be treated as such and not as a criminal, provided that hedoes not resort to criminal acts,"' said the BrainCommittee, which formulated the first significant changes in thecountry's drug laws seven years ago. Hard-drug abuse in England, also unlike theUnited States, became a problem only in the last ten years or so,as Table 7-1 clearly indicates. In 1954, the first yearnationwide heroin statistics were available, there were only 54identified heroin addicts. The majority of the 335 known drugaddicts that year, a total of 179, were addicted to morphine, andmost were women. Also, the majority of these addicts had becomeaddicted after receiving a narcotic to relieve pain related to alengthy illness. Among the few nontherapeutic addicts, a highproportion were doctors and nurses 'who had experimented withnarcotics and subsequently became hooked. Today, of course, the numbers, the reasons foraddiction, and the average addict age (see Table 7-2) haveall changed. For example, only 2 per cent of the reportedaddicts in 1968 were classified as therapeutic. Among heroinaddicts that year, 32 per cent were under twenty years ofage. Men outnumbered women by more than 3 to 1. TABLE 7-1 NUMBER OF KNOWN ADDICTS, SEX, AND DRUGS USED Number SexDrugs used* Year Of known Meth-Mor- Co- Peth- addicts MF Heroin adone phinecaine idine 1945 367 144223 1950 306 158148 1955 335 159176 54 21 179 6 64 1960 437 195242 94 68 177 52 98 1961 470 223247 132 59 168 84 105 1962 532 262270 175 54 157 112 112 1963 635 339296 237 55 172 171 107 1964 753 409344 342 61 162 211 128 1965 927 558369 521 72 160 311 102 1966 1,349886 463 899 156 178 443131 1967 117291,262 467 11299 243 158 462112 1968 2,7822,161 621 21240 486 198 564120 1969 2,88121295 586 1 @417 11687 345 311128 1970 2fi6l2,071 590 914 1,820 346 198122 * Alone or in combination with other drugs. SOURCE: Drugs Branch,Home Office. England differs from the United States againin that its addicts today are not as a rule from disadvantagedfamilies, are not members of minority groups, and do not"turn on" to blot out the economic dispair of theghetto. "On the contrary," says Dr. David V.Hawks, a key staff member of the Addiction Research Unitof London's Institute of Psychiatry; "those notified in the1960's were often construed as 'middle class dropouts' whoseaddiction, far from being explicable in terms of some materialdisadvantage, appears to have been motivated by the deliberaterejection of middle-class norms and opportunities." TABLE 7-2 AGES OF ADDICTS KNOWN TO THE HOMEOFFICE 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 Under20 All drugs - 1 2 3 17 40 145 329 395 764 637 405 Heroin* - 1 2 3 17 40 134 317 381 709 598 365 20-34 All drugs 50 62 94 132 184 257 347 558 906 1,530 1,789 1,813 Heroin 35 52 87 126 162 219 319 479 827 1,390 1,709 1,705 35-49 All drugs 92 91 95 107 128 138 134 162 142 146 174 158 Heroin 7 14 19 24 38 61 52 83 66 78 101 95 50 and over Alldrugs 278 267 272 274 298 311 291 286 279 260 241 253 Heroin 26 27 24 22 20 22 16 20 24 20 46 50 Age unknown Alldrugs 34 16 7 16 8 7 10 14 7 82 40 32 Heroin 1 43 26 18 * Beginning with 1969, this figure includesaddicts to heroin and/or methadone. SOURCE: Drugs Branch, Home Office. This does not mean that the poor have escapedheroin addiction. They have not. But they aren't-by any count-inthe majority. The basic guidelines for Britain's drug-abusepolicy were established in 1926, a dozen years after Americapassed the Harrison Act, which set the stage for the U.S.addict-criminal doctrine. A committee chaired by Sir HumphreyRolleston, a prominent English physician, turned the problem overto doctors and steered it away from the police. The Rollestoncommittee said that doctors should be allowed to prescribenarcotics to wean patients off these drugs, to relieve pain aftera prolonged cure had failed, and in cases where small dosesenabled otherwise helpless patients to perform useful tasks andlead relatively normal lives. The Rolleston Committee's findings were thebasis of British drug policy for almost forty years. They werereaffirmed in general in 1961 by the Interdepartmental Committeeon Drug Addiction, chaired by Sir Russell Brain. However, theaddiction statistics began to move upward, the Brain Committeewas reconvened, and a second report was issued on July 31, 1965.It recommended the first significant restrictions on theprescribing of heroin and cocaine. The report succinctly stated the motivationand fears behind England's drug policies and their sharpdifferences with those of the United States: We have borne in mind the dilemma which faces the authorities responsible for the control of dangerous drugs in this country. If there is insufficient control it may lead to the spread of addictionas is happening at present. If, on the other hand, the restrictions are so severe as to prevent or seriously discourage the addict from obtaining any supplies from legitimate sources, [they] may lead to the development of an organized illicit traffic. The absence hitherto of such an organized illicit traffic has been attributed largely to the fact that an addict has been able to obtain supplies of drugs legally. But this facility has now been abused, with the result that addiction has increased. The Brain Committee recommended the followingchanges: 1. "All addicts to dangerous drugs should be notified to a central authority." (This authority later became the Chief Medical Officer of the Home Office.) 2. "To treat addicts a number of special treatment centers should be established, especially in the London area." 3. "There should be powers for compulsory detention of addicts in these centers." (This recommendation later was rejected by the Minister of Health.) 4. "The prescribing of heroin and cocaine to addicts should be limited to doctors on the staff of these treatment centers." 5. "It should be a statutory offence for other doctors to prescribe heroin and cocaine to an addict." The government accepted these recommendationsand incorporated them in the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1967. InFebruary, 1968, the compulsory notification of addicts went intoeffect. By April of that year, heroin and cocaine prescribing wasrestricted to doctors in the newly created treatment centers. During the almost three years that passedbetween the committee's report and the effective date of itsrecommendations, harddrug addiction soared. From 1964, the latestyear for which a full year's statistics were available to thecommittee, to 1967, heroin addicts alone increased fourfold, from342 to 1,299. A year later, the heroin-addict figure reached2,240. The committee's concern that"insufficient control may lead to the spread ofaddiction" was more than confirmed. Although it is unjust toblame the British medical profession alone for the sharp rise inaddiction, the fact is that general over-prescribing and theactivities of a few medical charlatans fueled the craving forheroin. Some addicts were receiving prescriptions fromgeneral practitioners for as much as 20 or more grains of heroina day (1,200 milligrams). Very few addicts used that amountthemselves (a dosage, incidentally, that would kill almost anyAmerican adult). Most beneficiaries of overprescribing doctorssold their surplus and, of course, addicted others. What issurprising is that the Disciplinary Committee of the GeneralMedical Council, the policing arm of the British medicalprofession, permitted this situation to continue as long at itdid. The problem of overprescribing doctors, withstrong hints that their conduct was ethically questionable, wasdiscussed in print as early as 1965 in the public report of theBrain Committee: From the evidence before us we have been led to the conclusion that the major source of supply has been the activity of a very few doctors who have prescribed excessively for addicts. Thus we were informed that in 1962 one doctor alone prescribed almost 600,000 tablets (6 million milligrams or 6 kilos) of heroin for addicts .3 The same doctor, on one occasion, prescribed 900 tablets (9,000 milligrams) of heroin to one addict and three days later prescribed for the same patient another 600 tablets (6,000 milligrams) "to replace pills lost in an accident." Two doctors each issued a single prescription for 1,000 tablets (10,000 milligrams). Overprescribing was so extensive during theyears after the Brain Committee report and before the opening ofthe clinics that pure, British-manufactured heroin was readilyand relatively inexpensively available on the black market, whereimported, illicit heroin was virtually unknown. While prices forall consumer products rose during this period, black-marketheroin-the overprescribed surplus-held the line against inflationand stayed at one pound sterling a grain. This meant that, for$2.40 a day, an addict could support a heroin habit. (Today,incidentally, British manufactured heroin is both relativelyscarce and expensive on the black market, with a sixfold increaseto six pounds, or $14.40 a grain.) One psychiatrist, reviewing the yearsimmediately preceding the opening of the clinics, felt thatgeneral practitioners were overprescribing to such an extentthat, for every two addicts receiving prescriptions, at least oneother was maintaining his habit from these supplies. Anotherpsychiatrist believed that about a third of the reported addictswere not bona fide addicts at all but were merely sometimeheroin users who conned doctors into issuing regularprescriptions that they would then sell. But a few doctors clearly had not beensweet-talked by addicts into writing too-generous prescriptions.They had purposely turned the narcotics problem into a lucrativeenterprise with the simple stroke of a pen. They wroteprescriptions for pay-at a going rate of one pound to two poundsper script. These were the junkie doctors whose names can befound in almost every London clinic's case records. One of them, a dermatologist with a passionfor gambling, ended his prescribing days issuing orders from ataxi parked in front of the Baker Street Tube Station. He wasnabbed on a technicality-failing to keep proper narcoticsrecords-spent a short period in jail, and finally had his licenseto practice revoked by the General Medical Council after numerouscomplaints of his activities from druggists and Home Officeofficials. Another was reported to have issued prescriptions to140 addicts with a daily average of 6 to 8 grains at the heightof his narcotics enterprise. He is also without a medical licensetoday. He went to jail for conspiracy to commit murder. While no one knowledgeable about the Englishdrug scene will say that the nation would not have had ahard-drug problem had it not been for overprescribing doctors andoutright charlatans, there is consensus that overgenerousprescriptions, whatever the doctor's motivation, helpedsignificantly to create the chaotic drug scene that thegovernment clinic program was expected to remedy. THE CLINICS In 1970, a monthly average of 1,154 drugaddicts obtained government-paid-for heroin and/or methadone anda little cocaine from clinics scattered throughout England andWales. Recently, the clinic figures have remained relativelystable, fluctuating by fewer than 100 addicts every month. Thenumber of new addicts registered with clinics dropped from amonthly average of 66 to 41 in 1971. (See Table 7-3.) Nevertheless, it is risky to conclude thatthis relative stability in clinic enrollment reflects containmentof drug addiction in England. Some clinics appear to have set aquota of addicts and simply do not accept, or cannot accept, morebecause of staff or facility limitations.The slow reduction in new addicts, however, is a hopeful sign. There are 14 clinics in London, which has fourfifths of the country's addicts. Elsewhere, an addict may obtaindrugs at 13 special facilities or at some 42 hospital outpatientdepartments These are prepared to service an occasional addict aspart of their regular outpatient program. The special clinics vary in every conceivableway-in type of facility, size of patientload, size of staff, treatment approach, and prescribingphilosophy. There is no central authority over the clinics toprovide specific guidelines for staffing or determine treatmentor prescribing policies. Because of this, it is a mistake torefer to the English "drug clinic system." There is nocommon "system" beyond the fact that addicts may obtainheroin and methadone from government-supported clinics. Each clinic director is doing "his ownthing," based on his own particular approach to drugaddiction. He works with the facility, staff, and budget he wasable to get from his own hospital and Regional Hospital Board,the governing body that supervises medical care for a given area. These various approaches have not beenevaluated comparatively for cost or effectiveness. The addicts,however, are usually in agreement about which are the"best" clinics in a less than scientific rating system,which might be called the "Santa Claus" scale. It rankscandidates on their drug-prescribing generosity. The lack of central direction is the resultnot of careless management but rather of design. Americans oftenhave the impression that the British National Health Service is amonolith that dictates everything from aspirin dispensing toappendix removing, but the fact is that the government's Ministryof Health has approached physicians both within and outside ofthe National Health Service with the circumspection of animpresario dealing with a diva. After the government accepted most of thesecond Brain Committee recommendations and prepared the necessarylegislation to implement them, the Department of Health andSocial Security issued a memorandum to Regional Hospital Boardsand hospital governing groups.' The Ministry directed its memoparticularly at mental hospitals and psychiatric departments ofgeneral hospitals. As a result, today the clinic directors arepsychiatrists, most of whom follow a general psychiatric practicein addition to their interests in the drug field. The Health Department memorandum included alist of the known addicts in each Regional Hospital area. Sincemost addicts were in the London area, it asked city hospitalswith psychiatric departments to plan for drug clinics. At thesame time, the Health Department asked hospitals to set upinpatient beds for withdrawal treatment and to assess addicts whowould obtain their drugs as outpatients for the required dosage.Today most clinics have such beds available to them.Significantly, the "how" of operating clinicswas not described. The decision to supply an addict with drugsand whether to seek to substitute other drugs, the assessment ofdosage, and the method of supply rest with the clinician. It isto be expected, however, that where possible, the dosage will bedetermined by assessment during inpatient observation and thatthis will usually be offered, though continued treatment cannotbe made conditional on acceptance. [This in-hospital assessmentis rarely done today, and it is clear that most clinic directorsreject this Health Department "expectation."] Theorganization of services will depend on the method of supplyingdrugs that is adopted by clinicians. It is, however, desirable inany area that there should be a fairly uniform approach;otherwise, the organization of services and the sharing of theload will be obstructed because addicts will gravitate to thoseclinics where they think drugs are easiest to get. While directadministration of drugs by the medical staff of the treatmentcenter is not excluded, supply by the hospital or by retailprescription is likely to be more generally practicable. The clinics have certain statistical reportingobligations, both to the Health Department and the Home Office.There is an exchange of views and information among clinicdirectors and other medical staff members at periodic meetingscalled by the Health Department. A department official told methat these meetings generally are held every two months, but therecords show that such sessions are usually held on an irregularbasis. Minutes of the meetings indicate that not all clinics arerepresented at every meeting and not every clinic directorattends regularly. FACILITIES The differences between clinics is apparentfrom inspection of their physical facilities. In the naval-basecity of Portsmouth, the clinic is in a large general hospitaltucked behind a door marked "Dental Waiting Room." InEast London, the center is in its own building on the grounds ofa mental hospital. In the Denmark Hill area, it is part of thehospital's general outpatient department. If you visit St. Giles Clinic in the Church ofEngland Community Center, you are reminded of an Alec Guinnessmovie. Dr. James H. Willis, a young psychiatrist, holds courtresplendent in a white medical coat, seated behind a large woodentable in a room marked "Lecture Hall." He is flanked bytwo pianos and a bass fiddle. Above and behind his head, a brassplaque reads: "The trustees of St. Giles Center gratefullyacknowledge the generous support given by the Rotary Club ofCamberwell." It is doubtful that the Rotarians would rushto support the effort now going on in the lecture hall. It islack of such support that has prevented Dr. Willis from using anew $192,000 building specifically constructed for his drugclinic by the two hospitals and the Regional Hospital Boardsponsoring it. The building, which includes eight single roomsfor inpatient assessment, stood empty for more than a year afterit was completed. Public protest -exploited by localpoliticians-forced the hospital to rescind its decision to bringyoung addicts into the middle-class neighborhood of St. Giles. In his churchly retreat, Dr. Willis has nofacilities even for basic medical examinations, and patientsleave urine specimens in the center's men's room. STAFFING A most basic difference among clinics is inthe kind and size of staff that operate them. One of the mostsignificant contrasts is between St. Clement and Lambeth HospitalClinics. The staffing patterns are as follows: LAMBETH (96active patients) Doctors: 1 31/2 days a week 1 21/2 days a week I 1 1/2 days a week Social worker: 1 21/2 days a week Nurse: 1 full time Secretary: 1 ST. CLEMENT (71active patients) Doctors: 1 full time 1 1 1/2 days a week I psychiatric intern 1 1/2days a week Social workers: 2 full time Nurses: 10 full time Secretary: 1 The nurses at St. Clement function like socialworkers: they counsel patients and make home calls both topatients and to their families, relatives, or close friends. The Lambeth Clinic, run by Dr. Thomas H.Bewley, a wellknown author of medical articles on the Englishdrug scene, is far closer to the English clinic prototype. The besieged Dr. Willis at St. Giles,incidentally, was even worse off when it came to staffing. With75 active patients and 64 inactive patients, the clinic includedthree doctors, two full time and another one-third time. Althoughthere were two slots for social workers, both were temporarilyempty. Dr. Willis has no nursing help. His only other assistancecomes from a secretary and a hospital porter, who acts asfactotum around his piano-flanked emporium. St. Clement, in terms of staff time for theaddict, is clearly exceptional. It was originally intended as aday hospital where an addict would come for the entire day,returning to his home only at night. The original staffingpattern was retained when the clinic was turned into what can bedescribed more accurately as a day center that addicts of theclinic may or may not attend. There is a ping-pong table, artclasses, and a "fixing room" where addicts can injectthemselves. Individual and group therapy sessions also are heldin the day center. Among all London clinics, the amount ofsocial-work time provided to addicts varies from 475 hours perweek (St. Clement) to none, according to a questionnaire filledout by the clinics themselves. Because of the difference in staff timebetween St. Clement and Lambeth, the addict's relationship tothese clinics is vastly different. At St. Clement, each socialworker and nurse has about ten cases. They know each addict byhis first name, and the easy, relaxed relationship that comeswith familiarity is evident. One addict, for example, came in toshow his nurse pictures of his recent wedding and to thank herfor her congratulatory telegram. At Lambeth, the lone social worker, whoprovides twenty hours a week, has a caseload of 30 addicts out ofthe 96 active with the clinic. Of the 30, she estimated that shehas what she called "a deep relationship" with ahalf dozen. "They get a good half hour a week." Of the clinic's work, she said: "We'recontaining it, regularizing it a bit; but, we're not treating it.I think I do first aid a lot." At St. Clement, staff members were slightly,but not much, more encouraging. Not only did this clinicrepresent the most concentrated staff effort with addicts, butits patients resemble American ghetto addicts more closely thanany other London group. St. Clement is a 128-bed mental hospital inEast London, an area that in terms of income and class-but notcolor-can be compared to New York's Harlem or Bedford-Stuyvesant.The addiction clinic of St. Clement serves patients from thesurrounding neighborhoods, the bleak row houses that bring tomind a Charles Dickens novel. Eighty per cent of St. Clement'saddiction clinic customers are East End boys; the other 20 percent come from the far more affluent middle- and upper-class WestEnd. While an estimated 10 per cent of the East Endpopulation is colored (i.e., Negro, Indian, Pakistani), only oneof the clinic's 100 patients is half-Negro. This appears toreflect accurately the fact that in England few"colored" are involved with narcotic drugs. The clinic is located on the hospital groundsin a separate pre-fah building constructed especially for thisuse at a cost of 14,000 pounds, or $33,600. The annual operatingcost for salaries and drugs is estimated by its director to beabout the same amount. Psychiatrist John Denham is both clinicdirector and head of the St. Clement Hospital. Much of theday-to-day operation of the clinic fell on Dr. Margaret Tripp,the full-time psychiatrist who served at the clinic from thesummer of 1968, when it opened, to 1971. Neither Dr. Denham nor Dr. Tripp makes anygrand claims for the clinic, even though they, and it, havereceived considerable publicity in U.S. media (Look magazine,various television and radio networks). Dr. Denham has a thickfile of letters in response to this publicity requestingpermission to visit and interview him. He does not trade on thisnotoriety. As is true of virtually all other clinics, St.Clement's heroin dispensing is dropping monthly-from 214 grams inMarch, 1969, to 73 grams in May, 1970. Methadone, both ampoulesfor injection and oral, has increased at St. Clement, but not inproportion to the drop in heroin. Dr. Denham attributes thisheroin reduction to the use of methadone, to more conservativeprescribing, and to greater expertise among clinic doctors. Hereadily admits to the confusion that apparently hit every clinicin the opening period of 1968. "A drug addict presentedhimself and said he needed six grains of heroin a day. We knew hecould do with two, but that he would settle for four. It was ashaphazard as that.29 The same kind of candor is evident in a paperpublished by Dr. P. H. Connell, another of the early pioneers indrug-addiction control in England.' Reporting on 107 narcoticsusers attending a London clinic between March, 1968, andFebruary, 1969, Dr. Connell acknowledged that some of thesepatients had become addicted to drugs by the clinic. REGISTRATION How do you begin obtaining free drugs? Some of the addicts interviewed are convincedit is getting harder to get on the rolls. Some say that, for anew addict to get on, be has to buy black-market narcotics for awhile and then show wicked withdrawal symptoms. Doctors discount the severity of thesestatements but acknowledge that they are getting moreconservative. Interclinic monthly heroin and methadoneprescription quantities are distributed among the clinics, andthis may have developed a touch of competition to stay in therange of low prescribers. At St. Clement, for example, a monthlygraph is kept showing its standing against the all-Londonaverage. Doctors agree that identifying an addict andprescribing the correct quantity of drugs is the toughest part oftheir jobs. They use words like "haggling" and"bargaining" sessions to describe the difficulties ofdeciding how much an addict should receive. The Health Department's suggestion ofin-hospital assessment before prescribing to addicts generally isnot part of the procedures of the London clinics. An occasionalapplicant may be sent for observation for several days, but thisis the exception and not the rule. In Portsmouth, however, Dr. Ian Christie willnot accept a new patient unless he agrees to three days ofhospitalization to determine the kind and size of his habit, or,for that matter, if indeed he has one. In London, addicts arriving at a clinic forthe first time, or to reapply, usually are given at least twointerviews. The first may be with a nurse or social worker andthe second with a clinic psychiatrist. After acceptance, addictsgenerally report once every week to their psychiatrist or socialworker. Some are requested to come in several times a week, whileothers, who may be more stable, are permitted to report every twoweeks. Before acceptance, one, and sometimes several,urine tests are scheduled, usually two or more days apart.Drug-positive urine tests play a key role in the decision-makingprocess. Urine tests, incidentally, are not regularlyscheduled for every addict after he has been accepted by aclinic. Their frequency varies from clinic to clinic. At St.Giles, Dr. Willis formerly demanded only sporadic urine tests.Now, however, every patient gives a sample at each clinic visit.In other clinics, it appears that tests are made when there issome suspicion of other than clinic-prescribed drug use. A key step in the preacceptance interviewprocedure is the completion of a form outlining the addict'sbiography, his drug history, and his physical characteristics.This is sent to the Home Office, where it is compared with themaster list of registered addicts. The procedure helps toidentify previously unknown addicts and to prevent duplicateregistering at two or more clinics. Have addicts succeeded in getting on the rollsof two different clinics? Yes, but how many or how often isdifficult to document. At St. Clement, Dr. Denham does notremember a case where the Home Office check produced duplicateregistration. However, he does recall an incident indicating thatthe problem is real. Not long after the clinic opened, a boy,while stoned, told his fellow addicts that he was obtaining drugsfrom two clinics. This came to the attention of the staff, and anurse was sent to the clinic closest to St. Clement. Sevenaddicts were identified as St. Clement boys and five othersconfessed to duplicate registration. At the time, thisrepresented 12 per cent of the St. Clement caseload. "Did that surprise you?" I asked Dr.Denham. "At the time, it annoyed me." Dr. Connell, in his study of 107 drug users,also found that four had been attending other clinics, where theyrequested help without, of course, acknowledging the duplication. From observation, it appeared that a seasonedaddict with a long Home Office or clinic record, or both, hadmuch less difficulty in re-registering at a clinic than aprevious "unknown." Dr. Bewley permitted me to sit inon a series of interviews with addicts applying to the Lambethclinic. All had been previously interviewed by the clinic'spart-time psychiatrists, who also sat in on these secondinterviews. My notes for this session are as follows: 1. Male, out of prison since May 1. Was withLambeth a year ago, had received 200 mg. daily of heroin andmethadone; long criminal record, most recent possession ofburglar tools, cannabis; told to return for urine test.Dr. Bewley indicated he probably will be reregistered with 20 mg.methadone a day as starter. 2. Male, long criminal record, now underthree-year suspended sentence; long drug history, longest periodoff drugs was six weeks; told to come back for urine test. Dr.Bewley indicated he probably will be put on clinic rolls. 3. Male, 23, in and out of series of buildingindustry jobs; said he started with drugs at 16, shooting heroinand methadone at 20; said now buying six ampoules of methadone aday on black market at $1.20 per ampoule or $7.20 for day'ssupply; no criminal record; first urine test showed methadone;told to come back after weekend for another urine test. Bewleyestimated there was a 50-50 chance he would not be back. If hecomes and test is positive, he probably will be accepted. Dr. Connell, in his study of the previouslycited 107 drug users at a London Clinic, found a large dropoutrate between urine tests. "Refusal to prescribe at firstattendance, whilst awaiting results of urinalysis, led to a highincidence of failed reattendance. Thus 92 per cent prescribedheroin reattended, whilst only 35 per cent prescribed no drugsreturned." This was true, even though 22 out of 36 who hadbeen given no drugs had positive urine tests. This led Dr. Connell to conclude: "Inview of the essential need for accurate diagnosis, it seemsinescapable that a prescribing method of management should not beadopted until firm evidence of daily use is obtained by, say,three consecutive positive urines collected on different days andover a period of ten days or more to take into account the factthat methadone is excreted more slowly than morphine." 4. Female, 23, no previous history withclinic; arrested four times, shoplifting, abuse of floor walker;said she was taking 130 mg. heroin daily obtained from blackmarket. She was turned down. The psychiatrist who first interviewed thegirl acknowledged, as did Dr. Bewley, that much of thisdecision-making process is guesswork. Will this girl now go outand steal enough merchandise to fuel what may be a drug habit?Will she overshoot herself to convince Lambeth or another clinicthat she really is addicted? No one could answer these questions. DRUG DISPENSING None of the London addicts receives his drugsfrom the medical staff in the clinics. Rather, a prescription ismailed directly to the druggist of theaddict's choice. Only on rare occasions does the addict receive aprescription personally-for example, if it is clear that the postoffice cannot deliver it in time to fill an immediate need. Each prescription form is filled out by theclinic physician, generally for a week's supply. Prescriptionblanks are kept under lock and key, for there is a black-marketprice on blank National Health Service prescription forms. Although a week's order may be on oneprescription, the addict must collect his supplies from thedruggist daily. On Saturday, he generally receives two days'supply because of Sunday closing. Black-market prices for drugs,incidentally, are highest on Sundays, because of weekend demandsby occasional users and addicts who have shot up their two-daysupply on Saturday. Drugstores are monitored periodically by thepolice. However, these reviews generally are confined to thelarger distributors of drugs. The Scotland Yard Drug Squad hasfour detectives specifically assigned to inspecting drugstores. Drugstores keep detailed records of bothincoming and outgoing drugs. I examined this procedure in BootsPicadilly, the all-night drugstore in London's famed square.Dangerous drugs are kept in a special locked cabinet. Eachprescription is double checked and, of course, recorded. Onepharmacist will make up the order and initial the package, whichis checked by a second pharmacist. This particular store served36 addicts daily at the time of this review. Retail prices are standardized. Heroin is abargain compared with the various forms of methadone. The 1970retail prices were as follows: Heroin 100 tablets (10 mg. each) 1000 mg.$2.16 Methadone 100 ampoules (10 mg. each) 1000 mg.7.50 Methadone linctus (syrup) 5 bottles (200 mg.each) 1000 mg. 7.80 Since addicts come under National HealthService coverage, the drugs are free except for a small-25cents-weekly service charge. Disposable needles and syringes areprovided directly to addicts by some clinics or are supplied bythe drugstore. I was able to locate only two clinics inEngland that provide drugs administered directly by the staff.These are in Southampton and Portsmouth. I visited the Portsmouthclinic, directed by Dr. Ian Christie, in St. James Hospital.Because of the small number of patients, significant conclusionscannot be drawn from the in-clinic, drug-administering approachat this hospital. Seven addicts, six receiving methadone and oneheroin, come to the clinic twice a day for their injections.These are given by hospital nurses in early-morning andlate-afternoon sessions in the hospital's dental department.Injections are given in the deltoid muscle. The methadone addictsI interviewed said that they do not get a "flash" fromthe methadone intramuscular injection as they did from heroinwhen they administered it intravenously themselves in preclinicdays. Although all addicts mentioned theinconvenience of coming twice a day to the hospital-which is notcentrally located-only one complained vociferously about it. Hesaid he had to take a cab from work daily in order not to misshis second injection, at the 5:15 afternoon clinic. His employerwas unaware of his addiction and, he said, probably would firehim if he found out. In addition to the twice-daily clinicpatients, Dr. Christie has four others receiving methadonelinctus which he provides via prescription and two heroinaddicts-a husband and wife with a long history of addiction-whoalso receive prescriptions and administer the drug themselves."This probably was a mistake," Christie said. None of those receiving any drug is providedwith any rehabilitation services. "if they chose drugs, theyget drugs," Dr. Christie said. He gives each addict alternatives: hospitalin-patient withdrawal ("Everyone who has tried that methodhas relapsed"); in-hospital assessment with subsequentin-clinic daily drug taking; and, finally, entry into atherapeutic community, called the Alpha Unit. PRESCRIPTION TRENDS Since the clinics began operating in 1968, thequantity of heroin used by English addicts has been greatlyreduced. In the clinics, the monthly total grams of heroin havedropped from 2,177 in January, 1969, to 1,131 in December, 1970(see Table 7-4). Furthermore, while in 1968 the vast majorityof English addicts were taking heroin, today the majority aretaking methadone alone or in combination with heroin. Whateverthe opiate, the daily amount each addict takes is generallysignificantly less than the preclinic daily quantity. Statistics show that only 10 per cent, or 140,of all known addicts receiving opiates were receiving heroinalone on December 31, 1970. However, this may be somewhatmisleading, not only because the reporting procedure may be lessthan perfect, but because prescribing physicians frequentlychange both the quantity and the kind of drug prescribed. It is important to remember that methadone inEngland most frequently is provided for intravenous injection (asis heroin), and not for oral consumption, as is common in theUnited States. More than twice as much methadone is prescribedfor injection as orally. Most important, injected methadone has agood "rush" -oral methadone does not. Most clinics have adopted the policy of movingfrom heroin to methadone. Often, this is done gradually by givinga combination of heroin and methadone for a certain period andthen shifting to methadone only. Finally, an attempt is made toshift to oral or linctus methadone. Psychiatrists agree that thehardest task beyond total drug abstention-is to convince theaddict to give up the needle. This prescribing trend is reflected in theindividual clinics. Here are some samples: Larnbeth-8 on heroin alone, 12 on methadoneand heroin, 76 on methadone alone St. Clement-36 on methadone and heroin, 35 onmethadone St. Giles-54 on heroin or methadone andheroin, 1 1 on methadone for injection, 10 on methadone oral Charing Cross-2 on heroin, 10 on methadone andheroin, 45 on methadone for injection, 33 on methadone oral Portsmouth-3 on heroin only, 6 on methadonefor injection, 4 on methadone oral The shift from heroin to methadone is furtherindicated by the fact that clinics today infrequently interview anew heroin addict. The head nurse of the largest London clinic,Charing Cross, could not recall the last time a new heroin addicthad been interviewed; all the new cases were methadone addicts.In Portsmouth, Dr. Christie said, no one addicted to heroin hadapplied for help in the previous year; all the newcomers weremethadone addicts. METHADONE MAINTENANCE Directors of government clinics do notpractice the Dole Nyswander methadone-maintenance technique,emphasizing blocking the effect of heroin. Significantly, fourclinic directors expressed doubts about the effectiveness of theblocking method. Dr. Christie, for example, believes thatmethadone blocks heroin in American addicts because they areaccustomed to receive low and diluted doses of the latter drug."When an addict takes only four or five $5 bags a day, whichdon't contain more than 20 milligrams of heroin, then itworks." The others agreed that an addict who takes largedoses of heroin daily cannot be blocked with methadone. However, a private London clinic, run by Dr.Peter A. L. Chapple, has experimented with themethadone-maintenance approach known in the United States. Thisis the National Addiction and Research Institute, which has atleast as many active patients as the biggest government clinic.Dr. Chapple prescribes only oral methadone. He is not licensed toprescribe heroin in his clinic, and he is opposed to prescribingmethadone for injection because it perpetuates the needle cult.In 1969, he prescribed oral methadone to 106 patients, 70 percent of whom were receiving blocking dosages (between 100 and 200milligrams a day). There are no scientific data availableindicating whether these addicts actually were blocked from theeffect of heroin. Recently, however, Dr. Chapple said that he hasbeen trying to reduce the dosages of oralmethadone. "It probably was a mistake to go as high as 200milligrams a day," he added. The maximum is now 100milligrams a day, while younger addicts are more likely to bearound the 30-milligram-per-day level. Dr. Chapple said he hasshifted from giving a blocking dose because there is less heroinaround. He said he wanted to satisfy the drug hunger and notnecessarily to block heroin. *Interclinic statistics kept only sinceSeptember, 1969. SOURCE: Department of Health and SocialSecurity. He acknowledged that it is very difficult towork with younger addicts using oralmethadone, largely because of their delinquent and erraticbehavior. Last year, a young addict died as a result of takingbarbiturates while also taking oral methadone. (Dr. Connell, inhis examination of 107 addicts at a government clinic, alsorecorded an oral-methadone overdose death. This involved anaddict on 100 milligrams a day who obtained the next day's supplyshortly after midnight and drank both within hours of eachother.) If England's drug doctors do not subscribe tomethadone maintenance, why have they shifted so dramatically tomethadone from heroin? First, the very creation of the clinicapproach was prompted by what England viewed as a growingheroin epidemic. There was public and political pressure to haltthe rise in heroin addicts. The monthly distribution of a dossiershowing the amounts of heroin prescribed by each clinic made itclear to each clinic director where he stood among his peers inthis respect and undoubtedly created pressure to bring thequantity down. Secondly, there is general agreement amongclinic physicians that methadone has a longer-lasting effect thanheroin. Thus, the addict needs fewer injections a day. Thirdly, methadone for injection is consideredsomewhat more sterile than heroin, since it comes in liqui4 form,so that the addict merely transfers the ampoule content directlyinto his syringe. With heroin, he mixes a 10-milligram pill withwater, usually unsterile and sometimes from a tap or even atoilet bowl, to dissolve the pill before injecting. Finally, methadone for injection is viewed bya number of doctors as the bridge to oral methadone. Breaking theneedle cult is considered an important success step in thedrug-treatment program in England. Unfortunately, addict performances on heroin,methadone for injection, and oral methadone have received nodetailed scientific comparison in England.Furthermore-surprisingly, to an outsider-methadone continues tobe available outside of the drug clinics. There is nothing toprevent general practitioners from prescribing it. A few, infact, do. (Scotland Yard Drug Squad detectives, who monitordrugstores, say that about six London doctors prescribe methadoneon a regular basis.) Ironically, the second Brain Committeeforesaw the possibility that a substitute drug might becomepotentially as dangerous as heroin. When the committee urged andachieved prescribing restrictions on heroin, it said: "If,in future, circumstances should change, and other drugs ofaddiction should take the place now occupied by heroin andcocaine, it would be necessary promptly to amend the 'restricted'list accordingly." A number of leading professionals haveurged that methadone be placed on the "restricted"list, but this has not been done. The clinic shift from heroin to methadone,plus the absence of prescribing prohibitions on generalpractitioners, undoubtedly had led to a new metbadone-addictionproblem. The key issue is how big a problem it is. The over-allclinic drug-dispensing statistics indicate strongly thatconsiderably lower quantities of combined heroin and methadoneare being prescribed today than the largely heroin-onlyprescriptions at the beginning of the clinic era, but exactly howmuch lower is impossible to show, since methadone statistics werenot reported until September, 1969. However, it appears that there has not been asimple switch from a heroin to a methadone problem. Doctorsinterviewed are concerned about rising methadone cases but do notsuggest that they are replacing heroin cases on a one-for-onebasis. That is, the methadone increase is moving at aconsiderably slower pace than the sharp drop in heroin addiction,although no one can document the relative rates of change. The police, however, are less inclined to makedistinctions. In a 1970 report, Scotland Yard said: There has been a transference of addiction in as much as the treatment centers have succeeded in reducing the amount of heroin prescribed to addicts, thereby reducing the availability of this drug on the "illicit market." But, in so doing, they have increased the prescribing of methadone to counterbalance this reduction; consequently, there is now far more methadone available on the "illicit market." DRUGS OUTSIDE THE CLINICS How many other drugs do addicts take tosupplement those prescribed by the clinics? While evidence in this area is bothfragmentary and sometimes disputed, there is agreement thatEnglish addicts often supplement the clinic-prescribed drug diet,with a wide assortment of chemicals that affect both the mind andthe body. These include black-market methadone or heroin,amphetamines, barbiturates, tranquilizers, and marijuana, or, forthat matter, a smattering of all of them. In short, the addict inEngland more often than not is a polydrug taker. The most significant evidence comes from awide-ranging study conducted by two staff members of theAddiction Research Institute. Between March and November, 1969,they interviewed in depth I I I heroin users attending the Londonclinics, representing about 10 per cent of all clinic patients inEngland.' The results showed that only a small proportion ofEnglish addicts can be considered "stable" in theirdrug-taking habits. Several clinic directors expressedreservations about the study, claiming that it did not representa true cross-section of their population since it included onlyactive heroin addicts. At the time of the interviews, they said,many of their patients, particularly the more promising ones, hadalready been weaned off heroin and onto methadone only. Thestudy, however, did include 91 (of the 111) who were receivingheroin in combination with methadone. Eighty-four per cent reported to interviewersthat in the month prior to the interview they had used drugsother than those prescribed for them by the clinics. Among theseother drugs, the largest number reported using barbiturates andtranquilizers (75 per cent), which, in the majority of cases,were prescribed by private physicians. This is an importantindication that extracurricular drug taking did not necessarilymean adding larger doses of illegally obtained narcotics. The range of drugs used is demonstrated inTable 7-5. These statistics show that the one additional drug all1 1 1 heroin addicts had used was marijuana or hashish (cannabis). An interesting sidelight brought out duringthe interviews was that 37 per cent had on occasion sold, lent,or exchanged at least some of the drugs the clinics prescribedfor them. In addition, the study confirmed the worst fears ofphysicians about the unsterile proceduresthat are an important risk when addicts administer drugs tothemselves. The report speaks best for itself: All subjects were using heroin by injection. In the week prior to interview 28 (25%) subjects had injected themselves at home only, a further 17 (15%) had injected themselves at their clinic or at a day center as well as at their home, 46 (41 %) had injected themselves at some time during the week in a public toilet as well as at home, clinic, or day center, and 20 (18%) had injected themselves in a "public place"-e.g., shop doorways, in the street ' or in telephone kiosks-in addition to any of the above places. Sixty-two (56%) had injected themselves whilst other addicts were present and also injecting themselves. The majority of subjects ( 101, 91 %) used a disposable syringe for their injections and of these 67 (66%) regularly used their syringes more than once. Seventy-two subjects (68%) did not clean their arms prior to injection. Although the most frequent method for preparing an injection was to dissolve heroin in sterile water, 54 (49%) had at some time during the week used ordinary unboiled tap water, and 12 (11%) had used water from a lavatory basin. Nine subjects reported sharing a syringe with another addict during the week. If injection practices are defined as sterilewhen normal medical procedure is followed(i.e., using a new disposable syringe for each injection or usingan adequately sterilized glass syringe, not sharing a syringe,cleaning the arm prior to injection, and making up the injectionwith sterile water) then in the total sample, 12 subjects (11%)are using sterile injection practices. In the week prior tointerview all others had engaged in some non-sterile practice. This kind of unsterile drug taking often ledto medical complications. Thirty-nine per cent had been inhospitals for treatment of septicaernia, hepatitis, abscesses, oroverdose. Of all addicts interviewed, 40 per cent reportedhepatitis and overdose and 46 per cent reported abscesses treatedboth in and outside of hospitals. Although this report indicated no particulartrend in polydrug taking, since the clinics began doctors haveseen definite increases in two drugs: methylamphetamine (speed)and barbiturates. In 1968, methylamphetamine was injected byaddicts with such frequency that authorities asked itsmanufacturers to agree to withdraw it from the retail market andrestrict its distribution to hospital pharmacies. Within weeks ofits disappearance from retail drugstores it disappeared among theaddict population. Misuse of barbiturates. by addicts became anacute problem in 1969. Some physicians, however, feel that it hasslowed somewhat since the last part of 1970. Addicts injectbarbiturates even though they are not manufactured, so that theywill dissolve completely in water. The undissolved particlesresult in collapsed veins and serious abscesses on addicts' armsand legs. Addicts I've interviewed said that they resorted tobarbiturates when they couldn't get enough heroin or methadonefrom the clinics. This, like all addict testimonials, is open toquestion. The degree of barbiturate abuse-particularlyby injection-is another aspect of the English drug scene that isleft largely to conjecture. A study in 1969 of a small sample ofheroin addicts -again conducted by a team from the AddictionResearch Unit-showed that among this sample the problem washuge.' Sixty-five heroin addicts were interviewed in May, June,and July of 1969, and 80 per cent were found to have injectedbarbiturates. Almost all of them-62 of the 65-had takenbarbiturates either by injection or orally. Of course, some hadused the drug only to help induce sleep. However, 65 per centacknowledged they had taken it for no medical reason and only for"kicks." A few addicts will take barbiturates with themto the clinics, although they may have obtained them from ageneral practitioner or bought them illicitly. I observed anespecially bizarre scene in one of the clinics. There were two chairs in the room, a steelsink, a length of rubber hose to use as a tourniquet, somecotton, and a supply of paper towels. The walls and the chairswere stained with dried blood; in general, the physicalappearance of the room was far from the kind of antiseptic clinicpresented by the likes of Drs. Kildare and Ben Casey. Thecharacters on this stage were two young addicts, both unsteady ontheir feet from drugs taken earlier. One took a syringe from hispocket, washed it out with tap water from the sink, pulled afolded piece of paper from another pocket, removed a barbituratecapsule, broke it in half over the syringe, and emptied itscontents into the tube. Once the white powder was in the syringe, headded tap water, shook the contents vigorously for severalseconds, and handed the syringe to his friend. Since his arms andankles were marked with sores, however, it took several minutesto locate a usable vein. Finally, he settled on a spot abouteight inches below the knee. (The other addict, incidentally,shortly afterwards injected himself in the sole of his foot.) A third addict, more stable, helped the firstboy out of the clinic by steadying him with an arm around hisshoulders. But once outside the clinic, the boy sagged andcollapsed on the grass. A few addicts nearby helped to drag theboy out of the sun to a tree, where they sat him up against itstrunk. I was not alone in observing this sequence; aclinic psychiatrist watched the entire scene with me. No effortwas made to assist, dissuade, or reprimand the addicts. We wereboth spectators, like a couple of medical students watchingsurgical techniques from behind a glass partition. LAW ENFORCEMENT Although the English have consistently vieweddrug addiction as a medical problem, this does not mean that thepolice have been dismissed from the drug scene. Possession,selling, and importing most dangerous drugs are against the law. An addict can go to a government clinic and,after convincing doctors of his addiction, obtain free heroin,but this does not mean that anyone can walk around London with apocketful of "horse" or any other opiate. Possession ofheroin, methadone, and similar dangerous drugs is illegal withouta prescription. In the case of heroin, the only source of such aprescription is a government clinic. Marijuana and hashish are illegal, period.There are no prescriptions given for these drugs and no medical"cover" exists to protect the owner of them. InEngland, they are clearly the number-one illegal drug, and theiruse continues to rise along with the arrest statistics of thosewho are caught with them. From 1968 to 1970, the number of cannabisoffenses more than doubled from 3,071 to 7,520. In 1970, cannibisseizures amounted to 11/4 tons. Unlike the United States, Britain has nonational police agency for drugs. For that matter, if there is noequivalent to the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,neither is there one for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.Scotland Yard is essentially a London agency, and, when aScotland Yard man is found looking for clues on some fog-shroudedEnglish moor (usually in a paperback detective thriller), he isthere on loan from London. In short, there is no national policeforce. Drug squads have been created largely becauseof need or, sometimes, because of the personal interest of anindividual police officer. These squads have no nationwideresources available to them either from an enforcement or from atraining point of view. Drug-squad members, including thehigher-echelon officers in charge of them, are largelyself-educated about drugs. Even Scotland Yard's Drug Squad islikely to have a director today who next month or next year maybe shifted to a completely different area of police work. However, this does not mean that expertise hasnot built up. There is no better example of expertise constructedlargely out of self-developed personal interest than DetectiveSergeant Alan Russell, who heads the drug squad in Portsmouth. Ifa national police drug force ever should be established, as someare urging, Sergeant Russell should have a prominent role in iton the basis of his record in Portsmouth. Russell has an excellent, and unpublicized,working relationship with Dr. Christie of the Portsmouth drugclinic: Christie doesn't squeal on addicts and Russell doesn'tgive away police plans, but it is clear from the way the two menspeak of each other that each has developed a warm respect forthe other's approach to addiction. The addicts appear to respectRussell as well. When the residents of Alpha Unit, thetherapeutic community directed by Dr. Christie, decided to holdan open house, they invited Russell even though he had arrested anumber of them on past occasions. Because of the Christie-Russell liaison-andaddicts corroborate it-there is virtually no black market inheroin or methadone in the Portsmouth area. In 1969, Russell'ssquad arrested two persons for possessing heroin, and thisinvolved only minute traces found in a syringe. During the entireyear, there were 12 to 15 methadone-possession arrests. Russell, however, regards opiate addiction asonly a small part of his concern. "Dependence on opiatedrugs is only the tip of the iceberg," he says. "Youhave millions of people in this country who are dependent onbarbiturates and amphetamines." In the greater Portsmouth area, with apopulation of about 500,000, he estimates that there are as manyas 1,500 users of marijuana, barbiturates, and amphetamines, someof whom may dabble with all of these drugs. This estimate is inmarked contrast to the very low numbers of hard-drug addicts-14in the clinic and 17 in the Alpha Unit therapeutic community. Possibly in part because of his respect forDr. Christie, Portsmouth's chief drug police officer has a verypositive attitude toward the clinics. "Make no mistake aboutit-and some people tend to forget it-a few years ago this countryhad a serious heroin problem." In London, there is considerable criticism ofthe clinics among members of Scotland Yard's Drug Squad, althoughnot a single police officer whom I interviewed was willing toscrap the clinics. Several officers thought that some clinicdoctors were still being conned by addicts into issuing largerprescriptions than required. However, all the officers agreedthat overprescribing had been reduced drastically since preclinicdays. As an example that the problem has not beeneliminated entirely, they cite a case in 1969: A member of thesquad searched the apartment of a longtime addict who had beenreceiving drugs from one of the central London clinics before hisdeath. The search uncovered a horde of heroin-900 tablets or9,000 milligrams, worth more than $2,100 on the British blackmarket and easily three times as much on the U.S. market.Although there was no evidence that the addict had been sellingfrom this cache, the police felt strongly that it corroboratedtheir overprescribing charge. Furthermore, police are annoyed that there isno limit on the amount an addict with a clinic prescription maycarry. Recently, they stopped an addict with 40 grains (2,400milligrams) of heroin. He told officers he had been reducing hisprescribed quantity, and no arrest was possible, even though thepolice strongly doubted his story. Yet, such dramatic anecdotes are theexception. A review of squad arrest records shows that, from thebeginning of June to September 7, 1970 (the date of theinterview), there hadn't been a single heroin arrest and only twomethadone-possession arrests. (These were not the only Londondrug arrests; for, although the squad is the only police unitconcerned solely with drugs, other London policemen make drugarrests in the course of their regular activities.) Some members of the drug squad frankly admitthat they would be in trouble if heroin were completely outlawed.None is campaigning for such a move. One top drug-squad officer,a critic of the present clinic approach ("They sustainaddiction . . . there is no place in England where a drug addictcan be cured") is not interested in abolishing them, either.He would like to see all drugs administered by the clinics in theclinics. Instead of fourteen separate clinics in London, he wouldlike four open on a twenty-four-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-weekbasis. Scotland Yard detectives acknowledge that theclinics have reduced not only the quantity of heroin prescribedbut the amount available on the black market. Cocaine, they say,has also been reduced dramatically. Like their colleagues inPortsmouth, however, they are often more concerned about theother drugs that are available on the black market. The lead drug, of course, is marijuana. Theyclaim that large scale trafficking is mainly carried on byEngland's new immigrant population, primarily the Pakistanis.Marijuana comes into England frequently by parcel post directlyfrom the producing countries. Students also bring it in from suchwell-known drug centers as Morocco. LSD most often comes from the United States,even though in 1969 English police raided and closed downat least two illicit laboratories producing LSD for both localconsumption and export. There appears to be little organizedimportation of heroin. What there is generally comes from HongKong and is imported by Chinese sailors and distributed byinhabitants of the small Chinese community in London. Addictsgenerally are not fond of Chinese heroin because of its uncertainstrength and, since it comes in powder form, the necessity toheat it in a spoon-in the U.S. mode-before mixing it forinjection. Police acknowledge that one can buy a varietyof illicit drugs in the network of side streets in and aroundPicadilly Circus and in some other areas of London where youthcongregate, often in or around the late-night clubs. However,these illicit business enterprises are small and unorganized,particularly in the hard drug line. Black-market prices in 1970, according to theaddicts and confirmed by clinic physicians and police, are asfollows: Heroin (British-manufactured) $14.40 a grain(60 mg.) Heroin (Chinese) $3.60 a packet (30-60 mg.) Methadone $7.20-$12.80 a grain (60 mg.) Barbiturates 25 cents a capsule There is no evidence anywhere that largenumbers of hard-drug users are supplying themselves from thisblack market. Furthermore, there is no evidence at all thatheroin manufactured in France-the principal source of supply forU.S. addicts-is being smuggled into England. The market justisn't big enough to make such an enterprise profitable. Scotland Yard does keep track of internationaland particularly European illicit-drug activity. Its principalsource for this information is not Interpol but the Europeanoffice of the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Thedrug-squad detectives express a great deal of respect for theirAmerican colleagues and are quick to admit that, if they needinformation or have a common problem, they will call Paris ratherthan Interpol. Often, they say, an American narcotics agent willarrive on the next plane. In 1970, the BNDD for the first time assigneda permanent man to the embassy in London, as part of its over-allEuropean expansion of manpower. A London slot was created becauseof the LSD traffic from the United States to England and themarijuana and hashish flow from England to the United States. John T. Cusack, the BNDD's European regionaldirector, is not enthusiastic about the English clinic approach.Of all police officers interviewed, he was the most stronglynegative about the clinic program. "The clinics arenot going to work giving away heroin. They are going to sustainand create some addicts," he said. He had three principal objections: " [I]It fools society. It kids all of us that it's doing a jobwhen it isn't doing a job. [21 The addicts will take what theycan get from the clinics and then they will get some more fromthe outside. [31 The clinics flirt with a conflict of theHypocratic oath of the medical profession. They sustain amedical-psychiatric sickness." (This argument is also madeby some British physicians, like Dr. Ian James, a British prisonpsychiatrist.) Cusack, however, is not athrow-them-all-in-jail police officer. He wants medical treatmentfor addicts and believes that governments don't spendanywhere near what they should on hospital care for addicts."I feel so strongly about it that I'd like to sweep up allthe addicts off the New York streets and put them into hospitals.It's incredible to me to leave addicts on the street. It's abig, expensive job to bring them in, but we don't let our mentalpatients run loose, do we?" If Cusack strongly disagrees with the Englishclinic philosophy, his London police colleagues sharply differwith their American counterparts over one vital aspect of thedrug problem: the connection between crime and addiction. Noone in England-from the toughest London detective to the mostliberal-prescribing clinic physician-suggested to me thatnarcotics addiction increases criminal behavior. This doesnot mean, of course, that drug addicts are crime-free. On thecontrary, a significant number of addicts engage in criminalbehavior, and some criminals are addicts. But in England there isno cause-and-effect relationship. Scotland Yard says it in writing. In a 1970report, its drug expert wrote: "There is no concreteevidence to connect any particular criminal activity with thosedependent on the 'hard' drugs (e.g., heroin) but without doubt,the increasing demand for the amphetamine-type drugs leads tothefts from chemists' premises, hospitals, and, in a smallerdegree, to thefts of prescription forms." Study after study documents the fact thatsticking a needle into his arm doesn't propel a man into therobber and burglar fraternity. More likely, he will have beeninitiated long before. What these studies do show is that addictsoften have a whole series of antisocial "hang-ups," ofwhich addiction is just one more on the lengthy list. In the previously cited 1970 study of 111heroin addicts attending London clinics, 51 per cent reported aconviction for a nondrug offense before their first use ofheroin. Thirty-six per cent reported such a conviction sinceusing heroin. A 1967 study of 50 addict-criminals in Londonprisons again indicates that a track record in court and prisonoften is established before track marks on the subject's arms.'Brixton Prison psychiatrist Ian James found that 22 addicts had ahistory of juvenile-court conviction and 16 had adult-courtconvictions prior to heroin addiction. In all, "Threequarters had a history of court convictions predating theiraddiction to narcotics, and there was usually a story of personaland social maladjustment dating from adolescence (educationaldropout, employment instability, sociopathic conduct,etc.)." Ten of the subjects had been convicted onlysince they became addicted, but only two were in prison for theirvery first conviction. Dr. James found, too, that, if onediscounts drug convictions, fewer convictions for crimes wererecorded after addiction than before. Although it is risky to draw conclusions aboutUnited States addicts based on English findings, one youngAmerican doctor did suggest that what was true about preaddictiondelinquency in Britain may be even more valid in the UnitedStates. Dr. Michael Paris, formerly on the staff of the FederalHospital for Addict Rehabilitation at Lexington, Kentucky, workedwith Dr. Bewley in 1970 in his London clinics. Asked to compareU.S. and British addicts, he said that the Americans he saw atLexington had bad at least twice as much antisocial behavior intheir early teens as the London addicts. In the first study of heroin users in aprovincial town, investigators found a reduction rather than anincrease in crime after addiction began. Twenty of 37 heroinusers had been convicted of breaking the law." The crimes not involving drugs were generallypetty in nature, such as stealing two pints of milk, minorshopliftng, and taking and driving away a motor vehicle. Of theten people who had been convicted of nondrug offenses, three hadcommitted them before using any drugs at all, and seven betweenfirst trying drugs and first trying heroin. There was only oneperson who was convicted of a nondrug offense after heroin usebegan, and this person had already been convicted of such a crimebefore the onset of heroin use. These findings prompted investigators tosuggest further research: Many of our subjects were in full-timeemployment or were full-time students; most were still living athome with their parents, a high proportion of whom knew of theirheroin use. Although there were instances of nondrug crime beforeheroin use began, there was only one such conviction (a secondoffense) afterwards. Whether drug use is for some people an"alternative" to other types of delinquent behavior isa question which suggests itself for investigation and remainsopen, but it is clear that our sample in no way constitutes adrifting criminal subculture, RESEARCH Until 1967, research in drug addiction inEngland depended on the personal interest of a physician. Ahandful of doctors wrote papers based on their personalexperiences with addicts. Public awareness of the problem stillwas slight, and concern and knowledge among doctors in generalwere not much greater. Funds for research simply were notavailable. Today, the veterans of the predrug-crisis eracontinue to produce papers for both national and internationalmedical publications, but they have been joined not only byindividual newcomers but by a government-supported researchproject as well. The Addiction Research Unit is a kind ofscientific conglomerate that investigates three of man's majorvices-drinking, smoking, and drug addiction. The unit, a part ofthe Department of Psychiatry of London University's Institute ofPsychiatry, began in 1964 as an alcoholism research group. In1967, after the Brain Committee report was translated intolegislation and public concern heightened with the catapultingaddiction statistics, political pressure prompted the HealthDepartment to provide funds for drug-addiction research. Druginvestigations were added to the unit's agenda, and sufficientfunds were supplied to construct a separate building on thegrounds of Maudsley Hospital. Research on smoking was added in1969. Each area of investigation has a separatestaff and coordinator, with the largest number in thedrug-addiction field. Dr. Griffith Edwards, whose earlierinterest was in alcoholism, is director of the entire unit, andDr. David V. Hawks, a psychologist, is coordinator of theeleven-man (and woman) Drug Research Group. Another organization, the Institute for theStudy of Drug Dependence, a privately financed group, does noclinical research, although it is looking for funds to financeboth clinical and other investigations. The Institute, with SirHarry Greenfield as board chairman, is directed by a retiredforeign-service officer with a personal interest in addiction. Inthe two years since it began, this struggling enterprise-financedby small foundation grants-has carved out a useful function as aninformation clearinghouse. It is the one place in England where aresearcher can find extensive, indexed, and easily availablematerial on the English drug scene as well as numerous itemsinvolving other countries. Until now, the national Department of Healthhas done no specific drug-addiction research of its own. In 1970,a joint committee of the Health Department and the Home Officewas created primarily to try to straighten out the sometimesconfused drug statistics. It recommended establishment of a DrugsResearch Group to be staffed by both agencies. While no specificresearch program was proposed, the committee suggested thefollowing areas of investigation: 1. Developing a typology of heroin users. 2. Measuring the effectiveness of differentforms of treatment in the existing clinics. 3. Comparing the effectiveness of compulsorytreatment (in prison) with voluntary treatment in hospitals. More important, perhaps, was the committee'srecommendation that statistical information be compiled on allpersons addicted to any dangerous drug in England andWales. The Department of Health is now building such a data bank,which already includes a total of 2,400 names, with the basicinformation obtained when an addict applies to a clinic or ishospitalized. Other government statistical records to be tappedinclude: 1. Dates and causes of death from the GeneralRegister office. 2. Admissions and length of stay inpsychiatric hospitals from the Department of Health and SocialSecurity records. 3. Details of employment histories, sicknessand unemployment payments from the Department of Health andSocial Security's Mental Health Inquiry Records. 4. Criminal records and prison statistics fromthe Home Office Statistical Division. This will be a vital resource forinvestigators and will open numerous research opportunities intodrug addiction in England. THE STATISTICS How accurate are the drug statistics inEngland today? It is difficult to generalize. Some statisticsare clearly more solid than others. A number of personsinterviewed expressed skepticism about the validity of one ormore sets of statistics. Included among the skeptics was aDepartment of Health official who works with the drug numbers. The problem with the statistics is thatreporting depends on individual physicians and clinic personnelwhose information is not channeled through a system ofcross-checks. The new Health Department data bank should help toimprove the accuracy of some of these statistics. Among the numerical data available, the clinicfigures reporting quantities of drugs prescribed appear to beleast open to significant error. Apart from an occasionalbookkeeping mistake, these statistics should accurately reflectthe downward trend of heroin use and the rise in methadone. The monthly clinic-attendance figures shouldstand up. However, the number of new addicts that clinics reportevery month may be a somewhat soft statistical area, becauseclinics may vary in their definition of a new addict. The clinic figures for the percentage ofaddicts employed could be on the high side, since"employment" depends on the individual's definition,and the accuracy of the addict's statements is questionable. Thedata bank, which will include employment records based onsocial-security information, should provide a cross-check forthese claims. The vital Home Office figures on addicts haveto be separated into addicts reported any time during the yearand addicts known to be receiving drugs at the end of the year. The figures for the total year tend to beaccepted as reasonably correct by those interviewed, with thegeneral acknowledgment that obviously not every addict in Englandis known to the Home Office. However, no one suggested that thenumber of "unknowns" is as large as the numbers listed.Opiate addiction, under the English drug approach, is difficultto conceal if it is taking place on any significant scale. Thehighest estimate for unreported opiate use was 25 per cent, butthis guesstimate included occasional users as well as addicts. The Home Office figures for 1968 may beunusually high because inauguration of the clinics may well haveflushed out previously unknown addicts. As a result, the tinyincrease in the total 1969 figures may not accurately reflect thedegree of change. Not until the end of 1970 did England have afirm statistical basis for concluding that the narcotic-addictionspiral of the 1960's had been halted. RESULTS There is a shortage of hard statistical dataabout the success or failure of Britain's drug approach, eitherbefore or after the clinic program was begun. Most availableevaluations were done prior to the inauguration of the clinicprogram. These do not generate applause. For example, in 1968, a study of 1,271 heroinaddicts who became known to the Home Office between 1947 and 1966showed that 70 per cent were still taking opiates in 1966."Of the nontakers, some 293 addicts-64 per cent-were in prison,hospital, or other institutions, and 89 were dead, the majorityas a result of overdose, suicide, or sepsis. The death rate among English addicts has beenvery high according to the Bewley study, twice as high as amongU.S. addicts. However, this study was conducted prior to theclinic program, when British addicts were receiving huge amountsof heroin prescribed by general practitioners. The death rateamong addicts included in this review was 28 times greater thanthe rate for the equivalent age group in the general population. Studies of withdrawal treatment in hospitalsare not more encouraging. In one follow-up of 23 hospitaladmissions, 12 relapsed within a week, five within a month, andthree within two months. Only three were still avoiding narcoticsthree months after discharge." Like their American brethren, the Englishtoday have no file folder marked "cures"; there is nocomputer printout on clinic performance that supports either thecritics or the defenders of the program. There is, however, a cautious thread ofoptimism that runs through conversations with clinic directorsand also a surprising degree of candor in identifying areas ofshortcoming and outright failure. Furthermore, these subjectiveevaluations by different directors generally make nearlyidentical points of both promise and disappointment. Finally,they are echoed by those who have no particular vested interestin the clinics. Dr. Margaret Tripp, a doctor at St. Clementwith no previous experience with drug addicts, frankly admitsthat her charges conned her in the beginning. Two years later shesaid: "I think we are controlling legal heroin. Muchto my surprise, we have stabilized the addicts-they're not dead,and they are better. They are more stable than before; their druguse has gone down, they work longer, and they are less of anuisance to everybody." Dr. Tripp chooses her words very carefully:"Three or four of the [present] cases are reasonably offdrugs." Dr. Willis, at St. Giles, also avoids wordslike "success" and "cure." He also cites thedrop in heroin and agrees that the rise of addiction has slowed."It's been possible to mount a general tidying-up operation.They are more stable now than they were a year ago. Their generalappearance is better. They are not asking for more drugs, andthey are not claiming as much drug loss [in order to obtainreplacements] as they did before." Dr. Connell, who is among the handful ofEnglish drug-treatment veterans, a consultant to the nationalHealth Department and director of the Maudsley Hospital drugclinic, summed it up this way: I'm pleased that the frightening curve of heroin addiction has leveled off. I'm disturbed that methadone and barbiturates have risen. In terms of containing the heroin problem, they [the clinics] are successful. They have provided some treatment services where none have existed. All of the terrible prognostications of American workers in the drug field have been unfounded. But [Dr. Connell added] in terms of research they are a failure. Similar sentiments are voiced by those who arebeing asked to evaluate their own work. Even the most hardened policeman-as we notedin the law enforcement section-is not prepared to suggest thatEngland should scrap the clinics. Despite the grumbling aboutdoctors who are either too softhearted-in the eyes of thepolice-or simply conned by addicts, the interviewer is left withthe distinct impression that even law-enforcement officersbelieve that the hard-drug picture has improved somewhat. Among druggists, there also is cautiousoptimism for the clinic approach. For example, Jerry Young, chiefchemist at Boots Picadilly, says flatly: I'm very pleased with the clinic system. I'd even be more pleased if they'd take the whole thing in their hands [administer drugs directly in the clinics]. We see more stability in the addicts. They don't come in making exorbitant demands on our service and our time. The genuine addicts are less of a nuisance. On the whole, they took physically better. They respond better. Asked for some tangible proof of hisassessment, Mr. Young said that, prior to the spring of 1968,when the clinics began, he had to call the police on the averageof twice a week to control an unruly addict in his pharmacy. Now,he said, he can't remember a recent call for police assistancewith a clinic addict. Occasionally, he asks police help with aforged prescription or when someone under the influence ofbarbiturates makes a disturbance. Mr. Young's analysis, like those of thephysicians who send him prescriptions, is subjective. However,there are at least a few statistical indications-developed sincethe clinic program began -that tend to support these assumptions.To find them, you have to go to an institution dealing with aconsiderably larger clientele than drug addicts. Brixton Prison, with its incongruousflower-filled inner courtyard, is to London what the Tombs is toNew York. It is a remand prison, where all London-area maleprisoners are brought while awaiting trial. There are 12,000"receptions" there annually. Brixton, in 1970, had on its staff the one manwho may have seen more English drug addicts personally than anyother individual. Dr. Ian James, the prison psychiatrist, has along interest in drug addiction. His small prison office is linedwith maps showing the routes by which drugs come to England, thelocation of addict arrests in London, the location of clinics,the arrests of those who are off drugs-all appropriately markedin clusters of multicolored pins. In 1969, Dr. James saw 223 drug addicts whowere at Brixton for both drug and other offenses. Theyrepresented about 10 per cent of all heroin addicts reported tothe Home Office during the year. Significantly, Dr. James said itwas rarely that he saw an addict unknown to the Home Office. Dr. James in the past has been a vocalopponent of the clinic program. His opposition was based largelyon medical ethics. Nobody prescribes two bottles of gin a day with duly enriched Vitamin B for alcoholics. The doctor knows that the addict will use an unsanitary procedure to satisfy his habits. He will take unsterile pills [heroin tablets], hold them in his sweaty hand, and put them in a syringe which he pulls from his grimy pocket. What kind of medicine is that? But Dr. James's own statistics are softeninghis anticlinic stand to the point where he said: "I thinkthe clinics are succeeding, but on the wrong premises." Dr. James's accounting may not giveoverwhelming proof to the statement that the clinics are having apositive impact, but it does add some significant bone behind thesubjective flesh of cautious optimism. In 1970, a third fewer drug addicts wereadmitted to Brixton than during the previous year, Almostthree-fourths of all addicts received at Brixton in 1970 wereattending a drug-addiction clinic prior to their arrest. In 1968,only three-fifths of the drug addicts were clinic-registered. These statistics not only buttress thecautious optimism of English drug experts but also cast doubt onany contention that there is a large addict population unknown tothe Home Office or to the clinics. If such an "unknown"addict pool in fact existed, sustaining itself from thehigh-priced black market, a significant number of its memberssurely would appear periodically inside the steel gates ofBrixton. There are other substantive indications thatthe narcotics situation is improving. At three London centers,the number of addicts holding jobs almost doubled in two years.In these same clinics, a series of urine tests given a year apartshowed that, while many addicts still were taking more anddifferent drugs than those prescribed, such misuse had beenreduced." In yet another survey, there were fewer arrests ayear after addicts had been with a clinic than before. But what does all this mean for the UnitedStates? What relevance does it have to America's ever-increasingnarcotics problem? In the past, almost all visiting American drugexperts have said flatly: None." The two countries, theysaid, are just too different. Not only do some key narcotics lawspoint in opposite directions, but the two societies' traditions,youth culture, and race problems are so disparate that what worksin the row houses of London could not possibly work in thewalk-ups of New York. A young researcher at the Addiction ResearchUnit may well have given an explosive jolt to such blanketdismissals. Jim Zacune, a social psychologist, in 1970 examinedin detail the performance of Canadian addicts in their nativeland and after they emigrated to England. His study issignificant to the U.S.-Britain narcotics-policy argument, sinceCanada's approach to opiate addiction is largely patterned afterours. Zacune traced and interviewed 25 of the 91Canadian addicts who are known to have come to England in the1960's. The rest of the emigres could not be located or hadeither died or been deported. For those he was able to interview,Zacune compared work records, prison records, and crime recordsin the two countries. He diplomatically says that his findingsshould not be used to condemn one country's addiction approachwhile praising another's, and cautions that his sample may haveincluded the most stable of the Canadians who packed up theirsyringes for England. But his findings are neverthelessstartling: At home, the Canadians spent 25 per cent oftheir addicted years, a combined total of 141 years and 2 months,in jail; in England, less than 2 per cent, a combined total of 2years and 5 months. At home, they compiled 182 offenses; inEngland, 27. At home, in the high addict-crime category oftheft, which included robbery and burglary, they committed 88; inEngland, 8. Not only did they commit far fewer crimes,but, while in England, many of them were crime-free. In Canada,16 of the 25 had committed five or more crimes, with one of themrecording more than 20 separate offenses. In Britain, nonecommitted more than four offenses and nearly half (12) were nevercharged with any unlawful behavior. Despite the fact that the Canadians consumedfar more daily heroin than the London average, many of thembecame job holders and led fairly normal lives while in England.Their living accommodations were far more stable. In Canada, onlyfive had a constant residence for more than three years; inEngland, ten had lived at their present address for two or moreyears, eight for one to two years, and five for less than oneyear. Two were in the hospital at the time of the survey. The employment record showed the most dramaticdifference between the two countries. In Canada, only one addictclaimed to have worked steadily while addicted. In England, themajority (13) worked full-time, and four worked part-time. Sixhad held the same job for at least three years. Seven hadsemiskilled or skilled manual jobs, two were office workers, onein sales, and one worked as a croupier. One was a full-timehousewife and one a student. "For once we could work andlive like humans," the addicts said. The interviewscontained again and again this and other personal and pragmaticassessments. "There is less trouble from the police . . . wedon't constantly have to be paranoid . . . there is less pressure. . . there is no need to steal." This study may encompass too small and speciala group of addicts to permit definitive conclusions. But,together with the other fragmentary evidence, it suggests thatthe English approach is an alternative not to be dismissedsummarily, as it is in a widely distributed U.S. Governmentpamphlet, which claims that "The British system isconsidered a failure and has been modified to meet the increasingproblem of addiction."" PERSONAL OBSERVATIONS For the American visitor, the most pervasiveimpression of the English drug scene comes in the form of aquestion: Why has the United States, decade afterdecade, continuously viewed narcotics addiction as largely acriminal, instead of a medical, problem? With all its imperfections andinconsistencies, the British approach to drug addiction convincedme that the United States will never make significant headwaywith the drug problem until it shifts the emphasis from thecriminal to the medical. Until this national policy is changed,American addicts will continue to be an ostracizedsubculture-morally exiled and often barred from the very medicaland social-work help they need so desperately, but physicallyvery much present in the criminal countdown of the largersociety, which has had to lock itself behind doors for the luxuryof guarding an unworkable dogma. Until this national policy is changed, theblack market will continue to flourish no matter how many morenarcotics agents are enlisted, and daily will help to infectothers, because of the astronomical profits to be made. Based on my research in England, I believethat the United States should experiment with both a methadone-and -a heroin maintenance program under more controlled andrestrictive conditions than generally prevail in Britain today. I believe that England provides significantresearch opportunities about the effects of different opiates,which could fill the knowledge void that is plaguing theaddiction field in so many countries. For example, what is theprecise difference between the effects of heroin and of injectedand oral methadone? What are the differences in work performance,antisocial behavior, and life-styles among addicts who use heroinand injectable and oral methadone? Because heroin addicts can beobserved in England under relatively controlled circumstances, awhole series of comparative clinical and sociological studies arepossible. No simple "yes" or "no"answer can be given to the question: "Is the Britishapproach to addiction a success or a failure?" The questionitself may not be valid in a field that has so much difficultywith the word "success." A more accurate question maybe: Is the British approach to addiction helpful or harmful? Eventhen, the answer may only be "Yes, but . . ." Can the British and American approaches toaddiction legitimately be compared? The study of Canadianaddicts' performance in England certainly suggests that suchcomparisons no longer can be dismissed out of hand. In England,at least, comparisons are made. Everywhere I went, opinion onthis was uniform. On my final day in London, a Home Officeofficial, whose knowledge of drug addiction has brought him aninternational reputation, summed it up: "We don't want to force our system onyou, but for God's sake don't bring your system over here." NOTES 1. The Second Report ofthe Interdepartmental Committee on Drug Addiction (BrainCommittee), para. 22, July 31, 1965. 2. There are about 500 British physicianslicensed to prescribe heroin and cocaine to addicts. This is afar larger figure than the actual number of physicians workingwithin the drug clinics. However, a special license to prescribethese drugs has become part of the British medical profession'skitbag of status symbols. The Home Office is hopeful of reducingthis figure. 3. That is enough heroin to support over 800American addicts with a $20-a-day habit for an entire year. 4. National Health Service, The Treatment andSupervision of Heroin Addiction, memorandum issued March 7, 1967. 5. Ramon Gardner and P. H. Connell, "OneYear's Experience in a DrugDependence Clinic," The Lancet(1970), pp. 455-58. 6. G. V. Stimson and A. C. Agborne, A Surveyof a Representative Sample of Addicts Prescribed Heroin at LondonClinics, Addiction Research Unit, 1970. 7. Martin Mitcheson et al., "SedativeAbuse by Heroin Addicts," The Lancet (March 21, 1970)@ pp. 606-7. 8. Op. cit., p. 370. 9. 1. Pierce James, "Delinquency andHeroin Addiction in Britain," British Journal ofCriminology (April, 1969). 10. Kosviner et al., "Heroin Usein a Provincial Town," The Lancet (1968), i, pp.1189-92. 11. Bewley, ben-Arie, James, "Survey ofHeroin Addicts Known to the Home Office," British MedicalJournal (1968), 1, pp. 727-30. 12. Zacune, Mitcheson, and Malone,"Heroin Use in a Provincial TownOne Year Later," Internationaljournal of the Addictions (1969), IV, 55770. 13. Bewley, James, and Mahon,"Effectiveness of Prescribing Clinics for Narcotic Addictsin the United Kingdom," 1968-70. A paper, presented at theInternational Symposium on Drug Abuse, University of Michigan,Ann Arbor, on November 9, 1970, evaluating the efficacy of suchclinics. 14. Among the fewexceptions was Professor Alfred R. Lindesmith of IndianaUniversity, who has concerned himself with the drug problem formore than thirty-five years. He was a defender of the Britishview of addicts as sick people long before England moved to theclinic approach. Because of these views, Professor Lindesmith hasbeen one of the academic betes noirs of the old U.S.Bureau of Narcotics, predecessor to the present BNDD, as well asto the drug professionals who in the past shared its addicts-are-criminals view. 15. A Federal Source Book: Answers to theMost Frequently Asked Ouestions About Drug Abuse (GovernmentPrinting Office, 1970), p. 25. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-8IA031-000652-B045-92http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/contrib.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131519 text/html 4741HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:15:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:32 GMTContent-length: 4524 THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT -- THE CONTRIBUTORS Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT THE CONTRIBUTORS Patricia M. Wald isa graduate of the Yale Law School. She has served as a member ofthe District of Columbia Crime Commission; as a consultant to thePresident's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administrationof Justice, the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders,and the National Commission on the Causes and Prevention ofViolence; and as a staff attorney for Neighborhood Legal Servicesand for the Center for Law and Social Policy. Since January 1,1972, she has been a member of the Board of Trustees of the FordFoundation. Peter Barton Hutt isa graduate of Exeter Academy, Yale University, and the HarvardLaw School. At the time of the study, he was a partner in theWashington law firm of Covington & Burling, and at present heis General Council of the Food and Drug Administration. He is amember of the National Academy of Sciences' Institute of Medicineand has been deeply involved in medical and governmental projectsinvolving alcoholism and drug abuse. James V. DeLong isalso a graduate of the Harvard Law School. He has been alitigation attorney, a Special Assistant in the Department ofHousing and Urban Development, and a Senior Staff Member of theProgram Evaluation Staff of the U.S. Bureau of the Budget. He nowworks for the Drug Abuse Council. Peter A. Wilson, agraduate of Princeton University, is finishing his dissertationin political science at the University of Chicago. He is also aconsultant to the Rand Corporation. John F. Holahan holdsa doctorate in economics from Georgetown University. He is now atthe Urban Institute working on healtheconomics problems. Annette Abrams isa graduate of Howard University. She has been a Staff Assistantto a Midwestern senator and a member of the Staff of the NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Education. She now works for theDrug Abuse Council. Peter B. Goldberg isa graduate of the State University of New York at Albany and isfinishing the requirements for a graduate degree in urbanplanning at George Washington University. He now works for theDrug Abuse Council. Paul A. Henningsen, a former legislative assistant and press secretary to aMidwestern congressman, has also been involved in the promotionof minority business development. A graduate of LawrenceUniversity, he now works for the Drug Abuse Council. Dr. Andrew T. Weil is a graduate of Harvard Medical School. He is aco-author of some of the first clinical studies of marijuana donein this country in modern times and of a recent book on drugs. Atpresent, he is engaged in a study of drug use among Indians inSouth America. Edgar May holds adegree in journalism from Northwestern University. He has been areporter for several newspapers and has won numerous journalisticawards, including the Pulitzer Prize. From 1964 to 1968 he waswith the Office of Economic Opportunity, first as SpecialAssistant to the Director and then as Director of the Office ofInspection. Subsequently he was Special Adviser to the UnitedStates Ambassador to France. He is now a free-lance journalistbased in Paris. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-9IA031-000652-B045-124http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/duapip/pip1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131533 text/html 89594HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:15:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:01 GMTContent-length: 89376 Drug Use in America - Defining the Issues Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | Drug Use in America, Problem inPerspective The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Chapter One - Defining the Issues The need to solve the "drug problem" has been arecurrent theme of political and social commentary in the UnitedStates for most of the past decade. The apparent increase in druguse - itself defined as the problem - has precipitated a seriousinquiry into its causes, a massive investment of social effortsto contain it, and a mobilization of medical and para-medicalresources to treat its victims. The Commission does not deny that a "drug problem"exists. We share the public's concern that an apparent rise incrime and other anti-social behavior may be related in part todrug-using or drug-seeking behavior. Likewise, we share thepublic alarm over the attraction to drug use by large portions ofthis nation's youth, particularly when such use is indiscriminateand apparently oblivious to its risks. The lives and futures ofour young people can only be hurt by such behavior. We share,too, the frustration which comes from knowing that drug usespreads by example, and that a continuing growth in the usingpopulation augurs no better for tomorrow. While recognizing that a drug problem exists, we cannot allowour distress to interfere with the performance of our mandate. Wewere appointed not to fan public anxiety, but to convert it intomeaningful activity with constructive proposals. This can be doneonly 'by refusing to accept at face value many of the commonassumptions about drugs and the drug problem. We must examine thereasons behind the fears, conducting the inquiry without passionand with candor. Confident social action comes from anunderstanding of the problem and from an impartial assessment ofthe impact of alternative strategies. We have sought to definethe problem and to provide at least an initial assessment of thepossible responses to it. The Commission has carefully surveyed the social response tothe contemporary drug problem, and has been struck by apersisting uneasiness which seems to color the entire effort. Onthe street and in the councils of government, increasing numbersof drug abuse "experts" wonder whether their commitmentand efforts have had any actual imp-act on the problem. Many ofthem assume optimistic positions in public, while suspectingprivately that no solution will be found. The Commissionunderstands the reasons for this malaise. We are convinced thatpublic policy, as presently designed, is premised on incorrectassumptions, is aimed at the wrong targets, and is too oftenunresponsive to human needs and aspirations. In this Chapter, the Commission seeks to bring the issue ofdrug use into focus. First, we will explore the way our societythinks about drugs by analyzing both the vocabulary of the drugproblem and the historical roots of contemporary attitudes. Afterconsidering the way in which the drug problem is presentlydefined, we will redefine it, first by broadening the scope tocover the entire range of drug use in America and then bynarrowing it to that drug-using behavior which properly shouldarouse social concern. After the problem has been carefully defined, thepolicy-making task begins. In this sense, this Chapter, and thetwo which follow, are designed primarily to create a climate forthe formulation of new policy concepts. Chapter Four details thepolicy-making process and sets forth specific recommendations forimmediate implementation by governmental and privateinstitutions. Chapter Five will then provide a broad perspectiveon the development of a long-term social response to drug-usingbehavior. DEFINITIONAL CONFUSION: WHAT IS DRUG ABUSE? The use of psychoactive drugs is commonplace in American life.Distribution of these drugs is an integral part of the social andeconomic order. In 1970, 214 million prescriptions forpsychoactive drugs were issued, representing annual retail salesof approximately $1 billion (Balter and Levine, 1971). Thealcohol industry produced over one billion gallons of spirits,wine and beer for which 100 million consumers paid about $24billion. What is the pertinence of this information for a Commissionmandated to report to the American people on drug"abuse?" Can such familiar American behavior includedrug abuse, even though that term is generally thought to referonly to the consumption of psychoactive substances obtainedillicitly from a market with an estimated annual volume of $2billion? The Commission concluded early in its deliberations that thefocus of inquiry should not be determined by general impressionsor facile labels. Instead, formulation of a coherent socialpolicy requires a consideration of the entire range ofpsychoactive drug consumption, and a determination as to whetherand under what circumstances drug-using behavior becomes a matterof social concern. For example, does youthful experimentationwith alcohol involve different social policy considerations thanexperimentation with marihuana? Do alcoholism and heroindependence present similar or dissimilar social policy questions?Do the social policy implications of repeated use of barbituratesor minor tranquilizers depend solely on whether a physician hasprescribed the drug or on the motivations for such use? In orderto deal coherently with such questions, it is necessary toexamine how this society thinks about drugs and their use. Drugs-The All-Purpose Concept The meaning of the word drug often varies with the context inwhich it is used. From a strictly scientific point of view, adrug is any substance other than food which by its chemicalnature affects the structure or function of the living organism.From this perspective, the term includes some agricultural andindustrial chemicals. The physician might define a drug as anysubstance used as a medicine in the treatment of physical ormental disease; when treatment of illness is the referent, thelay public may use the word in the same sense. However, when usedin the context of drug "abuse" or the drug"problem," the meaning of "drug" becomessocial rather than scientific. In its social sense, drug is not a neutral term. This point isbest illustrated by the fact that "drug problem" isfrequently used not as a descriptive phrase, but a substitute forthe word drug. In our visits to communities throughout thiscountry and other nations, we have noted that local leaders oftenfeel compelled to report not simply that drugs are available orthat they are used, but that there is a "drug problem." This value component of the word drug is reflected in theselective application of this term by the general public. TableT-1, drawn from a Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelsonet al, 1973) * illustrates that the public tends uniformly toregard heroin as a drug, as well as other substances associatedwith the drug problem, such as marihuana, cocaine, theamphetamines and the barbiturates. Some psychoactive substances,such as alcohol and tobacco, are generally not regarded as drugsat all. In neither public law nor public discussion is alcoholregarded as a drug. It may be called a beverage, -a food, asocial lubricant or a relaxant, but rarely is it called a drug. *The survey, conducted by Response Analysis, involvedface-to-face interviews with a random sample of 2,411 adults and880 young persons age 12-17 in the contiguous -states. Findingsfrom the Survey are reported and discussed throughout thisReport. The reader should note that surveys which employprobability samples may be generalized to the population as awhole within known limits. it should also be noted that theSurvey data presented here involve unweighted bases withpercentages calculated on weighted bases. Depending on the context in which the term "drug" isused, statements about what a given drug does are liable todiffer. If the therapeutic meaning is employed, for example, thecharacterization is likely to involve the reasons for using thedrug, the dose, the frequency of use and an evaluation of itseffects in terms of medical benefits. It might be asked whetherthe drug made an individual feel better, cured his illness, ormade him less anxious or depressed. If the social meaning isbeing used, however, the analysis generally focuses on toxicity,lethality, dependence liability, possible genetic defects,psychosis and effects of high doses; that is, on drugeffects in terms of their risks. The imprecision of the term "drug" has had serioussocial consequences. Because alcohol is excluded, thepublic is conditioned to regard a martini as somethingfundamentally different from a marihuana cigarette, a barbituratecapsule or a bag of heroin. Similarly, because the referents ofthe word "drug" differ so widely in the therapeutic andsocial contexts, the public is conditioned to believe that"street" drugs act according to entirely differentprinciples than "medical" drugs. The result is that therisks of the former are exaggerated and the risks of the latterare overlooked. This confusion must be dispelled. Alcohol is adrug. All drugs act according to the same general principles.Their effects vary with dose. For each drug there is an effectivedose (in terms of the desired effect), a toxic dose and a lethaldose. All drugs have multiple effects. The lower the dose, themore important non-drug factors become in determining drugeffect. At high dose levels, and for some individuals at muchlower dose levels, all drugs may be dangerous. The individual andsocial consequences of drug use escalate with frequency andduration of use. American drug policy will never be coherentuntil it is founded on uniform principles such as these, whichapply to all drugs. 'Unless otherwise noted, the word drug isIntended to encompass only "psychoactive drugs," orthose which have the capacity to influence behavior by alteringfeeling, mood, perception or other mental states. Drug Abuse: Synonym for Social Disapproval Drug abuse is another way of saying drug problem. Nowimmortalized in the titles of federal and state governmentalagencies (and we might add, in our own), this term has the virtueof rallying all parties to a common cause: no one could possiblybe for abuse of drugs any more than they could be for abuseof minorities, power or children. By the same token, the termalso obscures the fact that "abuse" is undefined wheredrugs are concerned. Neither the public, its policy makers northe expert community share a common understanding of its meaningor of the nature of the phenomenon to which it refers. The Commission has noted over the last two years that thepublic and press often employ drug abuse interchangeably withdrug use. Indeed, m . any "drug abuse experts,"including government officials, do so as well. The Commission was curious about whether the public had anymore precise conception of the meaning of drug abuse than theexperts. In our second National Survey, public attitudes on thisissue were probed. The public was requested to give afree-response explanation of what drug abuse meant. (See TableI-2.) In this multiple-response question, the public was dividedbetween perceptions related to the purpose or motivation of drugtaking (the first three responses) on the one hand, and to theconsequences of use on the other (the remaining responses).Roughly 30% of both youth and adult populations associate drugabuse with the use of drugs for other than medical purposes,including any use of those substances which have been prohibitedbecause they have no medical uses. In contrast, large numbers ofboth adults and youth relate the term to the consequences of drugtaking. Excessive doses (27% and 16%), dependence (17% and 15%)and danger to health (11% and lWc) are the most common examples.Also of interest were those respondents who indicated that theydidn't know what drug abuse meant (13% and 20%). In another part of the Survey, the respondents were askedwhether they regarded ten specific drug-using behaviors as drugabuse. These data illustrate that drug abuse is an entirelysubjective concept. It is any drug use the respondent frownsupon. Most respondents disapprove of the use ofmedically-distributed pills for other than medical purposes(those sanctioned by a physician), any use of heroin, and any usewhich suggests that the user is dependent or seeking pleasure. Significantly fewer respondents seem to disapprove of dailyuse of alcohol, weekly use of marihuana andexperimentation with legitimate pills not obtained through aphysician. (See Table 1-3.) As the National Survey data demonstrate, drug abuse may referto any type of drug or chemical without regard to itspharmacologic actions. It is an eclectic concept having only oneuniform connotation: societal disapproval. The Commission believes that the term drug abuse must bedeleted from official pronouncements and public policy dialogue.The term has no functional utility and has become no more than anarbitrary codeword for that drug use which is presentlyconsidered wrong. Continued use of this term , with itsemotional overtones, will serve only to perpetuate confusedpublic attitudes about drug-using behavior. Drug abuse, or any similar term, creates an impression thatall drug-using behavior falls in one of two clear-cutspheres: drug use which is good, safe, beneficial and withoutsocial consequence; and drug "abuse" which is bad,harmful, without benefit and carrying high social cost. Fromeither a descriptive or an evaluative standpoint, the matter ismuch too complex to be handled in such a polarized fashion. TheCommission urges that the public and its policy makers avoid suchlabels and focus instead on the relative risks and socialconsequences of various patterns of drug-taking behavior. The Roots of a "Problem" We have focused our initial attention on vocabulary for animportant reason. The linguistic symbols which our societyattaches to certain drugs and drug-related conduct illustrate theextent to which present attitudes and social responses are rootedin the past. "Drug abuse" is only the most recent in along line of such symbols which this society has applied todisapproved drug-taking behavior or to disapproved substances. Infact, the history of drug vocabulary is also a history of thechanging perception of the drug "problem" in the UnitedStates. Current social policy is largely an accumulation of ad hoc policyresponses to the use of particular substances. "Street"use of a previously unknown substance at a time of social tensiontends to generate a set of untested assumptions about the drug,often including a presumed consequence of undesirable behavior,and to result in a restrictive legal policy, all of which becomeimbedded in public attitude. Drug policy as we know it today is a creature of the 20thCentury. Until the last third of the 19th Century, America'stotal legal policy regarding drugs was limited to regulation ofalcohol distribution (and the periodic regional attempts toprohibit its use altogether), localized restrictions on tobaccosmoking, and the laws of the various states regulating pharmaciesand restricting the distribution of "poisons."Nineteenth century statutory vocabulary was simple and direct:arsenic, tobacco, alcohol, morphine and other opium alkaloidswere all "poisons." Until the Civil War, distributionof opium and morphine, which were widely used as therapeuticagents, was substantially unregulated. Gradually, however,official reliance was placed on the health professions to policedistribution of these drugs; Pennsylvania enacted what may havebeen the first prescription law in 1860, and most other statesfollowed suit over the next three decades. Medical lexiconsclassified opium and morphine as "narcotics," alongwith most other psychoactive substances then in use, includingalcohol; however, that term was not employed in most of theselaws or in common parlance. As early as the 18th Century, the medical profession was awarethat the oral use of opium could result in the development of an"appetite" or "habit," a phenomenon which wasgenerally classed in the same category as the "alcoholhabit." This awareness was not of sufficient consequence tosuggest the need for caution when morphine was discovered in 1803and when the hypodermic syringe was introduced in the middle ofthe century. As the hypodermic use of morphine became common inthe United States, the syringes were left with patients for theirown use to remedy practically every painful condition. The drug was used indiscriminately during the Civil War forthe wholesale relief of pain and, most significantly, to treatcommon gastrointestinal ailments. After the War, morphine waswidely used in medical practice and was easily available outsidethe medical system in proprietary medicines. Within a few years,"morphinomania" (or the "army" disease)became a recognizable medical entity. Nonetheless, use of thedrug was only minimally restricted either from outside themedical profession or within it, as Terry and Pellens noted intheir classic work: Meanwhile the ease with which pain could be relieved throughthe hypodermic administration of the drug, the time it saved thephysician in his busy rounds, the contentment it brought thepatient, and above all, the all too common inclination to relievesymptoms rather than cause, contributed to increase the practice.Consequently throughout the period of the earlier warnings of itsdangers, the employment of this mode of administration wasincreasing by leaps and bounds wherever medicine was practiced.(Terry and Pellens, 1928) This phenomenon of medically-based opiate use was largelyinvisible and was not a matter of major concern outside themedical profession for several decades. Meanwhile, a public response was triggered by use of thesesame drugs and cocaine in another social context. Beginning withincreased Chinese immigration after the Civil War, the practiceof smoking opium took root on the West Coast and spread rapidlyacross the country to most urban areas. Although the practice wasconfined mainly to the Chinese, it also appeared to attract"sporty characters" and the underworld figures in thecities. In 1875, San Francisco enacted an ordinance prohibiting thesmoking or possession of opium, the possession of opium pipes andthe maintenance of "opium dens." As the practicespread, it generated a succession of similar state laws and local,ordinances. Despite a growing problem of opiate dependencearising from unrestrained distribution of these drugs within themedical system in the United States, it was the"street" use of the opiates and cocaine whichaccelerated professional and public interest in theirhabit-forming properties. By the turn of the century, the nation had become aware of alarge opiate-dependent population in its midst. Althoughcontemporary estimates of its size varied as widely as currentfigures do, most researchers have concluded that the total neverexceeded a quarter of a million, divided evenly between"medical" and "street" dependence. As aresult of increased awareness, the medical profession and statelegislatures intensified their efforts to control availability ofthese substances, primarily by tightening the restrictions on medicaldistribution and prohibiting non-medical distribution. In 1906,the Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act, the first majorfederal drug legislation, which required labelling of allpreparations containing "habit-forming" drugs, andproprietaries containing significant quantities of opiates soondisappeared. By 1900, then, policy makers and the medical profession wereattuned to the dangers of chronic drug use, and some commentatorshave suggested that the availability of more accurate informationwithin the profession and improved methods of medical educationwould have retarded the medically-based opiate-dependence problemhad it not been for the introduction of heroin in 1898 (Terry andPellens, 1928). This new cough suppressant was promoted on thetheory that it possessed many of the virtues and few of thedangers of morphine; some even suggested that it would be usefulin the treatment of morphinism itself. From the time of itsintroduction, however, there were conflicting claims regardingits capacity for producing dependence. Regardless of theseclaims, the drug was available for the next decade in proprietarymedicines and throughout medical practice. By 1910, the medical profession had become seriously concernedabout the habit-forming characteristics of heroin. The publicityattending its pleas for legislative controls on the availabilityof this drug, together with a crusade being waged by lawenforcement officials against the street use of opiates andcocaine, aroused public anxiety about a "narcoticsproblem" of major proportions. Although almost every statehad regulatory laws of some kind, most observers contended thatthe states could not control the problem. Federal legislation wasalso said to be necessary to implement international treaties. Inaddition, the movement for national alcohol prohibition begangathering steam in 1913, sensitizing the public to thepossibility of national drug prohibitions. All these factorsculminated in passage of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914(.Musto, 1973). The Harrison Act crystallized a national policy of curtailingthe availability of "habit-forming" substances. Theprevious failure to appreciate the habit-forming properties ofnew substances had now resulted in professional and legislativepreoccupation with this issue. Whereas the term narcoticsformerly referred to those substances which producedstupefication and sleep ("narcosis"), includingalcohol, the term now assumed a new meaning, one defined by thepublic policy bearing its name. The term was now associated withany unfamiliar drug which appeared on the streets among thosepopulations which were associated with the opiates and cocaine.The acute effects of the various specific drugs became blurred.Because physicians and policy makers had now become exceedinglycautious about the dependence issue, any new drug was carefullyscrutinized for habit-forming properties; if the drug was used onthe streets it was often presumed "habit forming" andtherefore classified as a "narcotic." Within the next three decades, peyote and marihuana wereinserted in the "narcotics" laws of many states;chloral hydrate, which had been covered by earlier drug laws, wasalso included in the definition of "narcotics" in thenew legislation. It should be noted that legal classification ofa drug as a "narcotic" tended to malign its therapeuticutility. For example, heroin, and later marihuana, were purgedfrom the pharrnacopoeia altogether. In sum, the word"narcotics" had been purged of its scientific meaningand became, instead, a symbol of socially disapproved drugs. Other substances were introduced into the practice ofmedicine, notably the barbiturates and amphetamines, but theywere regulated under general pharmacy laws rather than under the"narcotics" laws. Although amphetamines were introducedin 1929 and the short-acting barbiturates appeared a few yearslater, they did not enter the illicit marketplace on a massivescale in the United States until the 1960's and consequently werenot associated with the narcotics until then. During the last decade, succeeding waves of hallucinogens,amphetamines and barbiturates escaped from the laboratories,pharmacies and medicine chests and found they way into thestreets. Together with marihuana, which moved from onesocio-economic "street" to another, use of these drugsdefined a new phenomenon and became associated with a new kind ofdrug user. To a substantial degree, the narcotics policyhad from the beginning been identified with underprivilegedminorities, criminals and social outsiders in general, although acommon feature of each periodic drug scare, including cocaine atthe turn of the century, heroin in the 1920's, marihuana in the1930's and heroin again in the 1950's, was the fear that drug usewould spread to youth. However, the drug problem of the 1960'swas clearly identified with the children of the middle and upperclasses. Drug use was now associated with unfamiliar life styles,youthful defiance of the established order, the emergence of avisible street culture, campus unrest, communal living, protestpolitics and even political radicalism. The drug taking of this youth population coincided withpervasive social anxieties regarding social disorder in generaland youthful behavior specifically. To many, youthful drug use,offered a convenient explanation for these problems, and, as theCommission noted in its first Report, marihuana in particularcame to symbolize the entire spectrum of social concern. Existinglegislative controls and vocabulary were closely tied to the oldstereotypes, and society responded to this new drug-usingbehavior through separate legislative action (the Drug AbuseControl Amendments of 1965) and a new linguistic symbol."Dangerous drugs" emerged as the statutory label forthe nonnarcotic drugs, such as hallucinogens, amphetamines andbarbiturates, whose non-medical use was socially disapproved. The single-mindedness of American drug policy is illustratedclearly by the reorganization of the federal drug bureaucracywhich took place in 1968. For technical reasons stemming from therevenue structure of the Harrison Act, narcotics enforcement hadalways been lodged in the Treasury Department. When the,"dangerous drugs" were brought under regulatory controlin 1965, enforcement responsibility was assigned to a new bureauin the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Then in1968, the responsibilities of the two agencies were merged in anew agency established in the Department of Justice: the Bureauof Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Public policy had theappearance of coherence once again. But this was not enough. Marihuana use continued to increasethroughout the decade, and the public was caught up in a highlyemotional debate. For the first time since the inception of theAmerican "narcotics" policy, public opinion focused onsome of the fundamental assumptions. Not surprisingly, debate onthe marihuana issue was often couched in terms of the statutoryvocabulary which has come to symbolize drug policy. For example,the scientifically indefensible classification of marihuana as a"narcotic" immediately provoked an erosion of thesymbolic coherence which had previously characterized drugpolicy. Similarly, the inevitable comparison between alcohol andmarihuana called into question the substantive separation betweennarcotics and dangerous drug policies on the one hand and alcoholpolicy on the other.2 After all, alcoholcan legitimately be classified as a "narcotic" in avery specific sense of that term, and it is surely a"dangerous drug" as well. 2 During most of the period of national alcoholprohibition, the Bureau of Prohibition was responsible forenforcement of the Harrison Act as well as the Volstead Act; butpassage of these two laws had parallel rather than sharedhistories, a point clearly demonstrated by subsequent events. Until the close of the 1960's, official defenses of marihuanapolicy continued to be premised on the implications of thestatutory vocabulary. Although the narcotic ideology was quicklyabandoned, many official pronouncements continued to linkmarihuana with the opiates because of their association in thelaw and to insist that marihuana was a "dangerous drug"even if it was not a "narcotic." An historicalunderstanding apprises us that these classifications arereflections of, rather than reasons for social disapproval. It became clear by the end of the decade that"narcotics" and "dangerous drugs" were nolonger adequate symbols of social policy; consequently "drugabuse" was adopted as a replacement symbol. However, theneed to distinguish marihuana use from other forms of "drugabuse" resulted in yet another distinction: marihuana wasclassified as a "soft" drug as opposed to the"hard" drugs, suggesting the same kind of distinctiondrawn between "hard liquor" and other alcoholicbeverages. But, as has been the case with all drug vocabulary,this distinction serves a social rather than a scientificpurpose. This terminology generally indicates an attempt todistinguish marihuana from heroin and cocaine, the stereotypical"hard" drugs. However, there is no consensus whatsoeveras to which other substances, if any, are considered to be"hard." If hard drugs is a narrow category, referringonly to the opiates and cocaine, it is simply another way ofsaying "narcotics;" on the other hand, if it is takento mean everything other than marihuana, it is simply anexpedient way of disassociating marihuana from other disapproveddrugs. Like "drug abuse," the hard-soft terminologyreflects a nascent effort to reestablish a sphere of"bad" drug use. Within the official community as wellas the general public, attempts are being made to gradedrugs according to their potential hazards, particularly theircapacity for inducing physical dependence. To the extent thatthis is true, the new linguistic symbols suggest that publicconcern has in some ways returned full circle to where it beganalmost a century ago. THE SOCIAL RESPONSE: FALSE PREMISES AND THE PERPETUATION OFA PROBLEM As this brief historical summary illustrates, American drugpolicy is almost seven decades old, and not once during thisperiod have the underlying assumptions been systematicallyevaluated and a broad, coherent foundation for policy makingestablished. As a result, each new occurrence in drug developmentand each new use pattern have been viewed as unfamiliar, with theunfamiliarity breeding a sense of crisis, and the crisisprecipitating ad hoe policy responses. The Commission feels strongly that the present institutionalresponse, despite sincere efforts to move it in the rightdirection, continues to be rooted in the mistakes of the past,and, indirectly, tends to perpetuate the "problem."Accordingly, it is useful to scrutinize the goals toward whichthe policy is directed and the premises which support it, as wellas to describe briefly some of the present governmental responseswhich are guided by these assumptions. Finally, as a prelude tothe remainder of the Report, the concluding sections of thisChapter will attempt to "wipe the slate clean" and tosketch a general frame-work for defining the problem andformulating a coherent social policy. The Assumptions and Premises of Present Policy Elimination of Non-Medical Drug Use American drug policy has been predicated on one fundamental orthe societal objective is to eliminate "non-medical"drug use. Inquiry has rarely been addressed to whether this goalis desirable or possible. Failure to address such questions isabetted by the exclusion of certain drugs and certain types ofdrug taking from the realm of social distress. For example, thenon-medical use of alcohol and tobacco would be inconsistent withthe declared goal; thus, statutory vocabulary and social folklorehave established the fiction that they are not drugs at all.Although use of these substances may arouse concern, they are notviewed in the wider context of drug use. Another area excluded from public discussion is drug usesanctioned by medical judgment. While most medically-approvedconsumption of psychoactive drugs is substantially different fromthe situation where the individual chooses to use the drughimself, this is not always true. The absence of the interveningjudgment of a third party does not mean that the individual'smotivation is "non-medical," or hedonistic. Nor doesthe intervention of medical judgment assure that the drug will beused for medically-intended purposes.3 3 The third party judgment may intervenedirectly, as is the case with prescription drugs, or indirectly,as is the case with over-the-counter preparations previouslyapproved for this purpose by the Food and Drug Administration. Drug policy makers cannot truthfully assert that this societyaims to eliminate non-medical drug use. No semantic fiction willalter the fundamental composition of alcohol and tobacco.Further, even if the objective is amended to exclude these drugs,human history discounts the notion that drug-using behavior canbe so tightly confined as a self-medication in pharmacy, wheretheir prescription drugs with them, the proliferation ofover-the-counter preparations, the advertising of mood-alteringdrugs, and the popularity of minor tranquilizers are allmanifestations of an important contemporary trend. The medical/non-medical distinction has become increasinglyblurred as emotional ailments increase. Many individuals tendtoday to assess their own needs and define the purposes for whichthey use a drug. For this reason, generalized societalproclamations regarding the need to eliminate non-medical druguse raise an important question that must be honestly answered:how does the daily use of a prescribed barbiturate to bring aperson "down" from the day differ from the similar useof a self-prescribed minor tranquilizer or, for that matter, amartini? Deferring for the moment our own view as to what society'sobjective in this area ought to be, we do know that it is not asclear cut as official pronouncements imply. In determining theappropriate objective, a task that we will undertake in ChapterFour, policy makers must recognize the scope and complexity ofdrug-using behavior and develop rational distinctions betweenthat which should be disapproved and that which should betolerated, or even approved. Within the area of disapproval,policy makers should not consider all disapproved drug use to beof equal importance; priorities must be assigned on the basis ofactual and potential social consequence, and not just on thebasis of numbers of users. Risk-Taking and Health Often cited in support of societal disapproval of non-medicaldrug use is the proposition that individuals should not risktheir health by using drugs. Without regard to the philosophicalpropriety of this premise as a guide for social policy, this viewappears to be somewhat at odds with the facts about drug use andwith prevailing social attitudes toward risk-taking in otherareas. Much emphasis has been placed on whether or not a drug is adangerous drug; and analogies have been drawn between"street" drugs and such substances as cyclamates. Theseexamples illustrate how closely public discussion of drug abusehas become tied to matters of individual health. In supportingpresent social policy, spokesmen often list those drug effectswhich are potentially harmful to individual health rather thanfocusing on the social consequences of drug-using behavior. The Commission believes that persons who take this approachhave misconstrued the nature of the drug issue. The assumptionthat all psychoactive drug use is a high-risk behavior presumes aprogression from irregular use of low doses to continuous use ofhigh doses, thereby ignoring pharmacological variations amongdrugs and the importance of frequency of use, method ofadministration, dose, and non-drug factors as determinants ofrisk. In fact, injury to health is associated primarily withchronic heavy use and at times with the acute effects of highdoses. Further, there is no correlation whatsoever between thecapacity of psychoactive drugs to induce behavioral disorders andtheir capacity to induce organic or somatic toxicity orpathology. Of the drugs which are most commonly associated withdependence or drug-induced behavior, alcohol produces the mostclearly established and reproducible brain pathology. Cocaine,amphetamines and other stimulants, heroin and morphine-likedrugs, and cannabis do not appear to have this effect. On theother hand, very heavy use of phenacitin, which has nosignificant behavioral impact at all, may produce renal damage,and heavy tobacco smoking is associated with greatly increasedrisk of lung cancer. If the standard for social policy werepotential injury to individual health, barbiturates, alcohol, andtobacco would present the clearest cases for prohibition. Yet,the latter two are available for self-defined purposes, and theformer is widely used in the practice of medicine. Nonetheless, the approach often applied to "drugs ofabuse" is the same as that applied to non-psychoactivesubstances: risks to individual health will be tolerated only ifthe medical needs for the substance justify the risks. Butindividuals would not choose to use psychoactive drugs if theydid not perceive some advantage to themselves. So the fundamentalquestion arises: Who is to weigh the perceived advantages of druguse against the risk, the individual or the society? To deal with this question, we must examine the pattern ofsocial response to risk-taking behavior in general. For example,we urge our youth -to be curious and to explore. Until recentyears, Americans tended to place a premium on high-poweredautomobiles. We tolerate the private ownership of firearms. Wetend to applaud the courageous mountain climber or otheradventurer who ignores the risks in the effort to establish humandominion over nature. In short, risk-taking behavior is-permitted and often encouraged by many of our socialinstitutions, which defer to individual judgment the weighing ofoften intangible benefits against the quite tangible risks. Society has long been aware of the individual and social risksof alcohol use. Even with the effort now being made to inform thepublic of the risks of tobacco use, society still permits thisdrug to be widely available. In both cases, society clearlysubordinates the risks inherent in such behavior, deferringinstead to individual judgment. The Commission is not suggesting that health risks areirrelevant to the formulation of drug policy. However, whateverappropriate weight is given to health considerations, it is aperipheral, rather than focal, concern. Drug policy must be basedon the social consequences of drug use, and on the social impactof drug-induced behavior. Motivation for Mood Alteration Subsumed within the societal goal of eliminating non-medicaldrug use is the value judgment that use of drugs for the explicitpurpose of mood alteration is per se undesirable. Toharmonize this judgment with approved conduct, we avoid analyzingthe motivations of similar behaviors. As noted earlier, we do not verbalize the motivation f oralcohol use in terms of pleasure but rather in terms of thedrug's function as a relaxant, as a social lubricant, and as abeverage. We do not think about the alcohol experience as analtered state of consciousness but rather as a means to someother end, such as promoting conviviality or stimulatingconversation. Within the medical setting, the individual is increasinglymaking the decision to use medically approved drugs and selectingthem according to their capacity to alter his mood. The NationalSurvey shows that 157o of the adult population reported that they"take a pill to calm down or cheer up" when they feel"out of sorts . . . not really sick, but nervous, ordepressed or under stress." Eighteen percent of the publicreported that they used alcohol for similar purposes. The use ofa variety of new mood altering drugs to cope with stress isundoubtedly a, significant social development, particularly amongwomen. This option to employ drugs for what is essentially anindividual diagnosis of felt needs has, to a large extent,changed public perception concerning the role of the drugs asmood alterants in our society. Whatever the biological and psychological foundations for thecommon human desire to alter consciousness, policy makers mustrecognize that drugs have always been used for this purpose. Mostsocieties have institutionalized at least one form ofdrug-induced mood alteration; only the drugs differ, not theessential purpose. Instead of assuming that mood alterationthrough some drugs is inherently objectionable, while similar useof others is not, the public and its leaders must focus directlyon the appropriate role of drug induced mood alteration. It is nolonger satisfactory to defend social disapproval of use of aparticular drug on the ground that it is a "mind-alteringdrug" or a "means of escape." For so are they all. Drugs and Individual Responsibility Implicit in present policy is the concern that manyindividuals cannot be trusted to make prudent or responsibledecisions regarding drug-taking. Certain drugs are thought topossess even greater powers than they have, including thecapacity to overbear individual will. Most people are notaccustomed to thinking about drug effects in terms ofprobabilities and uncertainties, of dose-response curves, ofmultiple effects (some desirable and some undesirable), ofreactions which vary from individual to individual and from timeto time in the same individual. A deep-seated popular belief that some drugs diminish ordestroy the individual's capacity to control his behavior isreflected in hypotheses such as "drugs cause crime" or"drugs cause dropping out" or "drugs cause mentalillness." Any perceived correlation between use of the drugand the unwanted consequence is attributed to the drug, removingthe individual from any and all responsibility. Similarly, whileit is true that certain drugs offer more intense psychologicalrewards than others, seduction characteristics are attributed toall psychoactive drugs, suggesting a chain of progression fromlight to heavy use, from weak to stronger drugs, all without theintervention of individual choice. A drug has no effect until it interacts with an organism. Theeffects of any drug, psychoactive drugs included, are mainly doserelated. At low or moderate doses they are determined mainly bynon-drug factors, such as the psychological characteristics ofthe individual, the reasons why he uses the drug, what he expectsthe effects will be, the physical and social setting in which heuses it, and how he perceives its use or non-use in relation toself-defined goals. Further, how his friends, his sub-culture,and his society define and respond to his drug use are equallyimportant f actors. These psychological and social criteria notonly influence the reaction to a specific drug but they are keyfactors in determining use or non-use, selection of substance,and the pattern and circumstances of use. An Overview of the Present Response Because of this confusion about objectives, the formalinstitutional response to the drug problem has been morereflexive than rational, more situation-oriented than strategic.The ad hoc responses to use of specific psychoactive drugshave interfered with examination of the fundamental questionsrelating to behavior patterns and the appropriate means of socialcontrol. Research has provided us with an almost endless stream ofpsychoactive substances. The tendency is to identify a newsubstance, determine its potential hazards as a chemical and thento insert it into the existing system. This procedure tends toperpetuate the public focus on the drugs rather than on theprevention of behavior about which society is concerned. When thedrug appears in the streets, as it inevitably does, socialinstitutions respond as if the behavior was unanticipated, andbecause they are ill-prepared to deal with the situation, anatmosphere of crisis is generated. Because the focus has always been on the elimination ofprohibited substances altogether and on the elimination of thestreet use of therapeutically useful drugs, social institutionshave directed primary attention to the problem of use of specificdrugs. Patterns of drug-using behavior have been ignoredexcept as an afterthought of intervention. When increases inprohibited drug use continue to escalate, policy makers respond,not by reassessing the problem from different perspectives, butrather by pressing for ever-more costly mechanisms of control;costly both in terms of resources and important social values.Drug policy can be, thus summed up: increased use of disapproveddrugs precipitates more spending, more programs, more arrests andmore penalties, all with little positive effect in reducing useof these drugs. Details of the present institutional response share theconfusion of purpose which characterizes the, entire socialresponse. We will sketch a few of the key features here althoughthese matters will be considered in some depth in Chapter Four. Throughout this Report, consumption-related offenses willrefer to offenses such as use, possession for personal use,presence in a place where prohibited drugs are being used. Unlessstated otherwise, "possession" means possession forpersonal use. Risk-Education An important operating assumption of the present response isthat if people are educated about the risks of drug taking, theywill not use drugs. It is presumed that presentation ofinformation regarding dangers and risks can quiet curiosity andthe desire for anticipated pleasant psychological sensations, thefactors which account for most individual drug experiences. Society's experience in attempting to discourage use ofsubstances not labeled as drugs is instructive. Campaigns havebeen mounted in the past, both through the mass media and theschools, about the dangers of alcohol use and cigarette smoking.Facts have been marshaled, scientific opinion has been mobilized,and the adverse consequences of use of these drugs have beenamply demonstrated by the number of alcoholics within the UnitedStates and the number of persons dying yearly from heart disease,lung cancer and other respiratory ailments. Still the consumptionof alcohol continues and the number of persons smoking cigarettesincreases. This same kind of educational effort has been directed at theillicit drugs with no apparent impact on behavior. Little insighthas been gained as to why this approach has not worked withalcohol and cigarettes, or as to whether risk-oriented curriculamay actually arouse interest rather than dampen it. Further,assuming that such programs might be useful, little thought hasbeen given to how to transmit the information, the assumptionagain being that the facts speak for themselves. This vastexpenditure of time, money and effort has apparently paid fewmeasurable social dividends, and those that have claimed successhave done so not on the basis of scientific proof, but on thebasis of impressions and anecdote. Coercion If information about risks and moral suasion is insufficientto convince many people not to use drugs, it is assumed that thethreat of a criminal sanction will do so. While a criminalproscription does function as a deterrent to some degree for allbehavior, the strength of this factor varies according to thenature of the offense, the, characteristics of the actor, theprobability of detection and the certainty of punishment. Withregard to drug consumption, all of these factors diminish theutility of the criminal sanction. Drug consumption is anexpressive conduct which normally occurs in private among groupswhich are least influenced by legal condensation. In addition,the consumption-related offenses are no longer supported by thestrong social consensus which once existed, and the emergingambivalence is reflected in the dispositional decisions ofpolice, prosecutors and courts. We note that drug consumption offenses have not beenremarkably successful in curtailing use in general. However, itis important here, as elsewhere, to distinguish between differentpatterns of drug taking behavior. On the one hand, the law maydeter indiscrete use and continued use of a prohibited drug. Onthe other hand, experimental behavior, particularly by youth, isunlikely to be deterred by the law alone. For those who aredependent upon prohibited drugs, such as the heroin-dependentperson, the deterrence concept is functionally inapplicable. Sickness Anyone choosing to use drugs, despite the enumerated risks,moral suasion and threat of criminalization, is often consideredabnormal, emotionally ill and weak of character. The last decadehas seen the pendulum of legislative opinion swing toward thebelief that drug dependence and even drug use is a"medical" problem, that it can be "treated,"and that the user can be "rehabilitated." Like manyideas which aim to correct those previously in vogue, the medicalapproach has itself become a runaway concept. Policy makers haveadopted policy guidewords such as "treatment,""rehabilitation," "contagion," and"epidemic," without regard to their utility in thepresent context. The "sickness" label has been attached to all usersof prohibited drugs without regard to their patterns ofdrug-taking behavior. While very few question that personscompulsively using drugs are in need of some form of therapeuticassistance, the same is rarely true for the experimental andrecreational user. To label drug users in general as mentally illis to place a large segment of American society in need of formalmedical assistance. With regard to drug dependence in particular, the public hasbeen led to believe that this condition is as definable andtreatable as ordinary illnesses of the body. In reality, there isnot, at the present time, any generally applicable cure fordrug-dependent persons let alone non-dependent users of drugs."Success" in treatment programs has been difficult todefine, reflecting the complex relationship between drug use,social functioning and mental health. Even when measured againsttheir own criteria for evaluation, most treatment programs candemonstrate only limited "success." Public policy is committed to the treatment and rehabilitationof all drug-dependent persons. While thousands of persons havebeen aided by treatment efforts in recent years, socialobjectives continue to outstrip professional understanding of thecondition and official capacity to deliver the necessaryservices. Perpetuating the Problem Because of the intensity of the public concern and theemotionalism surrounding the topic of drugs, all levels ofgovernment have been pressured into action with little time forplanning. The political pressures involved in this governmentaleffort have resulted in a concentration of public energy on themost immediate aspects of drug use and a reaction along the pathsof least political resistance. The recent result has been thecreation of ever larger bureaucracies, ever increasingexpenditures of monies, and an outpouring of publicity so thatthe public will know that "something" is being done. Perhaps the major consequence of this ad hoc policyplanning hag been the creation, at the federal, state andcommunity levels, of a vested interest in the perpetuation of theproblem among those dispensing and receiving funds.Infrastructures are created, job descriptions are standardized,"experts" are created and ways of doing businessroutinized and established along bureaucratic channels. Duringthe last several years, drug programming has become amulti-billion dollar industry, one administering to its own needsas well as to those of its drug-using clientele. In the course ofwell-meaning efforts to do something about drug use, this societymay have inadvertently institutionalized it as a never-endingproject. All of these responses stem from one fundamental flaw inpresent drug policy: the problem is defined incorrectly. Theuneasiness which the Commission has encountered among thoughtfulobservers and officials arises largely from their own perceptionsthat the present response, although massive, has so far beenrelatively ineffective. Yet, any challenge to the basic premisesof policy may be viewed by some as a disavowal of the entiresocial response. The Commission does not believe the presentpolicy should be abandoned out of hand. Instead, we hope thatpolicy can be made more coherent and more flexible. In order todo so, we must put aside preconceived notions, setting out afreshto redefine the problem. DEFINING THE PROBLEM The Meaning of Drug Use Throughout history man has used available psychoactivesubstances to seek relief from cold, hunger, deprivation,anxiety, pain and boredom. He also has used such substances toreceive pleasure or to achieve new experiences. Various cultureshave sought out and used naturally occurring plants for theirpsychoactive ingredients, discovering their effects by trial anderror. Modern man has consciously created new chemical substancesand institutionalized their availability for similar uses. Drugs have effects other than those which are sought; and alldrug effects vary with amount and frequency of use, thecharacteristics of the user, and the set and setting in whichthey are used. Consequently, different cultures have applieddifferent values to the presumed consequences of drug use,whether beneficial or deleterious. Each society has decided whichneeds are legitimate, which effects are valuable and which risksare tolerable. These judgments are based on prevailing valuesconcerning specific drugs, their effects, the reasons for whichthey are used, and the people who use them. Man does not ordinarily continue to do something that does notfulfill some real or imagined need. To persist, behavior must bereinforced. To the extent that it does fulfill a need, it willrecur, often at some risk, unless it interferes with some moreimportant need. The need for a drug may be closely related to itsreal or imagined effects or it may be grounded in social ratherthan chemical elements. Use of specific substances may determinegroup membership, or status within a group, or among groups. Itmay function as either a symbol or symptom of rebellion,alienation, independence or sophistication. To better understand current self-defined drug use and todetermine the scope of social concern, one must go beyond thecataloguing of substances (pharmacologically defined wherepossible), the listing of effects, and the counting of users andnon-users of drugs. The inquiry must shift from drugs to people,from pharmacological effects to the meaning and function of druguse. The Incidence of Drug Use The nature and scope of society's drug problem at any giventime are generally perceived in terms of the incidence ofnon-medical use of legal and illegal substances. Tables 1-4 and1-5 present data, of this kind obtained in theCommission-sponsored National Survey. Such statistics may be useful for assessing in general termsthe relative success or failure of institutional efforts tochannel drug taking behavior into prescribed channels. However,these figures, and similar ones, are often used to arouse publicconcern, and do not explain either the meaning of such drug useor the nature and scope of the social problem which it poses. As an example, Table 1-5 illustrates that regular use ofalcohol is extremely widespread among Americans 18 years of ageand older (53%), and that large numbers of the nation's youth(12-17) consume alcohol despite official blandishments (24%). Dothe respective legitimacy and illegitimacy of these behaviorstell us anything about the nature of social concern about alcoholuse? In comparison, Table 1-4 indicates that 16% of the adultpopulation and 14% of the youth have used marihuana despite thelegal proscriptions, and that 8 % of the adults and 7 % of theyouth continue to use the drug. Smaller percentages of thepopulace have also violated the law by trying hallucinogens suchas LSD, cocaine or heroin. Does the illegitimacy and relativeincidence of such behavior bear directly on the dimensions ofsocial concern? Is marihuana use more or less of a social problemthan heroin use? Than alcohol use? The data in Table 1-5 illustrate that over-the-counterpreparations are sometimes consumed for non-therapeutic reasons.Does the permissibility of this behavior suggest that it iswithout social consequence? Does the motivation for use make apublic policy difference? Scientifically acceptable incidence data, together withdemographic analysis, can tell us who uses various drugs and bowthey are used in terms of frequency and duration. Suchinformation cannot, however, answer the crucial social policyquestions: why and so what? Drug-using Behavior The initial step in understanding the meaning of drug use andits impact on the social order is to regard this phenomenon as wewould any other human behavior. In Chapter Two of the Report, theCommission will place these incidence figures in perspective,elaborating on the patterns of drug-using behavior and theindividual and social factors which seem to influence individualdecisions to initiate, continue orterminate the use of drugs. In short, we will try to answer the whyof drug use. Because drug-using behavior is not a unitaryphenomenon, the social consequences of this behavior are tieddirectly to the individual's reason for the drug use and in turnto the frequency, duration, intensity, dose, set and setting ofuse. The Commission has divided the entire spectrum of drug-usingbehavior into five patterns reflecting essentially distinctmeanings for the individual users. The most common type of drug-using behavior can be classifiedas experimental: a short-term, non-patterned trial of oneor more drugs, motivated primarily by curiosity or a desire toexperience an altered mood state. Experimental use most oftenoccurs among young persons in the company of one or moredrug-experimenting friends or acquaintances. Most non-experimental drug-using behavior can be classified asrecreational, which occurs in social settings amongfriends or acquaintances who desire to share an experience whichthey define as both acceptable and pleasurable. Generally,recreational use is both voluntary and patterned and tends not toescalate to more frequent or intense use patterns. This type ofbehavior is not sustained by virtue of the dependence of the useron the drug in any meaningful sense of that term. Reinforcementfor continued use is strengthened by non-drug factors. A pattern of drug-using behavior which has grown significantlyduring the last decade is circumstantial drug use. Thisbehavior is generally motivated by the user's perceived need ordesire to achieve a new and anticipated effect in order to copewith a specific problem, situation or condition of a personal orvocational nature. This classification would include students whoutilize stimulants during preparation for exams, long-distancetruckers who rely on similar substances to provide extendedendurance and alertness, military personnel who use drugs to copewith stress in combat situations, athletes who attempt to improvetheir performance and housewives who seek to relieve tension,anxiety, boredom or other stresses through the use of sedativesor stimulants. A much smaller group of drug users may be regarded as havingescalated from recreational or circumstantial use patterns intointensified drug-using behavior. Although this is the mostamorphous of the behavioral categories, the Commission refers ingeneral to drug use which occurs at least daily and is motivatedby an individual's perceived need to achieve relief from apersistent problem or stressful situation, or his desire tomaintain a certain self-prescribed level of performance. Thiscategory includes persons generally referred to as "problemdrinkers" or "heavy social drinkers," housewiveswho regularly consume barbiturates or other sedatives andbusiness executives who regularly consume tranquilizers. A verydifferent group of intensified users are those youths who haveturned to drugs as sources of excitement or meaning in otherwiseunsatisfying existences. The salient feature of this class ofbehavior is that the individual still remains integrated withinthe larger social and economic structure; however, the regularuse of one or more drugs may constitute dependence in a broadsense and may threaten to impair individual or socialfunctioning. The most disturbing pattern of drug-using behavior,encompassing the smallest number of drug users, is compulsive usewhich consists of a patterned behavior at a high frequency andhigh level of intensity, characterized by a high degree ofpsychological dependence and perhaps physical dependence as well.The distinguishing feature of this behavior is that drug usedominates the individual's existence, and preoccupation with drugtaking precludes other social functioning. Under current socialand legal conditions, compulsive drug use is most easilyrecognized as occurring among chronic alcoholics andheroin-dependent persons, although the incidence of compulsivebarbiturate use is probably significantly higher than theessentially episodic nature of street use would suggest. Drug-Related Risk An understanding of the different types of drug-using behavioris the starting point for problem definition. In these behavioralclassifications, the key element is the meaning of drug use tothe individual; the specific drug being used is subsumed withinthis framework. In reaching the next step in the problemdefinition process, we must focus on the individual and socialrisks attending drug use and those factors which distinguishdrug-using behavior from other forms of experimental andrecreational activities and other forms of coping behavior. As anaid to understanding, basic psychopharmacological principlesconcerning drug-related risk must be kept in mind. Drug-related risk, both individual and social, escalates withincreasing dose and higher frequency of administration. Drug-related risk varies with the mode of drug administration,generally being highest for intravenous administration and lowestfor oral ingestion. Drug-related risk varies according to the setting in which useoccurs, particularly when low doses are used. Drug-related risk varies according to the user's capacity tocontrol intake and detoxify the drug. The greatest risk occurswhen the rate of administration exceeds the capacity of the bodyto detoxify the drug and in consequence the brain is never drugfree. Drug-related risk varies according to the "set" ofthe user, including the expected and desired outcome of the drugexperience, the user's personality, his ability to compensate fordrug effects on the basis of prior experience, and his ability tolimit intake according to a predetermined capacity. Drug-related risk often increases significantly if more thanone drug is used concomitantly. Further, many risks associated with drug use are a function ofsocial policy rather than of the drugs themselves. Unintentionaldrug overdoses, whatever their precise pharmacologicalcharacteristics, occur most often among those who have secureddrugs outside the legitimate channels which control quality andpotency. For example, the incidence of alcohol-induced blindnesswas significantly higher during alcohol prohibition than it istoday mainly because users resorted to methyl alcohol. Inaddition, the unsupervised intravenous use of illicitly obtainedsubstances increases the likelihood of pulmonary and circulatorydisorders and diseases which may result from use of unsterilizedequipment or from injection of insoluble material used on thestreet to increase the bulk of the drug. Finally, muchdrug-related crime, particularly that associated with dependenceon opiates such as heroin, is a function of a prohibitory socialpolicy toward availability rather than of the drugs themselves. The above propositions apply to all drugs. However, anadditional axiom is crucial to formulation of social policy:specific drugs are qualitatively different in terms of individualand social risk. Drug using behavior is not a unitary phenomenon;nor are all drugs the same. At lower levels of use, when non-drugfactors predominate in determining drug effect, the differencesamong drugs in terms of relative risk may be relativelyunimportant. At other levels of use, particularly in large dosesor high frequencies, the characteristics of the drug may becomemost important in determining risk. With these psychopharmacological postulates in mind, we nowturn to an analysis of the type of risks which engender socialconcern. The Commission has categorized drug-related risksinto those affecting individual health, those involvingdrug-induced behavior as an acute consequence of the drugexperience, and those associated with the behavioral aspects ofchronic use or dependence. Risks to individual health The health risks arising from the acute effects of a drugexperience are related primarily to dose and the set and settingof use. When drugs are consumed in small doses orally or bysniffing, acute risks to health are usually slight; when they areadministered intravenously, however, even in small doses, theacute health risks are multiplied, and fatalities have occurred,often for obscure reasons. High doses, individualpredispositions, including those related to age, and uncertainexpectations increase the risk of overdoses and of physical andpsychological injury. Since the lethality and psychologicaleffects of individual drugs differ widely, the drug used is animportant determinant of health-related risks. The major concern from the standpoint of individualhealth is the effect of repeated administration of the drug overa long term, rather than the acute effect of the drug experience.The possibilities of organ damage as well as impairment ofpsychological function increase with the frequency and intensityof use; also, chronic use of tolerance producing drugs increasesthe risk of overdose as well as the likelihood of physical orpsychological damage. Individual drugs vary widely in toxicity,in tolerance and in psychological effect. As we noted earlier, the special public policy considerationsposed by psychoactive drug use arise not from risks to individualhealth per se but rather from the capacity of these drugs toaffect behavior. There is no correlation between the capacity ofa psychoactive drug to induce behavioral disorders and itscapacity to induce either brain or other somatic pathology. Drug-Induced Behavior Whether a person under the influence of a drug will becomeaggressive or passive, will have impaired psychomotor capacity orwill exhibit otherwise disordered behavior depends on the entirerange of variables determining drug effect. Set and setting playa most important role, particularly when low doses are consumed.However, drugs are qualitatively different in this connection andcan be compared. A regular user of psychoactive substances isgenerally able to compensate for some of the acute behavioraleffects. Over the long term, however, additional risks may beencountered; as a result of chronic use, a person may becomesignificantly more aggressive or passive, may becomesignificantly less adept at muscular control, or may deterioratementally, becoming incapable of engaging in voluntary learningefforts. Most important, the likelihood of adverse long termeffects on behavior is increased substantially if the personbecomes dependent upon the substance. It is for this reason thatwe have isolated the dependence liability of various substancesas a separate risk factor. Dependence Liability Whether a person who continues to use a psychoactive substancewill become dependent on the substance, escalating fromrecreational or circumstantial patterns to intensified orcompulsive patterns, is an issue where the characteristics of thedrug and the individual play equally important roles. As we willdiscuss in Chapter Three, drugs are qualitatively different interms of their potential for reinforcement. For example,marihuana is significantly less reinforcing than heroin orcocaine. The behavioral consequences of chronic use also differamong drugs, as does the potential for behavioral disruption whenthe dependent person's drug-taking is interrupted. From theseperspectives, chronic use of dependence-producing doses ofbarbiturates pose significantly different problems from chronicuse of cocaine. Because the health and behavioral risks of drug use increasewith frequency, intensity and duration of use, the likelihood ofdependence is a crucial determinant of social concern. Evaluating the Social Consequences of Drug Use In order to translate the analyses of drug-using behavior andrisk potential of specific drugs into a meaningful framework forpolicy making, a description and evaluation of the socialconsequences which flow from drug-induced behavior or drugdependence is necessary. Although these issues will be addressedin Chapter Three, some general observations regarding the socialimpact of various patterns of drug-using behavior and of the useof individual drugs is useful so that a definition of the drugproblem as it is understood to exist in American society todaycan be undertaken. As we wrote in our first Report on marihuana, the socialimpact of the use of a particular drug or of a specific patternof drug-using behavior involves three distinct considerations.First is the impact on public safety of drug-inducedbehavior or drug dependence. The major concerns from thestandpoint of drug-induced behavior are increased aggressivenessor violent behavior, loss of psychomotor control or alteration ofjudgment and perception which might result in dangerous conduct.With regard to drug dependence, the public safety may bethreatened by persons who are dependent upon a drug which is notlegitimately available and who may commit crimes to financepurchases in the illicit market. The second general area of social consequence is the impact onthe public health and public welfare arising from drug use.This is a quantitative concept pertaining to the health resourcesand social services necessary to prevent, treat and compensatefor the adverse effects of drug use as well as the social loss,in terms of productivity and social contribution, which occurswhenever drug use interferes with normal social and economicfunctioning. For example, unemployment, absenteeism, decreasedsocial performance levels and family disruption may all stem fromintensified or compulsive drug use, resulting in a measurablesocial loss. When drug use is approached from the public health and welfarestandpoint, it must be viewed as part of the larger health andwelfare system which deals with many related problems. Thissystem generally focuses on populations at risk, organizing thenecessary range of medical, human and social services fordelivery of services to the appropriate population. In the drugarea, health resources must be allocated and available todeal with acute reactions, overdoses and diseases, such ashepatitis, among predictable proportions of drug-usingpopulations. This may require a shift of limited medical servicesfrom one health area to another. More important, medical andsocial services must be organized for delivery to persons whoseintensified or compulsive drug use is correlated with impairmentof social functioning (treatment and rehabilitation), as well asto populations who might develop these patterns of use(prevention). Finally, an understanding of the social impact of drug usemust also include the impact on the normative social order. Althoughthis concept is entirely qualitative, dealing with the prevailingsocial values, it has always determined the manner in which thedrug problem has been defined and the nature of the socialresponse. In terms of establishing policy predicates, theCommission believes strongly that considerations of morality doinfluence the formulation of appropriate policy objectives.However, the Commission believes that such considerations oftenhave been overemphasized in the process of defining the problem.Only when the impact of drug use on the normative social order isplaced in proper perspective can we hope to dispel the climate ofcrisis in which drug policy is now made. Defining America's Drug Problem Theoretically, social concern about use of a particularsubstance relative to another should correlate with the verifiedsocial costs attending the use of each drug in that society. Asthe incidence of intensified and compulsive use increases, so tooshould the public's concern with the problem. However, thecurrent problem definition in the United States bears littlerelationship to actual social cost. The intense public concernregarding use of most drugs in large measure reflects anxiety forthe future rather than empirical considerations rooted in thepresent. The result has been an overestimation of the nature ofthe problem attending use of some drugs, such as marihuana, andan underestimation of the problem attending use of other drugs,such as barbiturates and alcohol. In the Commission's view, problem definition should take intoaccount the relationship between the maximum potential socialcost of use of a particular drug under given conditions ofavailability, compared with the verified social costs at aparticular point in time. In this context, the most seriousconcern in contemporary America should attach to the use ofalcohol and heroin. Moderate social concern should attach to theuse of amphetamines, barbiturates, hallucinogens, methaqualoneand cocaine, the use of which is relatively well-controlledwithin the present social policy framework. The use of marihuanaand the so-called minor tranquilizers appears to requirerelatively minimum social concern at the present time. Presenttrends do suggest, however, that the incidence of use of anddependence on barbiturates and cocaine may be increasing and maydemand increased social attention. It is in this context that weturn to a general overview of the means by which social controlshould be achieved. The Limits of Social Control The Commission believes that the contemporary American drugproblem has emerged in part from our institutional response todrug use. Since we have failed to appreciate the diverse natureof drug using behavior, we have failed to weave policy into thefabric of social institutions. Instead, policy has been imposedfrom the top, often without regard to possible impact on theinstitutional fabric itself, much less on drug use. It isworthwhile, then, to consider the general requirements of socialcontrol and the general guidelines upon which policy makingshould be based. Responsible observers agree that society has an interest incontrolling the individual's drug-taking behavior. Thepotentially disruptive behavioral effects of the drug experienceand the potentially adverse social consequences of the chronicuse of most psychoactive drugs are matters of appropriateconcern. The policy maker's task in this area is not to choosebetween social control or social disinterest; rather, it is todetermine if and when informal mechanisms of social control mustbe supplemented with formal ones. Drug use, in one form or another, has been a common feature ofmost cultures throughout history. To the Commission's knowledge,no society has successfully eliminated drug use altogether,although all have attempted to set limits, and most heterogeneoussocieties have contained distinct subgroups opposing all drug useamong their own members. The alcohol prohibition experience inthis country is best viewed as an attempt by one social group toimpose its abstentionist doctrine on the entire culture. Socialcontrol generally stops short of elimination. In its most basic sense, drug taking is socially controlledwhen it is routinized, ritualized and structured in ways whichreduce to a minimum the occurrence of drug-induced behavior whichthe culture considers undesirable. In small, primitive societies,the social control over drug use tends to be most successfulsince it is fully integrated with the overall institutionalcontrol structure, generally dominated by kinship and religiousinstitutions. The well-controlled, ritualized use ofhallucinogenic substances by a number of tribal cultures, such asthe Indians in Central and North America and theaborigines of Australia, has been amply demonstrated (deRios1973). In contemporary mass societies, however, responsibility forsocial control over increasing spheres of human conduct hastended to pass from the family and church to educational,economic and governmental institutions. This reliance on formalinstitutions, coupled with the impersonality and complexity ofindustrial and post-industrial societies, has made the task ofsocial control of drug-taking behavior all the more difficult.For this reason, together with the proliferation of availablesubstances, the problem appears far more pervasive in thesesocieties, especially when they are heterogeneous andindividualistic. Western societies have routinely utilized their publicinstitutions, particularly the legal ones, in an effort tocontain undesirable drug use within tolerable limits. The success of social control through law is always difficultto measure. First, "tolerable limits" is a relativeconcept. Many societies in the early stages of industrializationhave large populations of chronic drug users, but the importanceof enforcement of legal controls on drug taking behavior palesbeside the more pressing social needs of food, shelter, clothingand national survival. In this sense, the United States iscomparatively fortunate to be able to be concerned about its drugproblem, and to have a surplus of national resources to devote toits resolution. A second factor which complicates heavy reliance on socialcontrol through law are the values different societies place onthe rights of individuals. Application of criminal law mustconform to well-established limitations in the United States andGreat Britain, for example, and certain proscriptions thoughtnecessary to minimize a given drug using behavior may be moreintolerable to the general social fabric than the behavioritself. But this is not true in all societies. Japan, which is amore authoritarian society, was able to stem a large and growingamphetamine problem during the mid 1950's and an incipient heroinproblem during the early 1960's by mobilizing a broadly basedsocial response centered on effective use of the criminal law andan educational effort based in large measure on national pride.It is doubtful that similar exhortations and enforcementtechniques could be as readily employed in this country. These cross-cultural observations provide the backdrop againstwhich we must consider the current American response to its drugproblem. First, reliance on law is unlikely to be effective inAmerican society unless it is joined consciously and directlywith use of other institutions of social control. Second, drugpolicy should not be made in a vacuum. A proposed policy must beanalyzed both in terms of its likely impact on drug-takingbehavior as well as its likely impact on other social values andinstitutions. Third, the problems to which the society directsits formal response must be those which exceed the level ofsocially tolerable limits. For example, most drug use, even ofdisapproved substances, is socially controlled to some degree byinformal institutions such as peer groups and families. Formalsocial efforts should be directed to those behaviors which arenot adequately controlled by informal mechanisms of socialcontrol, aiming primarily to support the informal controlmechanisms and intervening directly only as a last resort. THE COMMISSION'S ROLE The Commission believes that the first step toward resolvingthe drug problem is to reconsider the present diagnosis of theailment. The social response is presently a large part of theproblem, one which is compounded with each unanticipated crisis.To break this cycle, it is necessary to refocus our attention onthat behavior which carries the most serious social consequence.Preoccupation with the drugs themselves must be replaced by anunderstanding of the behavioral impact of drug use. We must dealdirectly with the ambivalence of our attitudes with respect todrugs, conforming our beliefs to reality and our conduct to ourideals. Only then will a coherent policy emerge, one which canwithstand legitimate criticism, and one which will have abeneficial impact on the problem. Promises which cannot be kept must not be made. The publicmust be apprised that disapproved drug use is part of a largersocial pattern, and that all the money and effort that theAmerican society can muster will never be able to dealeffectively with this behavior if the problem continues to bedefined as it is now. Drug policy making must take into account awide range of social phenomena of which drug use is a small part,and institutional responses must be framed in the context ofbroader social roles. Unless present policy is redirected, wewill perpetuate the same problems, tolerate the same socialcosts, and find ourselves as we do now, no further along the roadto a more rational legal and social approach than we were in1914. The Commission has not attempted to devise utopian policyrecommendations. Instead we have attempted primarily to formulatea policy-making process, one which includes all of the importantvariables and which separates various crucial issues. We haveapplied this process in order to provide a plan of action to beimplemented immediately. But we would be remiss if we were onlyto propose recommendations for the present. The Commission feelsthat a coherent social policy requires a fundamental alterationof social attitudes toward drug use, and a willingness to embarkon new courses when previous actions have failed. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | Drug Use in America, Problem inPerspective WT01-B32-10IA031-000652-B045-166http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/duapip/pip3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131551 text/html 234794HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:15:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:12:35 GMTContent-length: 234575 The Social Impact of Drug Dependence and Drug-InducedBehavior The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972 Chapter Three - The Social Impact of Drug Dependence andDrug-Induced Behavior Western man pays frequent homage to the freedom of his will.Although Western philosophy has always included strains ofpredestination in one form or another, the belief that mancontrols his fate runs deep, and even those who question thisfrom. the scientific standpoint are often quick to add that thestate should continue to act upon it. Whenever an individualchooses to act irresponsibly, as defined by his society, he isheld accountable to other men, to his state, or according toprevailing belief, to his Creator. But man does not will everything that happens to him, and theprecepts of free will and accountability have been tempered inrelation to many conditions of existence, Foremost of these, ofcourse, is the notion of sickness. Although the individual mayplace himself in a position which increases the risk of disease,he does not usually will to be sick; -accordingly, he isgenerally not held accountable either for his sickness or for itsbehavioral concomitants. Poverty is another area which hasrecently been separated from notions of free will and moralworth. There are some who shun worldly possessions in order toenhance their spirituality, but most men do not will to be poor.Since the late 19th Century Western society has actedincreasingly on the proposition that environmental factors maypredispose poverty and socioeconomic immobility. The emergence ofthe welfare state rests on the belief that man should not be heldaccountable for, or suffer for that which he cannot prevent. Disease and poverty are two broad qualifications of anormative order premised on considerations of free will. Inaddition, our normative system and our law are replete with otherexceptions which recognize that an individual may well beoverborne by others or by conditions for which he is notresponsible. Love, hypnosis, duress, "acts of God,"irresistible impulses, uncontrollable rages all may excuse theindividual for conduct which might otherwise be consideredfoolish, unwise, intemperate or even criminal. Of course, thereare also conditions which may predispose behavior although we donot excuse them, such as foolishness, immoderation and vanity. Drugs introduce a new dimension into this uneasy marriage offree will and human and social imperfection. The very phrase"being under the influence" of a drug manifests thefundamental proposition that drugs can alter or control humanbehavior. The drug may induce a socially desirable form of control inthe sense that the influence of a drug may restore control whichhas otherwise been lost. For example, sedative drugs may beadministered to a person whose anguish over the death of a lovedone is out of control, not to obliterate grief but to modify theperson's responses. Drugs may also be used to minimize theeffects of "unwilled" behaviors stemming from mentalillness or aberration. Some examples of the socially sanctioneduses of drugs for behavior control in the context of therapy are:the administration of drugs to mental patients to dampen theintensity of acute behavioral disruption and to enhance theircapacity for organized responses, the drug-based efforts toincrease concentration and reduce aimlessness of hyperkeneticchildren, and the maintenance of heroin-dependent persons onmethadone to stabilize their otherwise anti-social behavior.Drugs have also been used for punishment; that is to alter thebehavior of persons in detention, although this development, hasmet with substantial resistance. The common thread of these examples is that drugs may beemployed to restore the capacity for responsible, willedbehavior. However, public attitude and social policy toward druguse are focused primarily on the fact that drugs may alsodiminish the capacity of a person to control his conduct in themanner society expects of him. This perception has dominatedpolitical rhetoric, literary description, legal doctrine andpublic understanding about drugs for centuries. With someexceptions, the American normative system stipulates that suchloss of control is socially undesirable and in itself constitutesirresponsible behavior. On the other hand, American law has longbeen ambivalent about whether a person should be held entirely orpartially accountable for such behavior or its consequences,reflecting the basic tension between freedom of will and humanlimitations. Whatever the precise relationship between drug use and self-control, the very possibility of drug-influenced behavior iswhat distinguishes drug use from other forms of behavior,motivating all societies to regulate it. In American society,however, the extent to which drug use, by itself, can deprive theindividual of control over his behavior has been highlyexaggerated. Drugs are fixed in the collective consciousness as substanceswhich can rob man of his sentiency, morals and values. Each drug,whether it be LSD, heroin or marihuana, is widely believed tohave the capacity to destroy the will. For decades, the publichas held the view that the initial use of psychoactivesubstances, often tied to the exotic Eastern world, is theopening of Pandora's box: one taste of the forbidden fruit andcontrol will shortly be lost. The assumed paths from marihuana toheroin, from. LSD to insanity, from heroin to crime, and, inbygone days, from tobacco to alcohol, and from alcohol to skidrow, reflect concern not only about social cost but also aboutthe inevitable erosion of will. This presumed relationship between drugs and will is alsoreflected in the tendencies to ascribe a causal relationship todrugs and almost every type of unwanted behavior, and toattribute to drugs the undes1rable behavior of disapproved socialgroups. Whenever specific drugs are temporally related to sexualexcess, crime, traffic accidents or use of other drugs, theperson and his will tend to be forgotten, and the drug itselfbecomes the villain. Perhaps the unique expression of drug-induced loss ofself-control is the inability of the individual to stop using thedrug. The dread of becoming ensnared in the "clutches ofaddiction" has long dominated public antipathy toward theevils of drug use, reflecting a deep-seated belief that mental,physical and moral debilitation is the likely consequence ofhabitual drug use. Whatever its ancillary impact or subsequenthistory, the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914 embodied above allelse a firm public policy judgment opposing the use of"addicting" or "habit-forming drugs."Further, the progression thesis, which has been propounded sincedrug policy began, although the drugs have changed, and the morerecent distinction between bard and soft drugs, suggests howstrongly concern about dependence dominates the entire drugissue. The notion of addiction is of relatively recent origin,emerging as a recognizable medical entity during the 18thCentury. Before that time, the focus of social control in thiscountry as in other societies, was on the disorderingconsequences of the drug experience. Aggressive behavior, loss ofpsychomotor control or other disordered behavior induced by thedrug experience must also be taken into account in theformulation of drug policy. TABLE 111-1. (Cont.) FOOTNOTES to TABLE 111-1. I In choosing substances to be included in this table, theCommission did not attempt to be comprehensive. Selections weremade in order to illustrate the full range of dependenceliability and capacity for influencing or inducing behavioralchange. 2 Capacity of drug to induce continued use on the basis ofpsychological reward. Relative judgments are based on use ofmaximum tolerated dose, as measured by laboratory studies andconfirmed by refined clinical experience. 3 The actual prevalence of chronic use among the usingpopulation. The relative prevalence of chronic use of specificsubstances is determined by a wide range of socioculturalvariables, including such factors as social custom, availabilityof the substance, susceptibility of particular populations topatterns of chronic use and availability of more potentsubstances. 4 Potential for disruption or impairment of socialfunctioning after a single dose. Relative judgments are based onconsumption of doses sufficient to produce marked pharmacologicaleffects. 5 Drug-induced behavioral response, as measured by potentialimpairment of social functioning, accompanying chronicadministration of dependence-producing doses. 6 Short-term behavioral responses, measured by disruption orimpairment of social functioning, accompanying interruption ofdrug taking after chronic administration of dependence producingdoses. 7 The relative judgments regarding methadone are based onparenteral administration and oral administration in naivesubjects. The Commission expressly notes that oral administrationto opiate-dependent persons in a maintenance setting has asignificantly different impact on behavior. 8 Includes related drugs such as psilocybin, DMT. 9 Inapplicable. Because of extremely low reinforcementpotential, chronic use patterns do not generally occur, and noabstinence syndrome has been described. 10 Includes drugs which are structurally related and roughlysimilar in effect to mescaline, such as DOM ("STP"). While drugs have a capacity to affect behavior, they do notdo so uniformly. Table 111-1 provides an overview of the relativecapacity of selected drugs to induce dependence and influencebehavior. However, drugs do not affect behavior independently.Non-drug factors play an equally crucial role in determining thebehavorial concomitants of drug use. The personal characteristicsof the user, his expectations about the drug experience and aboutsociety's attitudes and possible responses, the setting in whichthe drug is used, as well as broader sociocultural factors, areall major determinants of drug effect and of the individual'scapacity to control the effects of the drug through the exerciseof his will. We will now examine the social consequences of drug-usingbehavior. First, we will establish a framework by analyzing drugdependence and drug-induced behavior from a psychopharmacologicalstandpoint, providing detailed explanations for the conceptspresented in Table 111-1. Then we will consider the actual andpotential impact on the public safety and the public health andwelfare of the patterns of drug-using behavior discussed in theprevious Chapter. Finally, we will sketch the implications ofthis analysis for social policy. These guidelines will serve as abackdrop for the application of the policy-making process inChapter Four. I -- DRUG DEPENDENCE Since the psychoactive properties of naturally-occurringsubstances were first discovered and sought, the excessive,chronic or compulsive use of these substances has been anidentifiable and predictable human condition. Until the 19thCentury, however, this phenomenon was viewed primarily in moral,rather than medical or scientific terms. One 18th Centuryobserver likened the use of opium in Eastern countries to the useof "wine and spiritous liquors in civilized Europe (where itis) the support of the coward, the solace of the wretched and thedaily source of intoxication of the debauchee" (Crumpe1793). This is not to say that the physical consequences of chronicdrug use went unnoticed. As early as 1701, a London physician, inThe Mysteries of Opium Revealed, addressed "The Effects ofSudden Leaving Off the Use of Opium After a Long and Lavish UseThereof," where he described a withdrawal syndrome (Jones1701). However, neither Dr. Jones nor his contemporaries regardedthis condition as fundamentally different from that associatedwith excessive wine drinking or the excessive eating or chewingof other substances such as tobacco. The, physical concomitantsof the "opium habit", like those for tobacco and wine,were associated by some with a defect of individual will and byothers with some unknown property of the drugs. Isolation of morphine from opium and the subsequentdevelopment of the hypodermic syringe clarified the distinctionbetween the opium habit and the alcohol and tobacco habits. Twopreviously held theories were now discarded: first, that theopium habit was dependent on oral ingestion of the drug, andsecond, that the withdrawal effects arose. from resinoussubstances in the opium. Vivid literary descriptions, the,introduction of opium-smoking by Chinese immigrants, and thewidespread use of opium and morphine during and after the CivilWar soon stimulated the attention of medical professionals. The"army disease" or morphinisin was now recognized as adistinctive medical and social problem. During the last three decades of the 19th Century, medicalprofessionals strove to understand, describe and treat thissickness. Meanwhile, the public was becoming acquainted with thehabit-forming properties of the opiates, as the population ofopiate-dependent persons increased. State laws at once, began toreflect them popular fear of drug habits, as did the labellingrequirement of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906.Simultaneously, the social aspects of chronic opiate use arousedthe popular imagination. The stereotype of the "dopefiend" emerged, and with it a highly restrictive publicpolicy, one rooted in considerations apart from the pharmacologiceffects of the prohibited drugs. TEMINOLOGICAL CONFUSION In the United States, the public, the medical professions andpolicy makers all discovered the individual mid socialconsequences of chronic opium use at roughly the same time. Aconnection between popular vocabulary and scientific terminologywas established as the scientific community tended to appropriatelay terms, laden with emotional and imprecise meanings, and toimbue them with scientific meanings. The first of thesedescriptive terms to emerge was "addictions" Addiction The word addiction evolved from the Latin addicere which, inRoman law, meant the giving or binding over of a person to onething or another, such as a judge assigning a debtor to hiscreditor. By the late 16th Century, "to addict" hadapparently assumed a broader meaning: to devote, give up or applyhabitually to a practice. One writer suggests that the word wasgenerally identified with bad habits or vices (Sonnedecker 1959).With the emergence of public and scientific interest in the opiumproblem, "addiction"' and "mania" werecommonly used in the press to describe this ascendent vice. Within the American scientific community, the terms mostcommonly employed during the 19th and early 20th Centuries todescribe the condition were "opium (or morphine) habit"and "morphinism."' In 1903, for example, the, AmericanPharmaceutical Association established a "Committee of theAcquirement of Drug Habits." By 1920, however, thescientific community had given the term addiction its blessing, adevelopment paralleling the popularization of the word"narcotics" and the entry of government into the field."Narcotic addiction" became a household phrase. As we suggested in Chapter One, "narcotic" soonlost its pharmacologic meaning and came to encompass any drugassociated with the populations using the opiates or cocaine;similarly "addiction" came to be tied in the publicmind to the habitual use of any drug. In the press and councilsof government, marihuana users and cocaine users were frequentlycharacterized as addicts. Interestingly, the dangers of alcohol"addiction" were widely proclaimed during the intensePublic discussion surrounding the adoption of the 18th Amendmentalthough this terminology was strongly resisted by opponents ofProhibition. Many scientists remained uncomfortable with the imprecise useof the term addiction, and particularly with its strong moralover-tones. Yet, because the condition was so little understood,there was little agreement on a substitute. Throughout the 1920'sthere remained "considerable confusion ... as to thesignificance of various terms employed in consideration of drugaddiction in the broad sense of the word" (Seevers 1962).Terry and Pellens, in the introduction to their classic 1928 workaddressed this problem: One further matter requires consideration, namely, the terminology employed. As elsewhere, here also controversial subjects are involved, for different writers have used terms and definitions which in themselves have indicated particular attitudes toward the nature of the, problem. Thus habit, craving, appetite, mania, addiction, addiction disease, all may be interpreted significantly if desired by those using or reading them. We have tried to select some name for the condition of chronic opium-using that would not carry a partisan, restricted or incomplete implication as far as the nature of the condition is concerned. The phrase Chronic opium intoxication seems to fulfill this purpose better than any other but it has the disadvantage of length and is at times an awkward expression. We decided, therefore, not to restrict ourselves to any one term, but to employ whichever of those in common use today seemed best suited to the individual need (Terry and Pellens, 1928). Most scientific observers recognize that habitual users ofmany drugs did not experience the same degree of physicaldiscomfort upon abstinence as did chronic opiate, users.Consequently, the main goal was to establish a conceptualframework and a vocabulary which would distinguish the habitualuse of other drugs from the, chronic rise of opiates. By the late1920's, a general consensus had emerged that habit-forming drugscould be separated into those which produced"habituation," and those which produced"addiction." Habituation In broad terms, habituation usually characterized recurrentuse of those drugs which were not associated with the developmentof tolerance and an abstinence syndrome; for this reason, thecondition was closely linked with weakness of individual willrather than specific drug effects. Addiction, by contrast, wasassociated with physical dependence and -with serious individualand social consequences. This dichotomy, because of its publicpolicy implications, was not completely satisfactory from eitherthe scientific or legislative viewpoints. For example, thetendency to classify cannabis as an habituating substance wasgenerally resisted by those who sought to prohibit its use,mainly because public policy was so closely identified with theprohibition of drugs of addiction. Well into the past decade,there was still a strong tendency to classify marihuana as anaddictive drug. Many pharmacologists were uncomfortable with theaddiction-habituation dichotomy because many drugs would not fiteasily in these categories. They recognized that cocaine, forexample, did not produce the classic withdrawal symptoms ortolerance which were so closely intertwined with the notion ofaddiction; yet, it was clear to them that "cocainism"carried significant consequences for both the individual andsociety. In addition, the succeeding years witnessed thedevelopment for medical application of whole new families ofpsychoactive drugs. Often these new drugs could not easily bepigeon-holed within the simple dichotomy. Many pharmacologistswere concerned that classifying such new drugs as"addicting" would stigmatize them by associating themwith the opiates and with the perception of serious socialhazards. From this concern emerged a policy-based distinctionbetween the labelling and warning concepts tied to the Pure Foodand Drug Act and its successor statutes, and the addictionconcept associated with the Harrison Act. The Search for Precision For more than three decades, experts attempted to preservethe habituation/addition dichotomy, continually redefining andenlarging its scope in the hope that it would serve the needs notonly of science and medicine but also of law and sociology. In 1931, two experts, attempting to introduce some coherenceinto the subject, defined habitation as "a condition inwhich the habitue desires a drug but suffers no in effects on itsdiscontinuance." Addiction was defined as "a conditiondeveloped through the effects of repeated actions of a drug suchthat its use becomes necessary and cessation of its action causesmental or physical disturbances." Addiction was furthersubdivided into "true addiction" which involved the"physical disturbances" associated with the withdrawalsyndrome, and "psychic addiction, which was associated withthe "feeling of exhilaration and euphoria [constituting] analmost irresistible goad to its continued use" (Tatum andSeevers 1931). Six years later another expert redefined the basic terms asfollows: By habituation is meant the physical phenomenon of adaptation and mental conditioning to the repetition of an effect. Habituation to opiates is probably more intense than habituation to other substances. In a, sense habituation represents Psychical dependence. Addiction to opiates embraces three intimately related but distinct phenomena, namely tolerance, habituation, and dependence. These phenomena which make up the psychosomatic complex known as addiction are intricately interwoven and interdependent (Hirnmelsbach,1937). Over the years, successive definitions and redefinitionsbecame more and more elaborate. In 1957, the Expert Committee onAddictionProducing Drugs of the World Health Organization (WorldHealth Organization, 1957) attempted to specify the ways in whichaddiction differed from habituation: Drug addiction Drug addition is a state of periodic or chronic intoxicationproduced by the repeated consumption of a drug (natural orsynthetic). Its characteristics include: an overpowering desire or need (compulsion) to continue taking the drug and to obtain it by any means; a tendency to increase the dose; a psychic (psychological) and generally a physical dependence on the effects of the drug; detrimental effect on the individual and on society. Drug habituation Drug habituation (habit) is a condition resulting from therepeated consumption of a drug. Its characteristics include: a desire (but not a compulsion) to continue takin- the drug for the sense of improved well-being which it engenders; little or no tendency to increase the dose; some degree of psychic dependence on the effect of the drug, but absence of physical dependence and hence of an abstinence syndrome; detrimental effects, if any, primarily on the individual. Despite the loophole provided in subsection (3) to permit theclassification of cocaine as a drug of addiction, the WHOdefinitions continued to tie that term primarily to physicaldependence, thereby perpetuating the impression that the socialdetriments of chronic drug use arise primarily from physicaldependence or addiction. Despite a concerted effort within the expert community duringthe 1950's to rationalize the in-suited terms addiction andhabituation, the confusion remained. As the World HealthOrganization noted in 1965: Both terms are frequently used interchangeably and often inappropriately. It is not uncommon to apply the term addiction to any misuse of drugs outside of medical practice, with a connotation of serious harm to the individual and to society, and often with a demand that something be done about it. Such broad use can only create confusion and misunderstanding when abuse of drugs is discussed from different viewpoints. The difficulties in terminology become increasingly apparent with the continuous appearance of new agents with various and perhaps unique pharmacological profiles, and with changing patterns of use of drugs already well known. These developments must be considered in their relation to, but may not be adequately characterized by, current definitions of addiction. There is scarcely any agent which can be taken into the body to which some individuals will not get a reaction satisfactory or pleasurable to them, persuading, them to continue its use even to the point of abuse-that is, to excessive or persistent use beyond medical need. Probably the only exceptions are agents that have incidental or side effects that prevent such use-for example, cumulative or early toxic effects, to which the individual does not become tolerant (Eddy, et al., 1965). Two basic problems inhere in the concepts of addiction andhabituation. First, the nature of chronic drug-taking behavior,involving a range of individual-drug interactions, is entirelytoo complex to be compartmentalized into two mutually exclusivecategories. Determining the point where the lesser (habituation)becomes the greater (addiction) is bound to be arbitrary, since,as is true in all biological responses, there is a wide range ofvariation in the same individual and between individuals. Second, the terms, from their inception, were designed notonly to describe a form of drug-using behavior but also tocomprehend the relationship between that behavior and thesociety. The need to accommodate definitions to socialconsequence is reflected precisely in subsection (4) of the 1957WHO definitions quoted above. That the chronicity of drug-takingbehavior and social harm were not directly correlated becameparticularly obvious in the early 1960's when an anti-smokingcrusade was launched. In this connection, the word addiction wascommonly used to describe the tobacco habit despite the absenceof significant drug-induced behavior arising from its use. Drug Dependence In the early 1960's, the search for more suitable conceptsand terminology was intensified. In rapid-fire succession, mostexperts in the field and most professional organizationsdiscarded the terms addiction and habituation and substitutedinstead the concepts of physical and psychological (or psychic)dependence. After endorsement by two WHO expert groups and therelevant committee of the National Academy of Sciences-NationalResearch Counsel, the WHO officially adopted this position in1965, defining drug dependence as follows: Drug dependence is a state of psychic or physical dependence, or both, on a drug, arising in a person following administration of that drug on a periodic or continuous basis. The characteristics of such a state will vary with the agent involved, and these characteristics must always be made clear by designating the particular type of drug dependence in each specific case; for example, drug dependence of morphine type, of barbiturate type, of amphetamine type, etc. (Eddy, et al., 1965). In order to save the new notion of dependence from the fateof its predecessors, WHO added the following important caveat: The specification of the type of dependence is essential andshould form an integral part of the new terminology, since it isneither possible nor even desirable to delineate or define theterm drug dependence independently of the agent involved. Itshould also be remembered that it was the desire to achieve theimpossible and define a complex situation by a single term("addiction" or "habituation," respectively)which has given rise to confusion in many cases. Therefore, thedescription of drug dependence as a state is a concept forclarification and not, in any sense, a specific definition. However, the requirements of law and interdisciplinarycommunication have doomed this attempt to keep dependence as awide umbrella sheltering a series of more technical dependencetypes. All attempts to provide a more comprehensive definitionhave been faced with the fundamental truth that dependence is amatter of degree. For example, federal legislation and that of many states nowdefine a drug-dependent person as: A person who is using a controlled substance and who is in astate of psychic or physical dependence, or both, arising fromthe use of that substance on a continuous basis. Drug dependenceis characterized by behavioral and other responses which includea strong compulsion to take the substance on a continuing basisin order to experience its psychic effects or to avoid thediscomfort caused by its absence. *Many drugs with dependence liability, notably alcohol, arenot legally classified as "controlled substances." The problem of degree is submerged in this definition withinthe terms "continuous" and "strongcompulsion." From a legal standpoint, the umbrelladefinition and vague terms which cannot be applied to individualcases are inadequate, particularly when a finding that a personis drug dependent may result in coercive legal intervention. The Commission applauds the much-belated attempt by thescientific community to sever its conceptual apparatus from thevocabulary of politics and emotion. "Addiction," like"narcotics" and "drug abuse," has a generalconnotation of evil, suggesting illicit ecstasy, guilt and sin.Because the public image is conditioned more by culturalperceptions than by medical ones, medically-precise meaningssimply cannot be harmonized with common parlance. We believe that the concept of drug dependence offers auseful, objective way of describing a highly complex range ofdrug-using behavior. At the same time, the Commission recognizesthat the contrasting requirements of law and science may doom"dependence" to the fate of its predecessors. The onlyway to avoid this result is for the scientific community toengage in a concerted attempt to formulate a narrower umbrelladefinition which will meet the specificity requirements of law.For example, the broad concept of drug dependence must, for legalpurposes, be oriented toward the degree and types of dependencewhich impair the social functioning of the drug-dependent personand pose predictable adverse consequences for the society. In addition to this qualification regarding the requirementsof law, the Commission also emphasizes the responsibility of theexpert community to communicate an understanding of drugdependence to the public, and to modify the exaggeratedperceptions which have so long been tied to the concept ofaddiction. Excising "Addiction" The imprint of history on public attitudes is deep. Addictionstill provides the lightning rod for public concern about drugs,and is generally identified with "physically addicting"drugs, the prototype being heroin. The "narcotics,"morphine and cocaine, were the models for comparative socialdanger 50 years ago, and heroin is the model today."Narcotic" use was identified with depravity,immorality, uncontrolled drug use (addiction) and crime 50 yearsago, and the same is true today. Because addiction has been painted as the paramount socialand individual danger in drug use, these images and fears extendto some extent to the use of all drugs. Scientific emphasis onthe physical attributes of addiction has confirmed and supportedthe lay fears. As a general guide for public policy and personal conduct,the fear of addiction is a constant. When asked in the context ofthe National Survey which drugs are addictive in the sense that"anybody who uses it regularly becomes physically [and/or]psychologically dependent on it and can't get along withoutit," the public responded affirmatively in the followingproportions: When asked, in an open-ended question, to elaborate on thedangers of proprietary and prescription drugs, the most commonresponse was that they are habit forming. Roughly 50% of thepublic characterized this as the chief reason for not usingprescription drugs. For proprietary drugs, 35% mentioned thisconcerns a proportion exceeded only by the 40% which fearedoverdoses. Finally, slightly more than half of those withopinions on the subject have worried that if they took pills theymight become dependent on them (48% have worried and 44% have notworried). These responses bear comparison with the intensity of thefear of addiction. That is, all these drugs are perceived by alarge majority of people to be addicting; but specificperceptions about the nature of this phenomenon vary according todrug, often inaccurately. When asked whether they agreed ordisagreed with the statements that "you can use (heroin ormarihuana) occasionally without ever becoming addicted toit," only a small proportion of the public agreed. Alcohol and barbiturates are not viewed as addicting to thesame extent as heroin, and the alcoholic is not viewed with thesame fear as the "narcotics addict." For example, theCommission-sponsored National Survey in 1971 found that 66% ofthe adult public believe that "most people who use alcohollead a normal life;" only 23% thought the same was true ofmost marihuana users (Abelson et al., 1972). These differences in perception stem from social factorsrather than from failure to ascribe addiction potential to alldrugs. Paraphernalia is an important indicator of true addictionin the public imagination; the needle, the spoon andirregularly-shaped cigarettes stand as symbols of drug addiction.Further, the perception of addictiveness and its severity hasbeen tied to class and ethnic considerations since the creationof modern drug policy. The net result is that although most drugsare thought to be addictive, some are thought to be morecontrollable and less of a problem than others. Thesediscriminations are at odds with pharmacological truth. Toredress this situation, we now turn to an overview of the natureof drug dependence and its social impact. TOWARD A FUNCTIONAL UNDERSTANDING OF DRUGDEPENDENCE Research has established that repetitive drug use resultsfrom the interaction between a drug, the user and the surroundingenvironment. Understanding this behavior requires a conjunctionof psychological, pharmacological and sociological theory. Theconcept of drug dependence offers a useful framework for such ananalysis. This is not to say that it is without ambiguity, butrather that it is functional, and comports with social,psychological and pharmacological notions, rather thanoveremphasizing one aspect of this intricate drug-personsituation relationship. Psychological Dependence: The Primary Reinforcer To explore the concept of dependence, we must approachrepetitive, drug use from a broad psychological standpoint. Ulbehavior which is repeated more or less systematically, whetherit be dressing in a certain order, watching special televisionprograms, playing poker on Thursday, going to work in the,morning or coining !ionic from work in the evening, has beenreinforced. In a sense, a person can be said to be dependent onany of the innumerable liabits of life. The iniportant question,however, is how strongly the bebavior is reinforced and by whatfactors. Or, put the other way, what is the degree of dependence? Degree of dependence can only be measured by looking beyondthe behavior itself to its role in the individual's existence andto the nature of the adjustments which would be made if he couldnot beliave in the way he has come to depend upon. For example,the compulsive gambler is preoccupied with this particularbehavior, often to the, exclusion of his social obligations.Other persons may be, preoccupied with sexual behavior, sometimesto the point of dominating the person's existence and interferingwith the lives of others. For many Americans, TV viewing onSunday afternoon during football season has become a highlysignificant part of weekend life. This all suggests thatrecurrent behaviors will fall on a continuum from lesser togreater dependence in terms of their importance. to theindividual. The same is true for repetitive drug use, with one importantaddition. While other habits are only indirectly reinforcedthrough the central nervous system, psychoactive drug use isdirectly reinforced by its effect on the brain.2 This factor alsodistinguishes the, notion of vitamin-deficient, diabetic andcardiac-insufficient patients. Psychoactive drugs also modify thecapacity of the nervous system to react to, and to interpret thenature of the stimulus. 2 With pharmacologically inert substances dependence is basedsolely on the so-called placebo effect. It is strictlypsychogenic and a reasonable measure of the, existingpsychological state of the user or of the user's relationshipwith the giver. Many other substances which have no direct effecton the central nervous .system may, because of a strongperipheral action, reinforce psychologically and createdependence by drug-induced sensory input or by abolishingunpleasant sensations which arise from the the periphery. (Forexample, relief of burning sensation by counterirritants, intensecatharsis, relief of heartburn by antacids and the like.) Consideration of dependence on non-psychoactive drugs orplacebos is introduced here only to show why it should not beconfused, as it has been, with the principal issues as theyrelate to dependence on psychoactive drugs. Underlying the notion of psychological dependence is the sameconcept of positive reinforcement which describes behavioralresponses to many types of rewards such as food, drink, sex, andacclaim. In this instance, however, the specific reinforcer is adrug whose effects are sufficiently attractive and rewardingpsychologically at the first trial to motivate the user to repeatthe experience. The Pharmacological Component: Reinforcement Potential An individual who has had no experience with psychoactivesubstances will never become drug dependent. Having onceexperienced psychoactive effects, many persons will becomedependent to some degree. Some drugs are so weak that little harmresults. But many are such powerful reinforcers that if everyindividual in a given society were exposed to all suchpsychoactive drugs by intravenous administration and thenpermitted free access to them, a major social problem wouldensue. Lesser animals, such as monkeys or even rats, having onceexperienced a drug such as cocaine and after being givenunlimited access, will self-administer the drug until they die.It should be clearly understood by those who decry the depravityof the compulsive drug user that susceptibility is only relative,and under certain conditions, almost any individual can be madeto be drug dependent in the most extreme sense of the term.However, specific drugs are qualitatively different in thisrespect, and it is therefore important to consider thereinforcement potential of different substances. Some drugs offer, from a psychopharmacologic standpoint, highrewards and consequently great reinforcement for their continueduse. With drugs such as alcohol, heroin, amphetamines,barbiturates and cocaine, there is a significant likelihood thatrecurrent administration of large doses will result in a highdegree of involvement. However, this result is not inevitable.Many factors such as self-concept, peer orientation and religiousfeelings may mitigate against the use of large doses and frequentadministration, thereby reducing the likelihood of a high degreeof involvement. Substances such as amphetamines, when consumed orally, andthe minor tranquilizers" appear to have a moderatereinforcement potential. Others, such as marihuana and codeine,appear to have considerably less reinforcement potential.However, just as it is not inevitable that a high level ofdependence will occur with heroin and alcohol, it is possible fora person consuming sufficiently high doses to develop a highdegree of dependence upon substances such as marihuana andcodeine. In such cases, the dependence is reinforced primarily bynon-pharmacologic factors related to the individual and hisenvironment. Other drugs, such as LSD and mescaline, appear to possess aself limiting quality due to the temporary development of amoderate degree of tolerance to the psychic effects and to aphenomenon of psychological satiation arising from the intensityand duration of the drug experience. For these reasons, instancesof prolonged, frequent self-administration of these substancesare rare. Finally, some drugs, such as the phenothiazines (themajor tranquilizers) have a minimal reinforcement potential.' Psycho-Social Components Reinforcement for continued use may also stem fromnon-pharmacologic factors. As noted in Chapter Two, drug-usingbehavior may be influenced and reinforced by a wide range ofpsychological and sociological variables, and this is no lesstrue of continued use than of initial use. Various conditioningtheories have been advanced to illustrate how people learn to usedrugs, adapt them to their needs and seek the drug when needed.Drug dependence is a dynamic process composed of a sequence ofphrases during which the behavior may be reinforced by differentfactors at different times. On one extreme, drug-using behavior may be a function ofstatus definition in terms of class, group, ethnicity orgeography. Researchers have noted, for example, the antipathy ofmany marihuana-smoking youths for glue-sniffing groups (Blumer etal., 1967). Among other drug-using groups, there may be statusconnotations involved in selecting a particular brand of scotchwhiskey or in preferring scotch to bourbon. The cocktail partyepitomizes the manner in which drug using behavior may bereinforced by non-drug factors. In these examples, the recurrenceof drug use may reflect very little commitment by the user; inother words, repetitive drug-using behavior may not reflectdrug-seeking behavior .4 3 'Reinforcement potential" is an absolute laboratoryconcept, within which psychosocial factors are held constant. Inthis sense, the major tranquilizers are not reinforcing at allsince the "normal" population would not choose torepeat the drug experience because of its side effects. However,we should note that the use of any psychoactive drug can bereinforcing given the appropriate Psychological and socialreinforcements. Thus, it is meaningful to say that the majortranquilizers are reinforcing to the patients who agree to usethem because of their positive rewards as the individual and hisphysician define them. 4 These situations might be distinguished from the type ofbehavior involving elaborate, ritualistic preparation andadministration of a drug where the meaning of the behavior ratherthan the psychological experience (of the drug provide the entirereward. The selection and preparation of a bottle of wine and therolling of a marihuana joint are examples. There is also the"needle freak," a person who is enamored of the processof self-injecting any substance, including water. By contrast, drug use may be reinforced by less ephemeralvariables, as a person comes to rely upon the drug effect to getthings done or to avoid unpleasantness. For example, an anxious,unhappily married individual or an obsessional, overworkedexecutive may gradually drink more in quantity, frequency andintensity as he or she finds that this behavior blurs awarenessof problems and enhances the ability to avoid their resolution.By the same token, a lonely young person may turn to"speed" when it is popular and readily available,finding with more and more, predictability that he feels potent,alert and energetic and that he shares a common bond with hispeers who reinforce each others participation in the entire speedritual. At the other extreme, the recurring drug-using activity mayform the very definitional base of a person's life: "WhenI'm on the way home with the bag safely in my pocket, and Ihaven't been caught stealing all day, and I didn't get beat andthe cops didn't get me I feel like a working man coming home;he's worked hard, but he knows he's done something. . ."This person's life style is his repeated acquisition andconsumption of heroin; and each administration of the drugconfirms the success of his life style, representing his wagesand his sole reward. The Development of Dependence: Conditioning Many models have been proposed to describe the interactionswhich take place during the development of dependence. As yetresearch has not delineated or confirmed these models and theirimplications. However, at least three identifiable phases of theprocess of initiation and reinforcement have received attention.The initial phase of beginning and continuing drug use isreinforced primarily by social f actors. Pharmacological andpsychological factors become increasingly important in thedevelopment and maintenance of dependence. Finally, thepermanence of the phase following detoxification and"withdrawal" from the dependent state can be affectedby social as well as psychological factors. No one model or theory is uniformly accepted and manyquestions remain. However, it is instructive to examine some ofthe current thinking about these factors, and about theirinteraction in forming and sustaining dependence, withoutimplying thereby that these examples comprise a theory inthemselves. On the basis of participant observation of marihuana smokers,Becker identified a three-step process of social reinforcementleading to continued use: technical mastery of the process ofadministration, identification of the pharmacologic effects anddefinition of those effects as desirable. Becker's investigationsrevealed that novices generally reported their first exposure tothe drug as unrewarding. After being instructed by theircompanions regarding how to aerate the smoke (to take deepbreaths filling the recesses of the lungs and to hold theirbreath for maximal absorption of the drug), these novitiatesbegan to identify vague sensations as the drug experience.Finally, they were led to translate what in many cases had beenunpleasant responses into desirable ones and therefore intoreasons for continuing to use marihuana. The end product of thissequence of events was a confirmed marihuana user. Other factorswere delineated by Becker to explain the direction, frequency andintensity marihuana-using behavior might take (Becker, 1953). Social reinforcement alone, however, does not explainsubsequent and deep involvement: the weaving of drug use into thefabric of the user's life. One elaborate scheme assesses the roleof pharmacologic reinforcement in the context of conditioningtheory. Wikler (1970), for example, describes "primarypharmacologic reinforcement" as being either"direct" or "indirect." Direct reinforcementis related to receptors in the body which pre-exist the use ofthe drug. This corresponds to the concept of reinforcementresulting from stimulation of a reward center in the brain.Indirect reinforcement develops with drug administration and inessence is synonymous with "physical dependence." During repeated administrations a learning process occurs,which Wikler relates to "direct secondary pharmacologyreinforcement" or ("psychic dependence") (Wikler,1970). During the learning process, associations are made betweennonspecific environmental conditions or events and thereinforcements, including the central nervous system changescreated by the drug. For example, long abstinent persons can beprovoked into a mild withdrawal sickness simply by returning tothe community where their dependence occurred (Jaffee, 1970).Similarly, it is conceivable that relapse to drug use byabstinent former users may be influenced by non-drug factorswhich stimulate associated drug-taking responses. This kind of conditioning approach carries importantimplications for treatment. For example, a treatment regimenmight usefully associate with the drug certain influencesincompatible with its consumption. The therapist might create,verbally and otherwise, a dislike of the situation each time thedrug is administered. In a corollary model some researchers have suggested thatbehavioral responses may be learned while a person is under theinfluence of a drug and that these responses may be reduced instrength or be. entirely absent in the non-drug state. Such"state-dependent learning's has been demonstratedexperimentally in man using amphetamines, alcohol and amobarbitol(Overton, 1968). Many of the life style concomitants of dependent individualshave been learned while those persons were in the drugged state.It possible that certain relationships and activities necessaryfor copingor for effective life management have becomestate-dependent. If this is the case, then detoxification andabstinence, may create anxieties and frustrations, perhapsunrecognized, because the person is less able to cope than h ewas in the drugged state. Relapsing would then afford theindividual one option for regaining such capacity. Another optionis for the therapist to assist transferrence of these skills fromthe drugged to non-drugged state. The Dependence Continuum We emphasize that the only common denominator of all types ofdrug dependence is psychological reinforcement resulting fromreward associated with the first individual-drug-societyinteraction and the subsequent increasing desire for repeatedreinforcement. In the broad sense of dependence, a considerablesegment of the world's population can be said to be dependent ondrugs. This drug-using behavior is not necessarily harmful, andin most instances carries no social stigma. All repeated drug taking including that which is medicallysanctioned is conditioned by positive reinforcement provided bythe action of the drug and by the anticipated response of theuser's interpersonal referent, whether it be a physician or asocial group. In this respect medical and non-medical use sharemuch in common. All drug therapy, regardless of thepharmacological nature of the drug, or whether the substance isself-selected or prescribed, has a psychological component. Wereit not so, advertising to the public would lose much of itsforce, and physicians would lose a valuable aid in the treatmentof the sick, or those who believe they are sick. Consequently, psychological dependence must mean somethingmore than positive reinforcement through drug-based reward if itis to be a functional concept. At this point, then, it becomesnecessary to narrow the focus. As is true of non-drug habits, thefact of the recurrence of drug use is unimportant. The crucialquestion, for the individual, as well as for society, is thedegree of dependence and its consequences. For drug use as wellas any other behavior, the phase's of dependence actually form acontinuum from lesser to greater, from minimal to compulsive. Theadditional elements from the psychological standpoint are thedegree to which the individual is committed to or preoccupiedwith drug-seeking behavior as part of his life style, and thedegree of behavioral disruption which would attend theinterruption of his drug taking. From a pharmacologicalstandpoint, these elements are related to the frequency,duration, regularity and intensity of the reinforcements. Determining the existence of psychological dependence ondrugs by segmenting the broader dependence continuum requires anarbitrary decision. It will be recalled that the same kind ofjudgment was made in past years in order to distinguish addictionfrom habituation on grounds other than physical dependence. Thestrength of reinforcement is critical; yet, this judgment variesnot only with the chemical, physical and pharmacologicalcharacteristics of the drug, and with the dose, method, frequencyand duration of administration, but also with the personalcharacteristics of the user and the sociocultural context. Measuring the Degree of Dependence: PsychologicalComponents The most important factor to consider in describing thedegree of dependence is the extent to which drug use has becomeinterwoven in the fabric of the user's life. For some persons,interaction with or avoidance of the world are facilitated bydrugs. The more frequently the drug satisfies the person's needs,the greater the likelihood of his commitment to or preoccupationwith such use, with a consequent neglect of lower orderedpriorities and responsibilities, and a decrement in other socialfunctioning. Personal health, economic relationships and familyobligations may all suffer as the drug-seeking behavior increasesin frequency and intensity and dominates the individual's life. A parallel consideration in measuring the degree ofdependence is the likelihood of adjustment or disruption whichoccurs when the individual's drug-using behavior pattern isinterrupted. When faced with interruption, the individual mayrespond with some form of substitute behavior or may experience adisruption of his customary behavior patterns. Because the desireto continue the behavior also suggests a desire to avoid being ina position of abstinence, the notion of adaptation is closelyrelated to that of preoccupation. Some experience withinterruption may increase the priority assigned to the behavior. The disruption which can occur when an individual is deprivedof his drug or a substitute varies with the extent of hisdependence. Mild behavioral symptoms may be seen in a housewifedeprived of her diet pills, such as lethargy, irritability,reduced amount of housekeeping, or an unusual afternoon nap,while, more intense drug-seeking behavior, including aggression,may be seen among compulsive speed users. To a large extent,these symptoms can be exacerbated by the pharmacologic effects ofthe drug; in other cases they may be products of anxiety or theunmasking of behavior formerly under pharmacologic control. Many treatment programs for drug-dependent persons operate onthe premise that therapy must provide alternative supports forthe individual previously preoccupied with drug taking. In largemeasure, the potential for success is related to the intensitywith which the individual participates in the design of theprogram, and on the strength and numbers of supports within thealternative system. As an awareness of these interrelationships has increased, someprograms have made the system and the treatment synonymous.Alcoholics Anonymous was one of the first such systems. Duringthe last decade many therapeutic communities, relying on thepioneering experiences of Synanon, have emerged to deal withheroin, amphetamine and alcohol dependence. For many of theseprograms, particularly those dealing with severely dependentpersons, a prerequisite to participation is a drug-free status.This is partially in recognition of the disruption attendinginterruption of drug-using patterns. It might be useful at this point to relate this discussion ofpsychological dependence to the patterns of drug-using behaviordeveloped in the previous Chapter. By definition, experimentaluse is not a recurrent drug-use pattern. Recreational andcircumstantial use, if systematically repeated over a short orlong period of time, would reflect the positive reinforcementunderlying the notion of psychological dependence; but these,forms of drug-using behavior, as we have defined them, are notsufficiently interwoven in the fabric of the users' lives toimpair social functioning. The functionally important area of the dependence continuumincludes intensified and compulsive use. Intensified use may beof the regular long-term variety which involves continuousintoxication followed by periodic drug-free intervals of severaldays' duration-the intravenous amphetamine user, for example; orit may be of the regular daily use variety with long drug-freeintervals during the day-the heavy social drinker, for example;or it may be of the intense episodic or spree variety-thepatterned binge drinker, for example. The classic type of drugdependent person, of course, is the compulsive user who rarelyhas any drug-free intervals. The chronic alcoholic and heroindependent person are the most recognizable examples. Physical Dependence: The Secondary Reinforcer All drugs which induce rewarding subjective responses havethe capacity to become psychological reinforcers. Whereas this isthe primary force leading to intensified or compulsive usepatterns, certain drugs, when administered in sufficient dose andfrequency, are capable of producing physiological changesrequiring repetitive use in the, sense, that physical illnesswill ensue if the drug-taking behavior is not continued. Thishighly specific abstinence syndrome, which is what is generallymeant by "physical dependence," can be reversed byreadministration of the drug which causes it. Substitution ofanother drug or drugs from the same pharmacologic class can alsoaccomplish reversal. Of course the symptoms themselves can beameliorated by administration of substances from otherpharmacological classes although these substances will notreverse the patho-physiological process of withdrawal. Fear of drug-deprivation, with its attendant physical andpsychological agonies, serves as a powerful secondary reinforcerfor repeated and, in these cases, continuous drug use. In theabsence of the drug or a substitute, behavioral disruption willoccur. The intensity, length and nature of the disruption variesaccording to the drug, the method of administration, the dose andthe length of time the drug has been used. The rapidity withwhich the physiologic need develops varies similarly. Abrupt deprivation of use of certain stimulants, such ascocaine and amphetamines, following prolonged and continuous use,may precipitate a rebound withdrawal illness characterized bypsychological letdown and depression, and by extreme exhaustiongenerally compounded by previous lack of sleep. The array ofnon-specific symptoms and signs results from continuousagitation, absolute insomnia and acidosis from food and waterdeprivation. In contrast to the highly specific morphine andbarbiturate syndromes, this "withdrawal" illness cannot be prevented by continued readministration of the drug. Lastly, there exist a number of drugs, such as marihuana,betel and nicotine, with mixed depressant and stimulantproperties, which create strong anxiety when use of the drug isdiscontinued. Since no evidence has been adduced which implicatesa physical dependence, the basis for this anxiety is presumably afunction of psychological, social and cultural variables. Summary Drug dependence, in its broad sense, involves much of theworld's population. Conceptually, drug dependence should beviewed as a continuum starting from a low degree of dependence asmeasured by minimal individual preoccupation with drug-usingbehavior and minimal disruptive effects upon interruption of thebehavior, and escalating to compulsive dependence as measured bytotal preoccupation with drug-using behavior and seriousbehavioral disruption attending deprivation of the drug. Drugdependence exists in innumerable patterns and in all degrees ofintensity depending upon the nature of the drug, the route ofadministration, the dose and frequency of administration, otherpharmacological variables, the personality of the user and thenature of the environment. In this connection, it is important to discard theundimensional concept of individual loss of self-control whichhas long dominated scientific and lay concepts of"addiction." Most people who use psychoactive drugs donot succumb entirely to the pharmacologic. properties of thedrugs. All of the factors which we have noted interrelate indistinctly different fashions with different individuals underdifferent circumstances. For this reason, there can be no staticmodel of drug dependence within which finite values are assignedto these various factors. Drug dependence is a dynamicphenomenon, and the formulation of social policy must reflect itscomplexity and relativity. Further, the primary basis of dependence for all drug use ispsychological reinforcement based on reward. This reward iscomposed of two elements: it stems from whatever brain effectsoccur, some of which the user may experience subjectively, andfrom complicated sequences of psycho-social variables shaping theneeds satisfied by the drug experience, and drug-seekingbehavior. When physical dependence is a part of chronic drugadministration, the threat of the aversive effects of withdrawalserves as a powerful secondary reinforcer of the drug-usingbehavior. Drug dependence is not necessarily harmful either to theindividual or to society. The social cost of drug dependence isrelated directly to the intensity of user-preoccupation. Thecompulsive extreme of drug dependence may lead to disorders ordefects of behavior with serious implications for the publicsafety, health and welfare. However, many forms of drugdependence do not carry adverse social consequences, as isillustrated by the widespread chronic use of substances, such astobacco and coffee, with such weak psychoactive properties thatthey are measurable largely in subjective rather than objectiveterms. Heavy and prolonged chronic use of the substances maydamage organ systems and result in injury to individual health.But they do not induce physical dependence or result inanti-social behavior even upon prolonged or excessive use. Thisfactor distinguishes them from all other dependence-producingdrugs. WHO's appreciation of the need to separate social impactconsiderations from the simple description of drug dependence wasstated clearly in its 1965 statement: Further to clarify our meaning, the nature and significanceof drug abuse may be considered from two points of view: onerelates to the interaction between the drug and the individual,the other to the interaction between drug abuse and society. Thefirst viewpoint is concerned with drug dependence and the,interplay between the pharmacodynamic actions of the drug and thepsychological status of the individual. The second-theinteraction between drug abuse and society-is concerned with theinterplay of a wide range of conditions, environmental,sociological, and economic. The 1957 Committee tried to encompassboth points of view when, in its definition of addiction, itlisted characteristics of which some were pharmacodynamic andother psychological and socioeconomic, perhaps therebycompounding some of the existing confusion (Eddy et al., 1965). 'The 1957 WHO Committee statement quoted earlier in thischapter on page 124. EVALUATING THE SOCIAL IMPACT OF DRUGDEPENDENCE Any analysis of the social consequences of dependence, asthey relate to public safety, health and welfare depends on boththe degree of dependence and the characteristics of the drug,rather than on the fact of dependence itself. Dependence, Health and Behavior No rational social policy would aim to eliminate drugdependence per se. There are societies in which virtually anentire population is dependent on natural products of plantorigin. Many of these plants, like the betel morsel, are used bymillions of people and produce no striking effects on the centralnervous system. The only subjective sensations are those ofmildly pleasant stimulation. Psychological dependence is wellestablished; many of the users spend much of their income toacquire the substance, and even the more intelligent users suffera considerable mental letdown in its absence. When the risk associated with a type of drug dependence doesnot involve drug-influenced behavior, but is rather limited topossible danger to individual health, it is the Commission's viewthat private normative choices should prevail, and that thesocial policy decision is of an entirely different order thanthat required by behavior influencing drugs. As already noted inChapter One, the primary policy consideration here is thebehavioral impact on the public safety, health and welfare. With regard to stronger psychoactive drugs, however, repeateduse may lead to intensified and compulsive patterns of use withthe resultant neglect of other activities, to the point ofdecrement in or destruction of other social functioning. Whateverthe appropriate legal policy toward availability of any givensubstance, and whatever the relative impact on behavior ofchronic use of these substances, a crucial element of socialpolicy must be to minimize the proportion of the populationreaching high degrees of dependence on all such substances. The Vulnerability Factor The prevalence of high degrees of dependence seems to restmore in the nature of the soil than in the characteristics of theseed. The individual user, rather than the drug, is the core ofthe problem; compulsive drug use is generally thought to occurmost frequently in emotionally unstable persons who havedifficulty in coping with reality. Drug dependence is in this sense an attempt at adaptation;the drug-dependent person seeks to alter his personal situationnot by changing his environmental circumstances or his pattern ofbehavioral reaction but by modifying his affective reaction toand perception of those circumstances. Secondarily to this, hisentire pattern of interacting with his environment may change. The concept of psycho-social vulnerability rests on thenotion that as environmental stresses and frustrations becomestronger, an increasing proportion of the otherwise susceptiblepopulation will respond through self-changing responses such ascompulsive drug use. On the basis of this hypothesis, if anotherwise susceptible individual can either master theenvironment or remove himself from the adverse conditions, he maybroaden his options and reduce the likelihood of drug dependence. 'From this point, drug dependence will refer only to thecompulsive end of the dependence continuum; drug-seeking behaviorwith a high degree of user preoccupation. Although the data are inconclusive, many observers believethat American minorities, such as the Spanish-speaking, blacksand native Indians, have a higher risk potential to drugdependence in the sense that they are disproportionately poor andleave disproportionately higher percentages of drug-dependentpersons. Since social and economic forces continue to restrictthe upward mobility of these groups, particularly the youngmales, they remain at high risk to development of drugdependence. Whatever the accuracy of this hypothesis, it is clear thatcertain populations in any society at any given time are morevulnerable to intensified or compulsive drug use than others. Thechoice of drug varies within and across societies. Although thisphenomenon has not been studied carefully, the Commission'simpressionistic survey of consumption patterns in societiesthroughout the world indicates that the choice of substances hasan affective component and differs among those segments of thepopulation most susceptible to intensified or compulsivedrug-using behavior. In the United States, for example, the most vulnerable groupsappear to demonstrate a preference for the depressants,particularly alcohol and heroin, which are most likely toobliterate rather than intensify their awareness of their socialcondition and to reduce the anxiety which wells up in reaction tothis condition. In other societies however, the reverse may betrue. Vulnerable populations in Japan turned to the stimulantsafter World War II. We should note, however, that a persuasivecase can be made for the proposition that availability is thecrucial determinant of chronic drug-using patterns in anysociety. For this reason, a comparison of different drugs in terms ofrelative danger to society is impossible. In each society amultitude of factors will determine the levels of use ofdifferent drugs, and the price which society bears as a result.At best, we can speculate about the cumulative social costaccruing from widespread chronic use of a drug under conditionsof unrestrained availability. Comparisons between drugs would bebased on their relative potential for reinforcement and on theirrelative capacity to influence behavior. (See Table 111-1.) Available cross-cultural information does suggest that theremay be a maximum penetration level of drug dependence in anysociety. Even in Hong Kong where heroin is available andinexpensive, the prevalence of intensified and compulsive usedoes not exceed 4% of the entire population although thisproportion is higher (about 11%) among males over 20 years ofage. Similarly, heroin and opium are easily secured in Thailand,but the proportion of chronic smokers does not exceed 2% of theentire population or 10%, of the adult male population. In theUnited States, the proportions are roughly the same for chronicalcohol use: about 15% of the total population and about 15% ofthe middle-aged population. Available estimates also suggest thatthe level of chronic cannabis use in Egypt may be of the sameorder. Interestingly enough, the prevalence of chronic opium andmorphine dependence in the United States at the turn of thecentury when availability was relatively unrestricted probablynever exceeded 1% of the adult population. As availability of a substance becomes more restrictedthrough formal legal controls, the maximum penetration level ofdependence probably becomes lower. Thus, under any given socialpolicy in any given society there is probably a maximum socialcost. On the other hand, no matter how restricted the legalconditions of availability for a given substance, there is alsolikely to be a minimum penetration level. From this perspective,the best that a society can hope for is to reduce the level ofintensified and compulsive use to that minimum, and keep itcontained at that level. The Relevance of Social Response Finally, the adverse behavioral consequences of certain typesof dependence may be tied to social policy and to institutionalresponses to the drug-using behavior. Among those dependent onhighly reinforcing drugs, the level of dependence likely to bereached is increased by social policies which prohibitavailability of the substance to the drug-dependent person. Thisis because the "hustle" necessary to acquire the drugwill exaggerate the user's preoccupation with drug-seekingbehavior. Similarly, prohibitory policies also increase theadverse social impact of drug-abstinence behavior of thosephysically dependent on the prohibited drugs. Consequently,appraisal of the social cost of a given type of dependence mustalso take into account the potentially counterproductive effectsof the institutional response. Present Social Impact Turning now to the social impact of dependence on varioussubstances in the United States today, we find first that publicperception of the problem is not related either to the prevalenceof dependence or to the environmental and pharmacologic aspectsof the issue. Alcohol Alcohol dependence is without question the most serious drugproblem in this country today. Alcohol users far outnumber thoseof all other drugs and are found along the entire continuum ofdependence. The reinforcement potential of alcohol and itspotential for behavioral disruption are high. Use of the drug ispervasive within the general population, and its readyavailability facilitates the development of high degrees ofdependence among vulnerable populations. The prevalence ofintensified and compulsive use among the entire alcohol usingpopulation is roughly 10%, and a serious decrement in socialfunctioning is noticeable in half of this group. While there are many abstainers and the number ofnon-dependent users is large, alcohol use nonetheless carries asubstantial social cost. The risk of individual involvement isaccentuated also by the pervasive sentiment which tends toexclude alcohol from classification as a drug, therebyeliminating it from the concept of "drug abuse" and thesocial problems which go by that name. As noted in Chapter One,according to the National Survey, alcohol is regarded as a drugby only 39% of the adult population and 34% of the youthpopulation. Twice-daily use of the drug is viewed as drug abuseby only 36% of the adults and 37% of the youth in contrast to theuse of heroin "once in a while," which is regarded asdrug abuse by 82% and 80% of these populations. Finally, only 7%of the public mentioned alcoholism as a serious social problem,as compared with the 53% who mentioned drugs. Heroin Heroin is a highly reinforcing drug and, in the presentsocial context, demonstrates a selective attraction forhigh-risk, vulnerable populations, in particular those withminimal opportunities for a rewarding life style. The risks ofcompulsive use are exacerbated by the prevalence of intravenousadministration and the rapid development of tolerance. Thedependence continuum is compressed at the maximal end andmovement through the phases of dependence is rapid. Even thoughthe incidence of ever-use among the adult and youth populationsis less than that of any other drug, the prevalence of dependenceamong the exposed population is high, though not as high aspopular belief would suggest: available data suggest that 25% to50% of those in high risk populations who try heroin may becomedependent. Heroin dependence is disproportionately high among the mostvulnerable segment of the population; young males in the nation'surban centers. Because dependence tends to develop during theearly years of adulthood, social and economic integration isinhibited at the most crucial time, to the detriment of thesociety in general and to the users' immediate social group inparticular. For this reason, the social cost of heroin dependenceis substantial. Unfortunately, present social policy tends toexacerbate this cost even more. Because of enormous pressurescharacterizing the present social-legal-medical response, adisproportionate degree of behavioral disorganization anddisruption accompanies heroin dependence. Barbiturates Barbiturates are pharmacologically similar 'to alcohol,involving the same dependence liability and potential socialimpact. At the present time, however, no major social costarising from compulsive use has been specifically identified.This is largely because these substances were hithertodistributed primarily through medical channels, and their use hasbeen generally hidden. Recently, episodic barbiturate use hasappeared increasingly in the streets among youth populations,posing serious problems in certain urban areas. For the mostpart, however, high degrees of dependence have not been apparent. The Commission suspects that the prevalence of dependence maybe much higher than is generally estimated. The depressantproperties of the barbiturates have already attracted the samepopulations who are most vulnerable to alcohol and heroindependence, and these drugs are often used in combination or asalternatives. Even more important, however, the frustrations socommonly felt among housewives appears to be fertile soil for thedevelopment of sedative, anti-anxiety responses. Increasedbarbiturate use in the past decade parallels the increase inalcohol dependence during the late 1950's among this samepopulation. The Commission believes that barbiturate dependence may bethe modern equivalent of the hidden opiate dependence of the late19th Century. Therefore, even though a verified social costremains relatively low, the Commission attributes this fact lessto the pharmacologic qualities of the drug than to the presentmedical orientation of the distribution system. As shown in ourNational Survey figures in Chapter Two, the incidence ofbarbiturate use outside the medical system has increasedsignificantly in recent years and promises to result in moreserious problems of episodic and multi-drug use in the future,and perhaps an increased prevalence of intensified and compulsiveuse patterns. Even so, the appropriate social response must beformulated in the context of continuing therapeutic needs withinthe medical system. Amphetamines and Related Stimulants Amphetamines and related stimulants, when administeredintravenously, have a high reinforcement potential. Consequently,strong psychological dependence can develop, even though thesedrugs do not induce physical dependence. The potential socialcost of amphetamine use, as measured by the prevalence ofcompulsive use, is much lower than with any of the depressants,largely because continued use of increasing amounts beyond thestage of pleasant mental and physical exhilaration leadsgenerally to unpleasant and unbearable hyper-excitability throughpsychotic manifestations. For this reason, compulsive use israrely sustained on a chronic basis. This does not mean, however, that compulsive use ofamphetamines cannot present a significant social problem. Inpost-war Japan, thousands of persons, particularly adolescents,turned to readily available methamphetamine. Enormous problems insocial reconstruction were created. The establishment of specialpsychiatric hospitals and the formulation of stringent legalcontrols were necessary to curb the increased use. Fortunately,cultural homogeneity and national purpose facilitated effectivemeasures to deal with this problem. In the United States, compulsive use of amphetamines didoccur among a highly vulnerable segment of the adolescentpopulation during the middle and late 1960's, although the extentof this phenomenon was exaggerated at the time and has diminishedrapidly since then. On the other hand, there is mushroomingevidence that large numbers of middle class adults, particularlywomen, have developed chronic using patterns of orallyadministered low dose stimulant preparations. Although thisphenomenon may have been halted by modified prescriptionpractices, most of the dependence on these substances at thepresent time does appear within the context of the medicaldistribution system. In contrast to the barbiturates, medicalindications for the amphetamines and related stimulants arehighly limited. Cocaine Laboratory experiments with animals have demonstrated beyonddispute that cocaine is the most powerful reinforcer of allpsychoactive substances. Although neither tolerance nor physicaldependence develop, this drug has a higher potential social costthan the amphetamines. Little social cost has actually been verified in thiscountry. Although increasing, the incidence of use and theprevalence of chronic use remain relatively low. The route ofadministration normally employed, sniffing or"snorting," is less likely to induce high degrees ofdependence than intravenous use. At the same time, cocaine hasdemonstrated its attraction to the same populations vulnerable toheroin dependence and to intensified amphetamine use, althoughthis factor may be in part attributable to multi-drug use and anoverlap in the acquisition ritual. Prudent policy planningdemands that the nature of cocaine-using behavior be kept underclose scrutiny, and that the currently inadequate data-base oncocaine and the behavioral concomitants of its use besignificantly improved. Hallucinogens The dependence liability of hallucinogens is relatively low.Although indiscriminate, sometimes daily use was not uncommon afew years ago, the combination of rapid tolerance, aversiveside-effects and psychological satiation minimize the likelihoodof intensified or compulsive use. For this reason, these drugsare generally utilized only for "spree" circumstantialor recreational use, generally with the goal of self-explorationor enhanced awareness. Consequently, dependence is not asignificant social concern, and attention should instead befocused on the behavior potentially influenced by the drugexperience itself. Cannabis Particularly in the doses commonly used in this country,cannabis is not a highly reinforcing drug. This drug does notinduce physical dependence and no significant degree of toleranceis developed. Although compulsive use of the more potent forms ofcannabis does occur in cannabis-origin countries, there is noevidence that such a use pattern is developing in this countrywhere use is generally experimental or intermittent and isconfined primarily to the less potent forms. Although there issome evidence that the availability of hashish is increasing, theusers generally titrate their doses to reach the desired effect.Finally, most persons using cannabis heavily in the United Statescan be classified as intensified rather than compulsive users.Consequently, dependence on marihuana is but a minor problem inthe United States today. We should note, in this connection thatwhatever tranquilizing effect marihuana has may be sought inalcohol and other sedative, anti-anxiety drugs. For this reason,the likely penetration level of cannabis dependence is fairlylow. II -- DRUG INDUCED BEHAVIOR A variety of social forces mold and reinforce desirableindividual behavior. Can the momentary influence of a drug loosenthe socialized restraints, inducing the individual to behave inways he would not otherwise choose? The history of psychopharmacology is replete with examples ofbehavior changes associated with the acute administration ofdrugs. A traditional, widely shared assumption of currentthinking in biological science is that there are an infinitenumber of interactions between behavioral and pharmacologicalsystems. The description of these interactions requiresinformation about concomitant variations between thecharacteristics of the behaviors and of the drugs. Informationabout the behaviors should be specific with respect to factorssuch as intraindividual and interindividual variability, type ofbehavior and past behavioral history. Information about the drugsshould be specific with respect to such items as dose-responserelations, time-response relations, dose-order relations,localization of the site of drug action, dosage forms, routes ofadministration, absorption and distribution in the body andbiological fate. Such drug and behavioral variables can be further modified byenvironmental variables such as set and setting. The resultantmyriad of drug-induced changes in behavior cannot be fullyunderstood unless all these underlying variables are sospecified. Furthermore, recent advances in neurochemical researchsuggest that many drug effects on behavior are mediated byneurochemical events and that these relationships are reciprocalin the sense that changes in one may affect the state of theother. If all of these possible combinations and permutations appearhopelessly confounded, it should simply caution us in making anypremature generalizations about drug-behavior interactions. Whileit is true that a full understanding of these interactions isrestricted by the limits of present empirical data, the presenceof such intricacies should temper an initial desire to simplifythe drug-behavior story and encapsulate it in succinct clich6ssuitable for mass media. Such attempts in the past have probablycontributed to the need for this Commission in the first placeand to do so again would be to ignore that information which theCommission has marshalled. Nonetheless, there is a certain utility in discussing severalimportant ways in which drugs may affect behavior. Although theinteraction among all of the drug-person-environment variableswill not be fully explored in this discussion, the Commissionbelieves it important to sketch certain categories which aredirectly relevant to man's conduct. Since behavior has beendefined by some as activity of an organism which is observable bythe organism itself or by other organisms, drug-induced change inperception is a suitable place to begin. IMPACT ON PERCEPTION Perception is defined as those processes by which manreceives or extracts information about the environment throughsensory apparatus (for example, vision and audition). Drugs canalter the sensitivity of these systems and thereby alterperception. Space and time relationships are examples of perceptionscommonly affected by drugs. Marihuana, alcohol, hallucinogens andother drugs have been noted to expand or contract estimates ofelapsed time or distance. For example, in simulated driving testsinvolving use of moderate doses of marihuana, some subjectsperceived themselves to be driving at a speed faster than thatactually being simulated. Similarly, some user-perceptionsrelating to enhanced sexual performance under the influence ofmarihuana are thought to relate to temporal distortions as wellas to abolition of negative perceptions. Temporal distortionshave also been described by amphetamine users who perceivethemselves to be performing more activity in shorter time spans. Drug effect may simply be a facilitating factor in manyalterations of perceptions; the effect of setting, for example,cannot be overlooked. However, the occurrence of illusions andhallucinations seem less influenced than other perceptual changesby non-drug factors. Hallucinogens such as LSD increase thevisual threshold in man, cause arousal of the central nervoussystem and allow for hyperexcitation to visual and auditoryevents. Colors may seem more saturated and sounds may seemlouder. Similarly the delirium tremens associated with alcoholuse is a state involving visual hallucinations and spatiotemporaldistortions. Drugs may also produce changes in specific anatomic areas ofsensory organs. For example, several phenothiazines (used fortranquilizing and sedative effects) have produced pigmentarydegeneration of the retina, and, occasionally, blindness. Somedrugs, such as the anti-depressant imipramine, have evenprecipitated glaucoma in susceptible individuals. Drugs may also interfere with the user's perception of hisown abilities. Some studies have noted that student amphetamineusers tended to overestimate their capacity to make soundjudgments and solve mathematical -problems, and amphetamine-usingsoldiers tended to overestimate their performance in certainroutine monotonous tasks. The important implication of any of these perceptual changesis that behavior may be altered from the expected to theunexpected unless the user is able to compensate for theseeffects as do some sophisticated users of marihuana and alcohol.The degree to which the altered behavior is of concern to societyrelates to the type of conduct which may be affected by theperceptual change. This could range from being late for anappointment to foolishly undertaking hazardous tasks. IMPACT ON MEMORY Man's behavior is dependent in part on what he has learned,either directly from experience or from others. To the extentthat drug use or any other event affects man's ability to acquireknowledge or recall it, it may influence his ability toanticipate the consequences of his behavior. A full discussion oflearning and memory processes is beyond the scope of this Report;indeed, these processes are currently the subject of intensiveresearch, covering an entire range of variables from genetic onesto biochemical ones. The controversial nature of theseinvestigations into learning and the inadequacy of the data onthe impact of drug use on man's learning process precludedetailed consideration here. However, some general observationsmay be made regarding the influence of drugs on memory(short-term and long term storage and retrieval). Retention of acquired learning is hindered by amnesia orforgetfulness. Amnesia is a state of decreased retrieval producedby trauma or by chemicals; forgetfulness is a state of decreasedretrieval produced by passage of time or by preoccupation withsensory input during time. Among the precipitators of amnesia areelectro-convulsive shock, anoxia, anesthesia (barbiturate andether), carbon dioxide and certain antibiotics. With regard topsychoactive drugs in particular, anesthesia produced by eitherultra-short-acting barbiturates or by ether can precipitateamnesia. Similarly, "blackouts" are commonly reportedafter drug-taking episodes, constituting a form of drug inducedamnesia. Drugs may also induce forgetfulness. It is common knowledgethat moderate doses of barbiturates and alcohol can reduce orablate newly acquired knowledge; in recognition of thisphenomenon, a recently proposed highway safety device wouldrequire the driver to recall a randomly displayed series ofnumbers before being able to engage an automobile ignitionsystem. Occasionally recall may be facilitated by drugs. Marihuana,LSD, and ketamine act vicariously to retrieve stored images and"project" them into some sensory modality-vision,audition, smell. The use of short-acting and intermediate-actingbarbiturates to facilitate recall of long-term memory inpsychoanalysis or espionage (truth serum) is well documented.Finally, nitrous oxide has been shown in some circumstances toreduce forgetfulness. ALTERATION OF MENTAL STATES Profound mental changes, both transient and permanent, havebeen attributed to psychoactive drugs. These include some drasticchanges in mood and psychological status. Humans are normallyconstrained by sets of socially-induced inhibitions from engagingin certain behaviors. Drugs such as alcohol and other sedativehypnotics tend to relieve these socially-inculcated anxietiesthereby increasing the likelihood of the usually restrainedbehavior. The garrulousness and amorous behavior associated withcocktail parties and the unabashed laughter following marihuanause are examples of this disinhibition. Indeed such actions areso common as to form a battery of socially recognized excuses fornormally embarrassing behavior. With prolonged use of high dosesof some drugs, notably alcohol, and the barbiturates, generalirritability increases and aggressive threatening acts may occur.The challenging conduct frequently encountered in barsconstitutes a recognizable example. Some drugs, notably amphetamines, cocaine and alcohol, canproduce a sense of bravado and have reportedly been usedintentionally to support the performance of daring acts. Euphoriaassociated with initial opiate experiences may promotethoughtless or indiscriminate actions. Amphetamines may inducegarrulousness, hyperactivity, rash promises and the like. At theopposite pole, depressive states and suicidal acts are associatedwith drug taking, particularly with the sedative-hypnoticsubstances. This fact was overlooked when some sedative-hypnotic,drugs were incorrectly promoter as tranquilizers appropriate forthe treatment of depression. Almost all psychoactive drugs can produce transientconfusional and delusional states. The use of hallucinogens,particularly by naive, control-oriented individuals, can producetransient panic reactions, as the. user apparently loses controlof his environment. Phencyclidine has been associated with panicstates involving fear of suffocation arising from the drug'spowerful action on the muscles of respiration; hydrocarboninhalants have been associated with similar states of feararising from displacement of oxygen in the inspired air. Acuteconfusional states occur with overdoses of alcohol, barbituratesand other sedative-hypnotic drugs. Alcohol and marihuana among'other drugs have been known to produce depersonalization. Subacute and chronic psychotic episodes, particularlyparanoid reactions of a persecutory nature, are associated withthe major stimulant drugs--cocaine, amphetamines andamphetamine-like substances. A prolonged "spree" use ofstimulants may induce a psychosis similar to that induced by thehallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline and others). Thesedrugs also have the specific capacity to induce an acutepsychosis with a single effective dose even in so-called"normal" individuals. As with all of the drugsmentioned above, emotionally unstable individuals are especiallysusceptible to drug-induced behaviors of this type. 'This is probably due in part to sleep-deprivation which maylast 5-10 days. It is well established scientifically thatprolonged sleep-deprivation alone can induce an acute psychosis. The exact relation between the drugs and these reactions isunclear. Although the acute reactions mentioned above are quitegenerally accepted as being at least partially drug related, theorigins of the chronic psychoses, either drug-precipitated orresiduals after termination of use, are much more debatable.Perhaps the most confusion and misinformation devolves aboutdrug-induced "brain damage" and its relation to mentaldysfunction. With but few exceptions, disorders of behavior cannot berelated specifically to detectable morphological change in thebrain, either at the gross or microscopic level. Whereas grossand cellular changes have been associated with chronicalcoholism, and with very heavy intake of barbiturates and thehydrocarbons, profound behavioral and marked mental changes mayalso be observed following long-term, chronic use of most otherpotent psychoctive drugs without any detectable cellularalterations whatsoever. In fact, this is usually the case. Thus,any statement that no mental dysfunction occurs because no braindamage can be demonstrated is in error. The social significance of these drug-induced mental changesis manifested in several ways. Those disruptions of mentalfunction associated with illusions and hallucinations,confusional states, and the like, cause the individual tomisinterpret his environmental impressions and react in anabnormal manner. This may take the form either of completewithdrawal and negativism, or at the other extreme, of violentand aggressive responses to situations which otherwise would nothave been considered to be threatening. In either type ofresponse, regard for welfare of self or others may be impaired orentirely lost leading to violent behavior and even to suicide andhomicide. IMPAIRMENT OF PSYCHOMOTOR FUNCTION Depressant drugs as a class-alcohol, barbiturates, volatilehydrocarbons and a multitude of lesser drugs-with the commonproperties of inducing unconsciousness and anesthesia in largequantities, produce varying degrees of motor incoordination as adose-related response. This phenomenon is so much a matter ofcommon experience with the alcohol-consuming public that ithardly warrants description. These drugs impair the function of all of the highlyintegrated response mechanisms in the nervous system whichcontrol all coordinated acts such as ambulation, operation ofmotor vehicles and the like.' Depressant drugs by impairinghigher brain functions and distorting or rendering inactivesensory input, or by rendering the user inattentive to thesecontrolling signals, may make him completely incapable ofperforming complex voluntary actions. Unfortunately, suchimpairment may occur with quantities of drugs much smaller thanthose required to prevent the muscular response itself. Thus, thedriver of a motor vehicle under the influence of relatively smallquantities of alcohol may lose control, not because he is unableto perform the mechanical act of driving, but because hisattention span is reduced, his vision is impaired, his memory ofa turn in the road is obliterated or he fails to hear the horn ofa passing vehicle. In other words, simply because a drug user can"walk a straight line" after drinking does notnecessarily qualify him to drive a motor vehicle. " Less complicated psychomotor tasks do not require allof this biological machinery to be In action. For example, ablind person may feed and dress himself without the sensory inputfrom vision and a deaf person can even operate a motor vehiclewithout auditory input, providing other sensory input is notimpaired or distorted. Stimulant drugs, notably the amphetamines, have been widelyused to permit truck drivers to endure long trips and athletes tocarry on beyond their ordinary limits of endurance. Whereas suchdrugs may mask the subjective effects of fatigue, they do notcorrect the adverse effects of fatigue on attention, visualdiscrimination and other factors which control proper psychomotorfunctioning. Amphetamines were used by all belligerents in WorldWar II to prolong psychomotor performance. It was common practicefor Allied pilots to take these drugs after a bombing mission inGermany to permit them to get back to their home bases inEngland. A surprisingly large number made the return flight toEngland safely but crashed their planes on landing. The subtleeffects of fatigue on psychomotor and other sensory components ofproper psychomotor functioning are not corrected by this classor, for that matter, by any other class of drug. SUMMARY In summary, drug taking has the potential for affecting man'sbehavior in a number of overt as well as subtle ways. Drugs canaffect perception, thereby influencing the way man regards hisenvironment. Drugs can affect memory, thereby influencing man'scapacity to anticipate the consequences of his actions. Drugs canalter mental states, thereby affecting his capacity to interpretand order his environment. Drugs can alter psychomotor function,thereby affecting man's capacity to respond appropriately to hisenvironment. These effects are neither uniformly negative nor uniformlypredictable. The number of variables affecting the interactionbetween a drug, a person and his environment is perhapslimitless. We can state with assurance only that drug-inducedbehavior is as multi-faceted as all other human behavior. III -- IMPACT ON PUBLIC SAFETY All other ends of government are secondary to itsresponsibility to ensure the public safety; and the cornerstoneof any viable social organization must be that each individualhave due regard for the life, limb and property of others. Fearthat the drug user will violate this precept has been a commonfeature of the periodic cycles of public concern about drugs. We have indicated that drugs can affect behavior in amultitude of ways, some subtle such as decrement in short-termmemory, and others more overt such as aggressiveness andpsychotic disorders. Naturally, public concern has always beengreatest for drug-induced violence or assaultive behavior. Butthe public safety may also be endangered by drug-influencedrecklessness or negligence. In this section, we will assess theimpact of drug use in the two areas of the most concreteinterest: crime and driving. DRUGS AND CRIME Fifty-three percent of all adults surveyed in the NationalSurvey spontaneously mentioned drugs as one of the most seriousproblems facing our nation and in need of attention. As noted inChapter One, the "drug problem" conjures up many imagesand conveys many things to many people; but for 13% of all thosewho mentioned this problem, the primary concern was therelationship between drugs and crime. When the National Survey queried the respondents directly onthis question, it found that more than half of all adults andabout two thirds of our youth believe that marihuana users oftencommit crime to buy more of the drug and that they "oftencommit crimes that they would not otherwise commit." TheAmerican public is even more convinced of heroin's directrelationship to crime; more than 90% of both youth and adultsbelieve that "heroin users often commit crimes to get themoney to buy more heroin" and that they often commit crimesthat they would not have otherwise committed. The extent ofagreement with these statements, however, was found to differsignificantly according to both the age and drug experience ofthe respondent. (See Table III-4.) In order to probe some of the factors responsible for thisset of beliefs, respondents were also asked to indicate theirexperience with what they perceived to be drug-related crime. Thedata show that about one-third of the adults reported havingexperience at some time with someone breaking into their home orplace of work to steal some property. Fifteen percent stated thatthe theft occurred at work, 19% indicated that it took place athome and 67% had no recollection of .such an incident. Thenrespondents were asked if they, personally, had ever beenattacked, mugged or robbed or if another member of theirhousehold ever had such an experience, or if this bad happened tosomeone "they knew well." Again, about one-third (31%)responded affirmatively; that is, if they themselves did not havesuch an experience, they at least knew someone who had beenvictimized in this manner. These individuals were then asked ifthey had reason to believe that the attacker was a drug user orwas under the influence of alcohol at the time of the offense.The data reveal that just under onefourth of those with suchpersonal experience or knowledge believed that the criminal mayhave been a drug user. Specifically, 77o believed the attacker orrobber was a drug user, 2% thought he was under the influence ofalcohol, and 22% said they did not know. In general, those who reported either being a victim orknowing a victim of personal crime were disproportionately young,college educated, and from a large metropolitan area, usuallylocated in the Northeast. Users of marihuana and alcohol(behaviors which also correlate with age and education) were alsodisproportionately likely to have been a victim or to havefirst-hand knowledge of one. Thus it appears that the generalizedbelief in the existence of a direct relationship between drug useand crime derives considerable reinforcement from the public'sexperience with both personal and property crime. As the Commission noted in its first Report on marihuana, therelationship of drug use to criminal behavior is difficult tounravel. Its investigation requires more than an examination ofthe pharmacological properties of a particular substance andtheir effects upon the individual user. Rather, additionalfactors to be considered include dosage level; the immediate andlong-term physiological and psychological effects on theindividual; frequency, intensity and duration of use; the purity,potency or type of drug used; the potentiating effects of drugsused in combination; personal expectations; motivations for use;set and setting; and the general impact and influence of thelarger society upon the individual. In order to assess the nature, direction and strength of thealleged relationship between drug use and antisocial behavior,particularly violent and non-violent criminal and delinquentbehavior, the Commission examined several hundred documents inthe professional and research literature and conducted a numberof its own studies. Review of the professional and researchliterature, including a number of studies conducted either by orfor the federal government, have led the Commission to concludethat it is difficult, if not impossible, to establish a directrelationship between crime and the use of various drugs; but ifone cannot say that the use of any drug in and of itself isdirectly responsible for the commission of a criminal act, it ispossible to demonstrate that drug use in combination with anumber of physiological, psychological and social factors mayassume an important role in the exacerbation of criminal,delinquent or other antisocial behavior. In the pages which follow, we will briefly survey 11 selectedclasses of drugs ranging from alcohol to heroin relative to theirpharmacologic potential for inducing criminogenic behavior, andto the empirical relationship of their use to crime anddelinquency in selected populations. Then we will attempt toidentify the major psychological, social and demographiccharacteristics of drug users, both criminal and noncriminal, andcompare these with similar characteristics of non-drug users,both criminal and non-criminal. Next we will grapple with tl.eproblems associated with inferring causation in the relationshipbetween drug use and criminal behavior, regarding the impact ofeach on the other. Finally, we will address the larger issue ofthe impact of drug treatment and rehabilitation on that criminalconduct assumed to be related to drug use. Drugs and Their Criminogenic Effects All potent psychoactive drugs have been associated withcrime, delinquency, heightened aggression, mental illness,reckless or negligent operation of a motor vehicle or otherdangerous machinery and other forms of antisocial behavior. In apaper prepared specifically for the Commission, 'Enklenberg(1973) has examined the pharmacological properties of severaldrug classes, has analyzed the degree to which they may beconsidered criminogenic, and has completed an exhaustive reviewof the research literature regarding the empirical relationshipbetween drug use and the generation of criminal and delinquentbehavior. This section draws substantially upon this specialreport to the Commission. Alcohol The major behavioral effects of alcohol derive from itsdepressant action on the central nervous system, also affectingthe function of peripheral nerves, skeletal, smooth and cardiacmuscle and other body tissues. Any behavioral stimulation whichis observed is probably attributable to the suppression ofinhibitory control mechanisms in various parts of the brain.Among the commonly observed acute effects of alcohol use are areduction of anxiety, mild euphoria, some lack of muscularcoordination, slurred speech, enhanced conviviality andassertiveness. Low doses of alcohol, although said to improve functioningwith regard to some simple motor or cognitive tasks, reduce thelevel of performance of such complex tasks as driving. When takenin moderate doses, alcohol has been found to reduce substantiallymotor skills as well as orderly thought processes and speechpatterns. Higher doses of this substance may cause the user tobecome highly irritable and emotional and displays of anger andcrying are not uncommon. Exceptionally high doses are known tocause stupor, unconsciousness and sometimes death. The standard setting, dose-response function and personalexpectations of the individual with regard to alcohol are, inpart, responsible for his behavior while under its influence.When loss of control, whether physical or emotional, is anexpected and recurrent reaction to alcohol use, the individualoften feels justified in his belief that it was the drug whichwas responsible for his behavior. Some researchers have advanced the theory that alcoholreduces anxiety related to sexual behavior and enhances sexualaggression; in fact, however, scientific opinion is split on thevalidity of this proposition. Various empirical studies on the relationship between the useof alcohol and the commission of violent crime have shown that,in the case of homicide and other assaultive offenses, alcoholwas used by at least half of the offenders directly prior to thecrime (Shupe, 1964; Wolfgang, 1958; MacDonald, 1961; Voss andHepburn, 1968). These studies also show that in alcohol-relatedviolent crime, the violence is most often directed at relativesor friends who were drinking together. Sex crimes have also been attributed to the use of alcohol.In a survey of sex offenders conducted by the Kinsey Institutefor Sex Research, alcohol was reported as a factor in 67% of thesexual crimes against children and 39% of sexually aggressiveacts against women (Gebhard, et al., 1967). Molof (1967) found that youth who used alcohol wereresponsible for significantly more crimes of assault than theirnon-drinking counterparts, and Goodwin and his colleagues (1971)reported that the use of alcohol was significantly associatedwith other forms of antisocial behavior including poor schoolattendance, an unfavorable work record and excessive fighting. Finally, some researchers have stated that a criminal may beprone to excessive drinking in order to increase courage inpreparation for the commission of a crime. Marihuana The initial effects of marihuana on the body can be comparedwith some of those attendant to alcohol use; mild euphoria,stimulation of the central nervous system and increasedconviviality. The user experiences a pleasant heightening of thesenses and relaxed passivity. In moderate doses the substance cancause short lapses of attention and slightly impaired memory andmotor functioning. Heavy users have been known to become sociallywithdrawn and depersonalized and have experienced distortions ofthe senses. Marihuana use is believed to reduce the inclination of theindividual toward physical tasks, particularly those requiringsustained effort. The combination of aversion to sustained effortas well as the disruption of the thought processes and alterationof sensory perception occurring from high doses of marihuana isbelieved to act as a deterrent to those criminal acts whichrequire, continuing physical effort and concentration. Only onvery rare occasions have individuals under the influence of thissubstance been shown to become agitated and even aggressive, andmany of these persons had long histories of acting out behaviorwell prior to their marihuana use. Motivations for use, personal expectations, along with setand setting exert a strong influence upon the individual'sbehavioral responses to marihuana use. A person who believes thatmarihuana use does not culminate in loss of control can beexpected to remain nonassertive while under its influence. 'The Commission has already provided a detailed report of theresearch findings regarding the impact of marihuana on publicsafety (see Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding, Appendix,Vol. 1, 1972, pp. 424-477). Presented here is a brief updatedoverview of these findings. Because marihuana does not have high dependence liability,the cessation of use, regardless of frequency and intensity ofprior consumption, does not induce the physical discomfortattendant to abstinence from other, more reinforcing substancessuch as heroin, barbiturates or amphetamines. Therefore, it isunlikely that even the heavy marihuana user will resort to crimesto sustain his level of use. It should be noted, however, thatsome individuals who sustain particularly heavy levels of use maybecome psychologically dependent upon the substance and maybecome somewhat more likely to engage in socially disapprovedbehavior and to become involved in multidrug use. As with alcohol, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac and does notchemically induce sexual arousal. Although some observers believethat the sexual experience is enhanced by marihuana use, an equalnumber disagree with this theory. In its review of the availabledata, the Commission found no evidence to indicate that marihuanause results in heightened sexual aggressiveness. From the facts stated above one can conclude that marihuanause is not ordinarily accompanied by or productive of aggressivebehavior, thus contradicting the theory that it induces acts ofviolence. Indeed, the only crimes which can be directlyattributed to marihuana-using behavior are those resulting fromthe use, possession or transfer of an illegal substance. Barbiturates Like alcohol, barbiturates cause depressant reactions andaffect nerve, skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscle as well asother body tissues. Depending on the barbiturate used, the dosageadministered and the emotional state of the individual, reactionsto these drugs can range from mild sedation to coma and death. Ingeneral, individual reactions to these substances are closelyparallel to those of alcohol. Barbiturate use in low to moderate doses is generallyunlikely to result in assaultive behavior, although high dose useof these drugs has been known to cause irritability andunpredictably violent behavior in some individuals (Bell andFraser, 1950; DiMascio, 1968; McGrath, 1970; Eckerman, et al.,1971; Malmquist, 1971; Blum et al., 1972; Tinklenberg, 1973). Forthe individual accustomed to maintaining a high level ofbarbiturate use, cessation of that use may result in delirium,convulsions and other transient toxic disturbances which isusually life-threatening. The increasingly common simultaneous use of alcohol andbarbiturates must be considered when examining the relationshipbetween barbiturate use and crime. In a study by Devens andWilson (1971), it was discovered that 70% of the population (N =129) of multiple drug users were known users of barbiturates aswell as alcohol. As mentioned previously, many of the effects ofthese substances on the individual are similar. It is notsurprising, then, that persons who are regular users ofbarbiturates may also be or have been regular users of alcohol.Since a strong association between the use of alcohol and violentcrime undoubtedly exists, it is not difficult to surmise thathigh level barbiturate use may also be linked to violent crime. Amphetamines The group of drugs known as amphetamines consists ofsynthetic chemicals causing stimulation of the central nervoussystem. They are commonly referred to as "uppers" or"speed." Some of the acute reactions produced by thesesubstances include increased alertness, vigor, suppression ofboredom and sometimes paranoia, assertive or assaultive behavior.Because of their reputation for increasing physical endurance,amphetamines have been used by athletes, truckers and otherindividuals who have found it necessary to sustain high levels ofalertness and vigor. Some individuals, however, experienceheadache, palpitation, dizziness, confusion and sometimesdelirium and fatigue. The cessation of repeated use of high doses of amphetaminesgenerally causes the user to feel irritable, fatigued anddepressed; and a type of withdrawal occurs, although it isqualitatively different from and not as uniquely characteristicas the withdrawal syndrome associated with cessation of heroinuse. The influence of amphetamines on sexual behavior is largelydependent upon dosage, setting and predisposing personality (Belland Trethowan, 1961; Ellinwood, 1967). Use of these drugs over ashort period of time, however, appears to induce no appreciablechange in performance although some increase in the enjoyment ofthe sex act (accompanying the delay of orgasm) has been reported.Anqrist and Grershon (1969) found that "increasedpromiscuity, compulsive masturbation, prostitution andintensification of sado-masochistic fantasies were all reportedas consistent sequelae of [high level and high intensity]amphetamine use." Similar findings were also reported byGeerlings (1972). In sum, the research findings indicate that thedirect effects of amphetamines on sexual behavior are complex andmultidetermined. Only a limited number of studies have focused on therelationship of amphetamine use to crime (Blum, 1967b. 1969;Eckernian, et al., 1971; Ellinwood, 1971, 1973; Malmquist, 1971;Smith, 1972; Tinklenberg, 1978). The majority of researchconducted on this subject, however, shows that amphetamine userswere disproportionately involved in crimes of violence (assaultsand robberies, for example). It has not been definitelydetermined, in this country however, that these crimes weredirectly attributable to the acute reactions of the drug,although it would appear likely that the paranoid states inducedby this drug may be linked to dangerous conduct. This isconfirmed by the close association between methamphetamine useand violent crime which occurred in Japan during the mid 1950's.This development was particularly striking because violentbehavior is relatively rare among the Japanese and the incidenceof this conduct decreased markedly when the use of amphetaminesreceded (Nagahama, 1968). Opiates Taken in small to moderate doses, the opiates can diminishpain, anxiety and tension and induce mild euphoria. Sustainedhigh intensity use, unlike that of alcohol or barbiturates, doesnot cause slurring of speech or lack of muscular coordination,nor do these drugs induce the paranoid behavior generallyresultant from the use of amphetamines. The effect of aparticular dose of any of these substances is largely dependenton the means of administration. Injection of these substancesreacts on the body more quickly than oral administration.",however, the latter often causes a more prolonged although lessintense "high." All drugs included in this class havethe potential for inducing dependence, and tolerance is built uprapidly. " Heroin is not consumed orally. The relationship of opiates to crime has been extensivelyinvestigated. The research conducted in this area has beenlimited primarily to: review of criminal records of knowndependents in an effort to determine whether dependence predatedor postdated criminal behavior; or a determination of the ratesof dependence among criminal or mental hospital populations; orcomparisons of criminal activity among dependents andnon-dependents or among users and nonusers; or comparisons ofpre- and post treatment criminal activity; or comparisons ofcriminal behavior between dependents who remained in orsuccessfully completed treatment and those who dropped out oftreatment or relapsed. Regardless of the type of study, some common conclusions wereapparent. First, the available data indicate that most knownopiate (primarily heroin) dependent persons had long histories ofdelinquent or criminal behavior prior to their being identifiedas drug users, that opiate use becomes a further expression ofdelinquent tendencies, and that most heroin-dependent personscontinue to be arrested subsequent to release from prisons,hospitals or treatment programs (Kolb, 1925, 1962; Anslinger,1951; Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953; Morgan, 1965; Blum, 1967b;Winick, 1967; O'Donnell, 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a; Friedmanand Peer, 1970; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Tn fact,opiatedependent persons tended to escalate the seriousness oftheir offenses and to experience increased arrests over theirpre-dependence rates, mostly for drug arrests and secondarily forcrimes against property (Blum, 1967a; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973). As Blum (1967a) has noted,"there is no doubt that among addicts with a delinquentlife-style, drug use is part and parcel of their otheractivities, crime included." Other observers have focused their attention on thecriminogenic effects of opiate use, per se, and especially on thenecessity to resort to crime in order to support a habit (Dal,1937; Pescor, 1943; Haines and McLaughlin, 1952; Mever, 1952;Tappan, 1960; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; Schur, 1962,1965; Duvall,et al., 1963; Lindesmith, 1965; Vaillant and Rasor, 1966;Cushman, 1971), and most note that the crimes committed for thispurpose generally tend to be non-violent. money-making crimes(Bromberg and Thompson. 1937; Finestone, 1966, Kolb, 1962; Chein,et al., 1964; Schur, 1965; O'Donnell, 1966; Preble and Casey,1969; Amsel, et al., 1971; Canadian Commission. 1972; Friedmanand Friedman, 1973). Indirect evidence linking the opiate (heroin) user tocriminal behavior is provided by a number of personsadministering treatment programs. Research findings indicate thatwhen the drug users are active in a therapeutic program andpresumably not using heroin, criminal activity decreases. Thatis, when heroin use, decreases either by treatment or othermeans, criminal behavior is also said to decrease (see, forexample, Joseph and Dole, 1970; DuPont and Katon, 1971;McGlothlin, et al., 1972). This proposition and the supportingdata. however, will be scrutinized carefully in a later section. Since drug-behavior interactions are complex processesinvolving the operation of multiple variables, the identificationof a single factor as causal is bound to be incorrect andmisleading. The number of nondrug influences on the opiate user'sbehavior is large, involving not only the immediatecircumstantial or situational variables but what preceded them(personality, socioeconomic factors, etc.). Some observers focustheir attention on the contagious features of opiate use, thatis, the spread of use is seen as largely attributable to drugavailability, modeling behavior, peer group pressures,conditioning and reinforcement (Chein, et al., 1964; Hughes,1971; Goode, 1972b; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Despitesignificant and numerous attempts by skilled investigators todiscover which of the many non-pharmacological f actors assume,the greatest relative importance, generalization,, at this timeare still premature. In sum, the use of opiates in the United States, particularlyheroin use, increases the probabilities that all individual willengage in acquisitive crimes or other criminal behaviors. most ofwhich are directly related to supporting the drug habit. However,the available evidence indicates that users of opiates aresignificantly less likely to commit homicide, rape and assaultthan are users of alcohol, amphetamines and barbiturates. Whilethere are no data directly comparing the criminal proclivities ofopiate users with those of the general population, the evidenceindicates that a disproportionate number of heroin dependentpersons have had long histories of deviance which began wellprior to their use of and their official identification as usersof heroin. Cocaine Cocaine is obtained from the leaves of Erythroxylon shrubswhich grow in the Andes. It is a powerful stimulant to thecentral nervous system and its acute effects resemble thosecaused by the amphetamines, increased alertness and vigor andsuppression of hunger, fatigue and boredom. Unlike the effects ofamphetamines, the effects of cocaine last only a short time dueto rapid detoxification, and no tolerance occurs. Chronic use,when and if it occurs, is attributable to psychological ratherthan physical dependence. Since cocaine produces many of the same reactions asamphetamines (e.g., paranoid reactions, impulsiveness andhostility), one would expect the user to be prone to aggressiveaction. Although there have been crimes against personsperpetrated by cocaine users, documentation of the drug'sspecific effect is often absent. Like the opiate user, the userof cocaine is more prone to commit crimes against property (Kolb,1962; Lewin, 1964; Eckerman, et al., 1971; Woods and Downs,1973). Hallucinogens The hallucinogens or "psychotomimetic" drugs cancause marked alterations in normal thought processes, perceptionsand moods. Usually produced synthetically, this class of drugsincludes lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD),dimethoxymethylamphetamine (STP), dimethyltryptamine (DMT),mescaline, phencyclidine and psilocybin. Of this family of drugs,LSD is the most potent and differs little from the other drugsexcept for intensity of induced reactions and side effects. Amongthe acute reactions of these drugs are dizziness, nausea,dilation of the pupils of the eyes, visual ,aberrations andheightened auditory acuity. According to Holister (1968) theindividual first experiences somatic changes then perceptualalterations and finally psychic changes. The effects of any ofthese drugs on the, individual are largely dependent upon hisexpectations. his emotional outlook and the social actionoccurring around him. Although dependence does not develop withcontinued use, the individual may be prone to flashbacks andpsychotic reactions even after use is discontinued. Presently, there are no convenient methods for determiningthe tissue level of most hallucinogens; consequently, informationregarding the association between use of these drugs and crime islimited toverbal reports and general observations. What little isavailable, however, suggests that aggressive outbursts can occurduring panic reactions, especially if such reactions includeparanoid delusions and hallucinations. A small number ofhomicides attendant to LSD induced psychoses have been documented(Williams, 1969, Glickman, 1970; Malmquist, 1971; Reich andHepps, 1972; Snyder, 1973). In his review of drugs and violence, Blum (1969) assertedthat emotionally stable individuals, even under the influence ofthese, drugs, do not generally act in ways qualitativelydifferent from their normal patterns of behavior. As such, it isimportant for investigators of the LSD-crime relationship toexamine the LSD user's previous psychosocial history and behaviorpatterns before attributing any criminogenic potential orproperties to the drug itself. Blum did note, however, that apoor judgment syndrome may develop in association with chronicuse, and that this syndrome could be a contributory factor tosome non-violent crimes such as perjury or theft. Nonetheless, heconcluded that hallucinogens probably have little effect uponboth the induction and prevention of violence. Other Psychoactive Substances Reactions attendant to the, use of the non-barbituratesedatives include excitation of the central nervous system andfeelings of anxiety. Very few data exist regarding therelationship of these substances to crime. However, it isbelieved that crime attendant to their use is probably minimaland not of a violent nature. Glue and noxious vapors may cause impairment of brain function in the individual as well as delirium and toxicpsychoses. At present, however, there is a general absence ofinformation regarding the relationship between these substancesand the commission of crime, although a few isolated cases ofassaultive behavior by persons in a delirious state have beenreported. The delinquent behavior generally attributable to thesesubstances, however, tends to be of a petty and nonviolentnature, although Friedman and Friedman (1973) have notedincreasing violence among glue sniffers. Summary In conclusion, the research findings concerning theassociations between drug use and crime have been complicated bythe interplay between the pharmacologic properties of the drugsand the psychosocial characteristics of the individuals who usethem. Inferences which might have been drawn from laboratoryresearch have suffered primarily from the difficulties attendingreplication of non-pharmacological. variables; and whilenaturalistic studies are appropriate to this area ofinvestigation, they have been plagued for the most part bydeficiencies in research design and sampling procedures.Nonetheless, the following tentative conclusions appearjustifiable from the data available: Alcohol, the most commonly used drug, is strongly associatedwith violent crime and with reckless and negligent operation ofmotor vehicles. Research findings linking barbiturate and amphetamine, userswith criminal behavior, especially assaultive offenses, areincreasing, but no definitive association has yet beenestablished in this country; However-, a strong association hasbeen demonstrated between amphetamine use and violence, in Swedenand Japan. Research data are generally lacking regarding the actualrelationship between cocaine use and criminal behavior; however,the pharmocologic effects of the drug would seem to suggest apotential for drug-induced violent behavior similar to that shownfor amphetamine and barbiturate users. Marihuana use, in and of itself, is neither causative of, nordirectly associated with crime, either violent or non-violent. Infact, marihuana tends to be underrepresentcd among assaultiveoffenders, especially when compared with users of alcohol,amphetamines and barbiturates. Use of opiates, especially heroin, is associated withacquisitive crimes such as burglary and shoplifting, ordinarilycommitted for the purpose of securing money to supportdependence,. Assaultive offenses are significantly less likely tobe committed by these opiate users, especially in comparison withusers of alcohol, amphetamines and barbiturates. Except in relatively rare instances generally related todrug-induced panic and toxic reactions, users of hallucinogens,non-barbiturate sedative-hypnotics, glue and similar volatileinhalants are not inclined toward assaultive criminal behavior.It should be noted, however, that some of the non-barbituratesedatives, notably methaqualone, and the hydrocarbon solventshave a potential for inducing violent behavior although theincidence, of such behavior is currently low. Psychosocial Characteristics of Drug-Dependent Persons: Implications for Public Safety The research literature is replete with descriptions of thepsychological, social and behavioral characteristics of drugusers, indicating that the characteristics and attributes ofdifferent drug-using populations are varied and tend to changeover time. The research findings regard-ing the characteristicsand attributes of drug-using offenders, however, tend to revealmore similarities than differences. In general, this can beexplained by their usual reference to a very narrowly definedsub-population of drug users: the arrested, convicted,incarcerated, hospitalized or in-treatment populations of drug-(primarily heroin-) dependent persons. Before describing the characteristics of this sub-population,however, we emphasize again that the largest proportion of drugusers never comes to the attention of official authorities. Mostof those who experiment with drugs do so while they are young andterminate use without escalating to dependence, or incurring ,anyadverse effects upon their behavior or their psychological orsocial development. The same official invisibility and generalabsence of untoward effects also obtain for the majority ofrecreational and circumstantial drug users. These segments of the drug-using population share thecharacteristics of the population-at-large; to the extent thatthey do come to the attention of law enforcement authorities ormedical and psychiatric personnel, such contact is almostexclusively limited to apprehension for drug law violations(possession, transfer and sale offenses or alcohol-relatedtraffic violations) or temporary treatment for an acute toxicreaction to a drug. Such persons are generally neither more norless criminal than their non-drug-using counterparts.11 Compulsive drug users,12 especially heroin-dependent persons,on the other hand, are considerably more visible to officialagencies and frequently differ considerably in theircharacteristics and behavior patterns front thepopulation-at-large, particularly with respect to their historiesof psychopathology tied social de6alice. For the most, part,heroin-dependent persons can be said to belong to a subculturewhose dominant characteristic is the presence of a variety ofpathologies and illegal activities, only one of which is the useof illicit drugs (see Kozel, et al., 1969; Cuskey, et al., 1973@.The probability is high that such individuals will, in therelatively lengthy course of their dependence, come, to theattention of the police, the courts, the prisons, the generalhospital, the mental hospital, the treatment program or themorgue. 11 To the extent that they do become more deviant, it may bea function of the manner in which they are officially handled(contamination through incarceration, for example) or theoperation of the self-fulfilling prophecy (Consequent to labelingthem as deviant for their drug activities (see Weitzner andFiglio, 1973). 12 Under present social conditions, the segment of thedrug-using population which we have classified as intensifiedusers is composed primarily of "problem drinkers" ofalcohol, and heavy barbiturate or amphetamine users in themainstream population. These persons do not tend to commit crimesand are not arrested for their drug-using behavior. Although compulsive drug users constitute the smallestnumerical segment of the drug-using population, they, like thechronic offender generally, are seen to pose the greater threatto the public safety. For this reason, the following discussionwill focus on this particular group. Although a few of the more recent studies deal withdrug-dependent persons drawn from the various cohorts of thegeneral population, most research has been specifically andexclusively concerned with drug-Involved male offenderpopulations (arrestees, prison inmates, parolees), persons indrug treatment programs or residents of psychiatric hospitals. Assuch, the descriptions to follow can be viewed as limited tothose drug-dependent individuals already officially recognizedand labeled by society as emotionally unstable, criminal orantisocial. Social and Demographic Characteristics Age: 13 Most drug-dependent (primarily heroin-dependent) personsknown to some official agency or authority are young, themajority being under 30 years of age. Despite their youth,however, their drug-using behavior has endured for many years;substantial segments of this population report onset of drug useto have occurred by the mid-teens, heroin use, to have occurredby about 18 to 20 years of age, the stage of drug dependence tohave been reached within a few years thereafter, and publicnotice of their heroin-related activities to have followed withinabout five years from the onset of dependence (Ellinwood, 1967 ;Robins and Murphy, 1967 ; Kozel, et al., 1969; Roebuck, 1970;Taylor, et al., 1970; Bass, et al., 1971 Cushman, 197 I ; Heckeland Mandell, 1971, Inclardi and Chambers, 1971a; Joseph, 1972;Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973; Jacoby, etal., 1973). Taylor and his colleagues (1970), for example, indicated that56% of their sample of heroin-dependent persons in a Philadelphiamethadone treatment program were under 35 years of age, but 58%of the sample had histories of over ten years of drug use. Themedian age of a sample of heroin dependent persons entering theNew York Narcotic Control Commission for treatment was 20 years;the median age of their initial drug experience was 13 years formales and 15 years for females (Inciardi and Chambers, 1971b).The ages of 81 patients in a hospital methadone clinic studied byCushman (1971) ranged from 20 to 62 years; the mean age was 37years. The length of dependence in this group ranged from two to47 years with a mean of 14.2 years. 13 Research findings are inconsistent regarding sex andracial distributions, a function perhaps of inherent samplingbiases. Only seven of the 81 patients reported having beenheroin-dependent for five years or less. Bass, et al., (1971) interviewed 150 admissions to theDistrict of Columbia Jail during January of 1971. Forty-sevenpercent were found to be dependent on heroin and an additional21% were reported to be "chipping" heroin. Eightypercent of the dependent offenders were under 30 years of age(mean age,: 24.1 years) ; 94%, of the "chippers" wereunder 30 (mean age 22.3 years). A comparison with the non-heroinusing admissions revealed that the latter were, on the average,five years older than the heroin-dependent offenders and sevenyears older than the chippers (mean age 29.2 years). The meanages of onset of drug use for the two heroin using groups were20.5 years for heroin dependents and 19.7 years for the chippers,though use of other types of drugs had occurred considerablyearlier for both groups. About one-fifth of the dependentoffenders (21170 reported using heroin on a daily basis for oneyear or more with 3% indicating that their daily use of heroincontinued over a period of at least five years. Two years earlier, Kozel and his colleagues (1969) hadsimilarly interviewed a random sample of 225 inmates at the D.C.Jail and identified 45% as dependent on heroin and 2% as chippingthe drug. Two-thirds of the dependents in this institutionalpopulation were under 30 years of age with the greatestconcentration being under 21. Half had used heroin before the ageof 20, and 26% reported using heroin by the time they were 17years of age. Educational Status: Very few of the heroin-dependent persons included in thevarious studies completed high school, and many dropped outbefore reaching the 9th grade. The majority, however, dropped outbetween the 10th and 11th grades or as soon as they reached theage at which they could legally do so (Griffith, 1966; Babst, etal., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a, 1970b;Roebuck, 1970; Stanton, 1970a; Taylor, et al., 1970; Amsel, etal., 1971; Bass, et al., 1971; Cushman, 1971; Cuskey, et al,1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Even while they were in school, however, and despite normalintelligence, most exhibited behavioral problems in the classroomsituation (Bender, 1963; Griffith, 1966; Robins and Murphy, 1967;Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Milman, 1969; Joseph,1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Income, Occupation and Employment Status: Because of their rather low educational achievement and theirgeneral absence of occupational skills, most heroin-dependentindividuals remain at the bottom of the socioeconomic hierarchy.Substantial, though varying, segments of this population havebeen unemployed either totally or intermittently for considerablelengths of time and many researchers have noted their financialdependence, either upon public welfare or the support of others.Among the 41-66% of the various study populations found to beemployed immediately prior to arrest, incarceration or treatment,most described their jobs as unskilled labor with low earningcapacity and admitted to supplementing their income, in order tosupport their habits, through illegal activities (Griffith, 1966;Angrist and Gershon, 1969; Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al.,1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a, 1970b; Taylor, et al., 1970; Bass,et al., 1971; Cushman, 1971; Inciardi and Babst, 1971; Joseph,1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Greenleigh, 1973). Because of the generally high relapse rate, employmentsubsequent to release from prison or treatment tended to followthese general patterns. The proportion actually employed,however, tended to rise after incarceration or treatment (Josephand Dole, 1970; Cushman, 1971; DuPont, 1972; Cuskey, et al.,1973). Home Environment and Marital Status: For the most part, heroin-dependent persons known to officialagencies were raised and still resided in the inner city coreareas close to their drug sources, in an environmentcharacterized by economic deprivation and family instability.Excessive drinking and criminal involvement among both familymembers and friends were not uncommon. Many of these conditionscontinued into the marital situations of these subjects. Althoughmost remained single, possibly as a function of their youth, asubstantial segment of those who married had already terminatedtheir marital relationships through separation or divorce. Inessence, the preoccupation with drug use, the self imposedisolation from stable social relationships (both to avoiddetection and preclude the possibility of family disapproval orefforts at reform) and the general inability to assume, personaland economic responsibilities collectively contributed tounstable home and family situations (Ellinwood, 1967; Babst, etal., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970b; Roebuck,1970; Taylor, et al., 1970; Amsel, et al., 1971; Bass, et al.,1971; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Psychological Characteristics The heroin-dependent individual has been variously describedas immature, resentful of authority, passive-aggressive,emotionally labile, sexually inadequate, anxiety-ridden,rebellious, withdrawn, socially isolated, depressed and suicidal.According to the available evidence, he also tends to repressaggressive and hostile feelings, to require immediategratification, to have low frustration and anxiety tolerance, topossess generally low self-esteem and to be manipulative, (Hill,et al., 1962; Bender, 1963, Alessinger and Zitrin, 1965,Schonfeld, 1967; Milman, 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a; Roebuck,1970; Friedman and Friedman 1973). The heroin dependent person can be viewed as an individualtotally uncomfortable with and alienated from himself and hissurroundings, who must constantly maintain control over thefrustrations, anxieties, hostility and aggression. At the sametime, because his dependence requires his preoccupation withdrug-using and drug-seeking behavior, he has neither the, timenor the inclination to form stable social relationships. His lowself-esteem and perceived inadequacies push him further intoisolation from friends and relatives. It is not, surprising given this variety of psychological andsocial characteristics, that so many of these individuals havehistories of psychopathology and antisocial behavior which dateto childhood and continue,, exacerbated by drug dependence, wellinto adulthood. Problems in Inferring Causation Research interest has recently increased in the relationshipbetween dr-ug use and antisocial behavior. Regardless of itsquality or method, most of this research is intended to answerthe following, basic questions: Does drug use predate or postdate criminal or delinquent behavior? What is the nature of the relationship between drug use and crime? How strong is it? Under what conditions is it present? Is criminal behavior caused by drug use? Does involvement in criminal behavior increase the likelihood that a given individual will use drugs, either generally or of a specific type? Is criminal or delinquent behavior aggravated by drug use? Is drug use, increased or aggravated as a consequence of involvement in criminal or delinquent behavior and its psychological, social and behavioral correlates? Is the alleged association between crime and drug use direct and identifiable or is it largely, if not wholly, attributable to the presence, of external intervening factors or simultaneously operating variables (that is, is it "real" or spurious) ? The research thus far conducted falls into several majorcategories. One category involves the interviewing of selected offenderpopulations (arrestees, adjudicated delinquents, prisoninitiates) relative to their drug-using behavior in relation tothe offense for which they were last arrested, convicted orincarcerated. A second type involves comparisons between thedrug-using behaviors of selected groups of offenders and matchedgroups of either non-offenders or different types of offenders. Athird type involves comparison of the criminal records of drugusers and non-drug users. The fourth major type involves abefore-after design relative to the temporal sequence of drug useand criminal behavior; the arrest records of individuals arecompared both before and subsequent to the onset of drug use ordrug dependence. Few studies either use prospective (following one or a,number of cohorts through time) rather than retrospectiveanalysis, or take into consideration multi-drug use patterns, oradequately investigate the individual's past psychological,social and behavioral history. As such, untested assumptions areaccepted as given and invalid conclusions are presented asdefinitive. Two illustrations should suffice to make this point. First,it has been assumed that if drug use is found to predate arrest,then it was in some measure responsible for the criminalbehavior. Often unrecognized, however, is that a considerableamount of undetected criminal behavior may have existed prior toapprehension and prior to the onset of drug use (see Inciardi andChambers, 1971a; Jacoby, et aL, 1973; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Second, if the offender indicated that he has taken a drug ofsome type (including alcohol) prior to the commission of a crime,or his use of drugs is identified in some, other manner, anassumption made is that the drug was responsible for (caused) thecrime. This is difficult to prove because the arrest may occurmany hours, days, weeks or months after the crime and the fewtests that exist are not systematically used to determine thetype or amount of the drug in the body. Despite these problems,the simple assertion or determination of drug use is often deemedsufficient to establish a causal link between that drug use andcrime. Despite the methodological limitations of specific studies,however, comparative analysis of self-reported delinquency orcriminality and of arrest or court records presents at least one,challenge to the hypothesis that drug use causes crime. If a druguser or drug-dependent person commits criminal or delinquent actsbefore he begins using drugs, then his criminality cannot besolely attributable to his drug use. Further, an examination ofthe types and amount of crime committed subsequent to the onsetof drug use or dependence is useful in analyzing the oft-statedassumption that many drugs, especially heroin, have criminogeniceffects on the personality and behavior of the user. Relative to the first point, considerable data exist to showthat the majority of drug-dependent, especially heroin-dependent,persons are involved with criminality or delinquency prior totheir drug use and dependence (Morgan, 1965; Vaillant and Brill,1965; Finestone, 1966, Smith, et al., 1968; Bluni, 1969; James,1969; Stanton, 1969; Plair and Jackson, 1970; Inciardi andChambers, 1971b; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Ellinwopd, 1973; Friedmanand Friedman, 1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973; Research Concepts,Inc., 1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Most of the researchers who have found that the majority oftheir sample populations were arrested before the onset ofdependence agree that criminal behavior is not a by-product ofdependence but results, as does the, drug dependence, itself,from psychological and social deviance which predates dependenceand is ordinarily apparent by adolescence. This conclusionchallenges the theory that drugs cause crime and stresses thatdrug dependence and criminality are two forms of social deviance,neither producing the other. It is generally agreed that drugs have the ability toexacerbate, existing psychopathology, delinquency andcriminality. However, such ability is conditional upon thepre-existence of psychological and social maladjustment prior tothe onset of drug use or dependence (Bender, 1963; Hekimian andGershon, 1968; Milman, 1969, Stanton, 1969; Jacoby, et al., 1973;Friedman and Friedman, 1973; Jones, 1973). Stanton (1969) notes,for example, that: Offenders do not originally become unstable or commit crimes because of drug use but drug use does contribute to and exacerbate both instability and anti-social behavior (p. 16). In examining post-dependence arrests, the increases werehighest for drug law violations and to a lesser extentacquisitive crimes against property (Jacoby, et al., 1973;Weitzner and Figlio, 1973). Even smaller was the increase inarrests for crimes against the person; several researchers foundno increases in violent or personal crime (Chein, et al., 1964;Finestone, 1966). To the extent that increased criminal activity involves drugoffenses and acquisitive crimes, some observers have suggestedthat the illegal status of heroin is the primary factor in thecriminal behavior of heroin-dependent persons. By law, societyhas defined the drug-related behavior (possession, sale) of thedependent person as criminal, and has necessitated continuouscriminal contacts. The property crimes often resorted to byheroin-dependent persons to support their habits are seen as adirect consequence of these conditions. Of course, this view isalso compatible with the argument that this previously delinquentpopulation would probably have engaged in another criminal lifestyle even if it had not been the heroin life style. Whatever the merits of this argument, it does highlightseveral important issues. First, what are the social costs ofheroin dependence under circumstances of prohibited availability?What price is society paying in order to avoid the socialconsequences of loosened availability? Second, to what extent aretreatment programs for heroin dependent persons able to reducethese costs? The Costs of Heroin Dependence In order to accurately estimate the social costs of heroindependence, several factors must be taken into account, includingthe crime-related costs as well as the public health and welfarecosts. In this section we will cover only the crime-relatedcosts. In the next, we will deal with factors such as theeconomic loss to the community of productive citizens and thestrain on the community caused by social and economic dependence,family disruption, and the like. With regard to crime relatedcosts, we will cover: The cost to the drug-dependent person to support his habit. The cost incurred to the community from crimes against both person and property committed by the opiate-dependent person. The cost to the community for arrest, detention, trial, probation, incarceration, parole, aftercare, treatment and rehabilitation. Cost to the Heroin-Dependent Person A figure recently released by the Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs sets the number of "active addicts"nationwide at 559,224. It has been estimated that between halfand three-fifths of the nation's opiate-dependent persons residein New York. That State's Narcotic Control Commission estimatedthat at the end of 1967, there were approximately 65,000 activeopiate-dependent persons in New York City alone, and by the endof 1971, approximately 150,000 heroin users were known to theNarcotics Register maintained by the Department of Health in NewYork City. The problems involved in accurately estimating thenumber of heroin-dependent persons, however, are myriad, and pastestimates have all suffered from invalid assumptions orinappropriate measurement techniques. 14 It is not surprising,therefore, to find critics of these estimates who are willing,however, to substitute equally questionable ones in their place.One such critic has set the 1971 New York City estimate atbetween 70,000 and 100,000. Regardless of the exact number ofheroin-dependent persons or even heroin users, however, a basicfact remains: a substantial illicit heroin market exists in thiscountry and the demand apparently remains larger than the supply. 14 The Commission has specifically addressed the problems ofheroin estimation and has attempted to identify the majorfallacies and deficiencies of past work in this area. It has alsoprovided some suggestions for future research. This study can befound in its entirety in the Appendix to the Report (Blumstein,et al., 1973). Undoubtedly, the price of heroin and its quality vary withboth the supply of and demand for the drug. Between World Wars Iand II, heroin use was confined primarily to artisans,entertainers and marginal social groups who congregated in urbanareas. Use of the drug also became fairly widespread among theblack and Puerto Rican males in the inner cities. After World War II, heroin trade ,and distribution routes,which had been interrupted during the War, reopened. New YorkCity and to a lesser extent Chicago, witnessed a great upsurge inheroin use among young minority group males. As victims ofunemployment and discrimination, frustration and alienation, theyformed a ready market for the new influx of heroin. At this time,heroin was in ample supply and of good quality; it was rarelybeyond the financial reach of anyone who cared to escape therealities of his existence. During the 1950's, heroin use spread with increasingpopularity to the younger people of the cities, children ofimmigrants and Southern blacks who were unsolved in the life andlife style of the street gangs. Although the available evidenceis somewhat contradictory, many observers have related theincrease in heroin use to the disorganization of gang activitiesand the disintegration of many street gangs. as their membersgrew ineffective in their own terms and incapable of protectinggang interests (Chein, et al., 1964; Hughes, 1971). Late in 1961, a critical shortage of heroin, an event whichcame to be known as the "panic", occurred in New York.According to some, this panic" is largely responsible forthe inflated cost of maintaining a habit today. Because thesubstance was in such short supply, dealers cut the quality ofthe, dose many times and therefore increased the amount of thedrug needed and the amount of money necessary to buy it. Yet,even with the inflated price and deflated quality, dealersexperienced little difficulty in disposing of their supplies. Twoobservers have noted that during this period, the cost ofmaintaining a habit was said to have increased to ten times whatit had been only twenty years before (Preble and Casey, 1969). The inflationary cost of heroin, however, did not disappearwith the passing of the panic, and recent estimates of the dailycost of supporting a habit have ranged from $20 to $100,fluctuating according to availability and location (Hekimian andGershon, 1968; Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Prebleand Casey. 1969, Holahan, 1970; Joseph and Dole, 1970; Rogers,1970; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970; Cushman, 1971 ; DuPont andKaton, 1971; DuPont, 1972). Costs to Society From Criminal Activity According to Preble and Casey (1969), at least 80% of NewYork's heroin-dependent population reside in urban slum areas.Figures culled from the Bureau of the Census reveal that at theclose of the 1970 census, the median family income of New YorkCity residents was $9,692. while, the mean income of familiesreporting public assistance in that city was $2,114. If we assume that a heroin-dependent person has a daily habitof $20 (the lowest daily estimate found but amounting to $7,300per year), we can also assume that it would be relativelyimpossible for him to support his habit without supplementing hisincome through illegal means. F or the most part, this illegal activity manifests itself incrimes against property, principally burglary and shoplifting(Finestone, 1966; Kozel, et al., 1969; Preble and Casey, 1969,Jacoby, et 11., 1973). Less commonly, heroin-dependent personsresort to offenses against the person (assault, mugging, robbery)in a similar desperate effort to obtain the money required topurchase the drug (Anisel, et al, 1971; Friedman and Friedman,1973; Jacobv, et al, 1973; Tinklenberg. 1973). Researchers haveestimated that for a heroin-dependent person to support hishabits he must steal property amounting to between two andone-half to five times the actual cost of his habit (Cushman,1971) and that he may be expected to steal in property an amountranging from $25,000 to $50,000 per year (Joseph and Dole, 1970;DuPont, 1.972). The estimated daily tolls in stolen property haveranged from $25 to $375. At least one researcher (Singer, 1971),however, has been highly critical of these, estimates, all ofwhich he deems to be grossly exaggerated. Heroin-dependent persons are also known to raise funds tosupport their habits by pimping and prostitution. Although theseactivities do not represent a direct financial burden to society,they do, nevertheless, constitute socially and legallydisapproved behavior" (Cushman. 1971 , 1972; see also Amsel,et al., 1971). A heroin-dependent person may also become involved in thecomplicated hierarchy of individuals who are responsible for theimportation and distribution of heroin. In this way, he isassured of a supply of the drug for his own needs and very oftenrealizes a profit large enough to induce him to go into thedrug-dealing business for himself. Criminal Justice Costs: Processing the Drug-DependentPerson In addition to the costs of crime incurred by drug-dependentpersons, the community must also assume the cost ofinvestigating. identifying, arresting, detaining, trying,sentencing, treating and rehabilitating the drug-dependentoffender. In 1969, the New York State Department of Correctionsestimated that it cost the State $12.75 per day for incarcerationof one person (Cushman, 1971), a figure including the separatecosts of overhead, custodial personnel, maintenance and otherlimited services.15 A similar figure of $12 per day was quoted asthe cost of (retention, while arrest procedures were estimated tototal $25 per arrest (Cushman, 1971).16 15 One 1969 study (Babst, et al., 1969) estimated that thecost of keeping all individual on parole or in aftercare came toapproximately one-tenth of that required to maintain him in acorrectional facility. This suggests all a(Witional cost to thecommunity of approximately $1.25 per day once the individual isreleased from prison (if. of course. the estimated cost ofincarceration is reasonably accurate). 16 This estimate was derived hy multiplying the hourlywag", of an average policeman by five, the absolute minimalestimated time deemed necessary to complete the initialadministrative procedures attendant to arrest. In a more recent study of heroin use in Washington, D.C.(DuPont, 1972), the daily cost per user for incarceration was setat $14, compared with an approximate cost of $5.50 per patientfor outpatient care. The Corrections Department in that same citylisted the daily cost per offender on parole at $0.97, a figuresomewhat lower than that noted for New York a few years ago. If the costs of arrest, trial, incarceration, treatment andthe like are multiplied by the alleged number ofheroin-dependent, persons in this country today, society is facedwith another potentially astronomic bill directly related toheroin and other drug use and dependence. To this figure must beadded additional amounts which reflect the, rate of recidivismamong drug offenders and the costs incurred from crimes committedto support their habits. Yet another adjustment must be made forthose who, during the course of their drug dependence willprobably be arrested several times on a variety of charges and beprocessed through the criminal justice system many times over. The Effect of Drug Treatment on Crime During the past eight years, methadone maintenance hasevolved from an experimental program with 22 patients into themost widely used treatment mortality in the nation. Itssupporters havee claimed that participation in one methadoneprogram reduces heroin-related crime, a direct function of thepatient's reduced need for and use of heroin. In addition,individuals participating in methadone maintenance programs arereported to be able to function, perhaps for the first time intheir adult lives, as socially responsible and economicallyindependent and productive members of society. The Commission has carefully scrutinized these claims. Ingeneral, they have been based on the reported findings of alimited number of quasi-experimental studies (mostly before-aftercomparisons); the deficiencies in research design, samplingtechniques, analysis and interpretation of the data significantlylimit the reliability and validity of the conclusions and theinferences drawn therefrom. In fact, we have not foundsufficiently responsible research to conclude that any of thevarious treatment modalities, regardless of type, actually reducecrime. When methadone maintenance was first devised, itscrime-reducing potential was regarded as ancillary to achievementof the primary program goal, the elimination of drug use. Withthe passage of time, however, heightened public fear and dramaticincreases in what is frequently reported to he heroin-relatedacquisitive crime have distorted the public's view of the purposeof methadone maintenance. Funding agencies, program officials andpublic leaders have continually touted this treatment modality asa law enforcement strategy designed primarily to reducedrug-related crime.17 17 The Canadian LeDain Commission recently noted in its,report on treatment "The success of methadone programs isgenerally measured in terms of social or cultural criteria ratherthan psychological ones. A return to a normal life cycle basedupon employment, marriage and stability of social interaction isthe prime criterion of success. However, the expectation of anormal life style characterized by emotional maturity andcomplete abstinence in addition to a law-abiding. productiveexistence is an ideal which in practice is seldom achieved.Because of this, some methadone programs arrange their goalshierarchically. The foremost expectation is that all patients whoare treated will become law-abiding citizens. although they mightnot become productive. mature or drug-free. The next level is toachieve a status in which patients are law-abiding and gainfullyemployed." (1972. 1). 24.) Current Research Findings The degree to which patients in treatment, have made gainstoward crime-free lifestyles is generally measured by comparingpatients' arrest records prior to program entry and duringtreatment. In a few studies, however, attempts at control havebeen made by comparing arrest records of methadone maintenancepatients with those of reportedly matched groups of individualsin other treatment modalities (detoxification or abstinence,programs) or with those of individuals who dropped out of the,maintenance program at, some stage. Several before-after comparison studies have attempted toestablish a direct relationship between methadone maintenance anda reduction in crime. Although the data available stronglysuggest a reduction in the criminal behavior of patients intreatment, differences in the basis of measurement precludeprecise comparison of their results. Joseph and Dole (1970), forexample, utilized data on convictions whereas Gearing (1971)studied arrests; Cushman (1971) reported on data derived frompolice records and interviews while DuPont (1972) drew on crimesknown to the police, arrests and incarceration figures. Theperiods of time before and after treatment which were measuredalso differ considerably and thereby affect the crime ratesreported. Examination of studies incorporating control groups havegenerally come to conclusions similar to those reflected in thebefore-after designs. Researchers who have compared individualsin treatment with those who have dropped out, at some stageuniformly show significant differences in arrest or convictionrates between the two groups and therefore conclude that it wasthe treatment which was largely responsible for the resultantcrime reduction (Joseph and Dole, 1970, Williams, et, al, 1970;Moffett, et al, 1971: Clines, 1972, DuPont, 1972). Studies designed to compare the arrest or conviction rates ofindividuals in different treatment modalities are intended todeal more specifically with the degree of crime reductionproduced by a particular type of treatment. In general, theirfindings have shown that methadone maintenance has beensignificantly more successful than other modalities(detoxification, and abstinence, for example) In achieving crimereduction, although the absolute amount of reduction and theprogram differentials have varied considerably (Asher, 1970:Joseph and Dole, 1970; Wieland and Chambers, 1970; DuPont, 1972;Cuskey et al., 1973). Although the statistics presented are generally impressive(crime reduction estimates range from 14% to 94%) untested basicassumptions and other methodological deficiencies preclude theirgeneralization and signal careful interpretation. In one before-after study, for example, the researcher'smajor hypothesis was that a recent annual rise in serious crimewas largely attributable to a heroin "epidemic," andwas manifest in significant increases in commitment rates ofopiate offenders and parallel increases in index offenses forthat period. A second hypothesis was that a subsequent unexpectedand abrupt decline in serious crime was largely attributable tothe treatment (primarily methadone maintenance) of thousands ofheroin-dependent persons. Although the researcher did give somecredit for this "pronounced and progressive" reductionin crime to the doubling of the police force during the timeperiod under investigation, the major conclusion of the study wasthat if the rise in crime was correctly attributable to a heroinepidemic, then it was also true that heroin treatment was largelyresponsible for- the subsequent crime reduction (DuPont, 1971). The researcher failed to demonstrate, however, that thesignificant increase in reported crime was indeed attributable tothe alleged rise in heroin dependence. Although the proportion ofincarcerated heroin dependent persons did increase, the reportednumber of index crimes increased by an even greater margin. Someof this increase was undoubtedly related to the growth of heroindependence, but the very large and general increase in the crimerate suggest that most of the increase was probably attributableto the majority of criminals who are not heroin -dependent.Another fallacy in the researcher's reasoning lies in the factthat the study was based on increases in arrests andincarceration and on the records of those persons who were intreatment. Those arrested, however, represent only a smallfraction of the universe of offenders, even drug offenders;persons incarcerated constitute only a tiny fraction of thosearrested; and persons in treatment represent only a smallproportion of known heroin-dependent persons (many more are onwaiting lists) which, in turn, represents some unknown fractionof all heroin-dependent persons. Thus, what is perceived as atriumph of a particular treatment modality may be for the mostpart a simple statistical artifacts Numerous other methodological obstacles precludegeneralization from research findings regarding, treatment andcrime. In only one study, for example, did the researcher attemptto control for dosage level of the methadone administered (thosewith lower dosages were found to have higher crime rates). Noneof the studies examined takes into account the monitoring andsupervision of the drug's administration nor is there anystandardization of the point in treatment at which themeasurements are. made. Finally, some studies use a man-yearfigure as a measurement of success although the conclusions drawntherefrom are especially likely to be distorted and misleading,(Joseph and Dole, 1970; Gearing, 1971, Joseph, 1972). To illustrate this final point, let us assume for a moment,that we are interested in 20 individuals in treatment program X.Of these 20, 15 had dropped out at exactly two months afterentering, two more dropped out after five months in the program,one stayed for a year before leaving and one confirmed intreatment for three years. Multiplying the number of individuals(20) by the number of months each spent in the program and addingthose figures yields the total member of man-months spent intreatment. This number, divided by 12, equals the total number ofman-years in treatment. (See Table III-5) Dividing the man-month or man-year figure by the number ofindividuals who had participated in treatment yields the average(mean) number of man-months or man-years of treatment perindividual. In this case, the average number of man-months oftreatment per individual totals 5 (or an equivalent of .4man-years of treatment per individual, on the average). Both the total. and the average man-month or man-yearfigures, however, provide for varying interpretation, dependingupon motive and requirements. In the case above, for example, anindividuals average time, in treatment was calculated to be fivemonths; yet the actual situation shows that 15 out of the 20(75%) of these individuals dropped out of the program after twomonths, the latter being the modal length of stay. The ways in which programs record admission and dropout datafurther complicate this matter. In some instances, persons whodrop out during the early high risk period (0-5 months afterentry into program) are simply not counted and therefore remaininvisible for dropout or failure statistics. These same persons,however, are frequently counted as program participants forbudgetary and accounting purposes. Similarly, dropouts who returnto the program after a specific, unusually short, period of time,are frequently counted as new program entrants rather thanreadmissions, again primarily for budgetary and programaccounting reasons (Research Concepts, Inc., 1973). Clearly, the manner in which data are presented cansignificantly alter and distort the perception of the reader ifnot the actual facts themselves. Aside from any basicmethodological deficiencies, this kind of statisticalmisrepresentation constitutes perhaps the most serious defect inthe available research literature on the effect of treatment inreducing crime among drug-dependent persons. A Realistic Appraisal We have already noted that most opiate-dependent personsleave long histories of psychopathology and social pathologywhich are manifest in delinquent, criminal, suicidal and otherdeviant, behavior prior to the onset of drug use. Psychiatric andother studies have also confirmed the hypothesis that thepre-existence of these problems significantly increased theindividual's initial susceptibility to opiate dependence as wellas his high vulnerability to relapse into drug use and crime, 18(Bender, 1963; Milman, 1969, Stanton, 1970a: Taylor, et al.,1970; Chambers and Taylor, 1971 Cushman, 1971; Gearing, 1971;Inciardi and Chambers, 1971b; Joseph, 1972; Laugrod and Lowinson,1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973). 18 A partial explanation for the increase in rearrest may liein police practice. By virtue of the police practice of increasedsurveillance of known drug-dependent persons the once-identifieddrug-dependent person, one with a history of arrest andhospitalization, stands a greater chance of being apprehendedthan does one who is not yet known to the police. The simpleaddition of opiate-dependence to delinquency automaticallyincreases the likelihood that the drug-dependent offender willcome to the attention of the police (see Bridges, 1965: Roberts,1967: Cuskey, et al., 1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973). Additional research findings have indicated that mostopiate-dependent persons come from unstable home and familysituations where social deviance was evident in other familymembers, and drop out of school at a fairly early time (generallyabout 10th grade). They generally possess no marketable skills;have non-existent or at best unstable employment histories; haveunstable personal and social relations; reside in the inner-cityghettos and suffer the psychological, social and economicstresses so often concommitant with that type of existence.19 19 Several researchers have attempted to describe the"addict subculture" and to document its importance andits implications for the treatment of drug-dependent individuals.See, for example, Finestone, 1964; Sutter, 1966; Feldman, 1968;Preble and Casey, 1969; Stephens and Levine, 1971. Taken together, these findings suggest that chances forrehabilitative success, however defined, are not high for suchindividuals. The psychological ambivalence which mostopiate-dependent persons feel toward the drug coupled with theindication from research findings that these persons had not yetbeen "habilitated" suggests a poor prognosis for their"rehabilitation," defined in terms of a "normallife style based on gainful employment, marriage and socialstability." Notwithstanding the fact that social,psychiatric, psychological, counseling and other ancillaryservices are provided to those in treatment, this society mustface the fact that even the best of the services have inherentlimitations in the degree to which such programs can alter thebehavior of individuals who for so long have been subject tononsupportive social and emotional circumstances. While evidencedoes exist to show that some qualitative and quantitative changesin behavior with respect to crime and employment are associatedwith treatment, the precise nature or amount of change which canbe directly attributable to programmatic inputs is difficult tomeasure and has not yet been documented substantially. DRUGS AND DRIVING Adult Americans spend an average of 5% of their waking hoursevery day behind the wheel of their cars.20 Although"driving under the influence" of drugs is universallycondemned by public opinion and public law, far too manyAmericans appear unwilling to structure their activities in sucha way that drug use and driving do not coincide. In an idealsociety in which all individuals behaved responsibly, the effectsof drugs on driving would not be of major concern. In thiscountry, however, our citizens are more dependent on motorvehicles than they are on drugs. For this reason, the full impactof drug-using behavior on the public safety cannot be fullyassessed without reference to the effect of psychoactive drugs onthe user's ability to drive a motor vehicle. 20 Each licensed driver drives an average of 10,000 milesevery year, spending 255 hours on the road. Research Limitations Data are generally lacking on drug use and its effect uponthe user's driving ability and motor vehicle accidents. The majorresearch obstacle is that effective devices are, not available todetect some psychoactive drugs within the body fluids of personswho are involved in accidents or traffic violations. In addition,these, tests, where available, are inconvenient and are notsystematically administered. Since it took several years ofresearch to develop functional alcohol detection devices, it isreasonable to predict that it will take some time to develop themore complex detection devices for these drugs. Further, even ifblood or urine samples are taken in an effort to test for thepresence of drugs other than alcohol, laboratories are generallynot available or equipped to determine the identity or quantityof drugs present. Even when such tests are feasible and available, research isfurther inhibited by the complexity of the drug-personinteraction. The relationship between the risk of automobileaccidents and use of psychoactive drugs is difficult to establishfor many reasons, among which are: the wide variety of such drugswhich are available; the, substantial quantitative andqualitative variation in drug-effect, the differences in durationof drug effect; the cumulative and/or interaction effects due toprolonged or combined drug usage, and individual differences inreaction to drug-effect. One of the major shortcomings of priorresearch is its emphasis on the dosage per se rather than onblood concentration levels which more accurately reflect thedosage effect according to individual characteristics, such asweight. Moreover, the studies conducted leave suffered from seriousmethodological defects which undermine their findings (Nichols.1971). Laboratory Investigations can determine the effects of use ofparticular drugs on driving-related performance. However, it isdifficult to generalize such results to real driving situations,and previous studies have failed to relate performance decrementto drug concentration levels. Anecdotal reports and case histories may suggest areaswhere controlled research is needed, but are, in themselvesinsufficient to establish relationships. Comparison of crash records of drug users and non-users comprisesan alternative method for assessing the impact of drug use onhighway accidents. However, even if the frequency of accidents ishigher among drug users, these findings do not establish anycausal relationship between the variables. For example, there isno way of determining from this method alone whether the highwayaccidents in which drug users are involved occurred while suchusers were "under the influence" of a drug. Systematic analysis of body fluids taken from crashvictims can determine the correlation between drug use andaccidents but can only presume causal relationships. As we notedearlier, such data are presently inadequate because some drugsare not detectable in human body fluid samples. In addition,testing procedures are plagued by unstandardized sampling andscreening techniques. Comparison of drug concentration levels of crash victimsand of non-involved drivers operating vehicles under similarcircumstances is perhaps the. soundest way of determining theimpact which drug use per se may be having on highwaycrashes. However, this procedure has not generally been used inconnection with drugs other than alcohol. In addition, it ishampered by the difficulty of matching comparison groups and bythe inconvenience of stopping and testing drivers not involved inaccidents. Research Findings Prior to describing the available data regarding specificdrugs and their effects on driving, we should note thatinsufficient attention has been paid to the impact of"medical" drugs on driving performance. At any one time, perhaps 3-5% of the driving population (age16 and over) are taking psychoactive medication prescribed by aphysician (Kibrick and Smart, 1970).21 21 In addition, psychoactive preparations soldover-the-counter may affect driving performance. So may someprescription drugs not normally taken for their psychoactiveproperties, such as antihistamines, which may have sedative sideeffects in some individuals. Alcohol Alcohol is the one drug which has been studied extensively todetermine its effect on driving ability. Not surprisingly, thedata confirm popular opinion that its use is a major contributorto accidents, especially fatal ones. The evidence consistslargely of postmortems of fatally injured drivers, conducted in amultitude of locations , which consistently show that 60% ofthese victims had more than a 0.05% blood/alcohol concentrationand that at least 30% of these drivers had more than a 0.15%blood/alcohol concentration (Arthur D. Little, Inc. 1966; MidwestResearch Institute, 1972). Complete assessment of the role ofalcohol in accidents requires a controlled investigationcomparing the incidence of drinking by accident and non-accidentdriving populations exposed to the same risks. Such studies arenot conclusive, but they do indicate that the incidence ofdrinking in the non-accident group is far less, and among theaccident group, drinkers are more prevalent than nondrinkers. Present data, though still inadequate, are sufficient tosuggest for purposes of policy making that drinking itself is acontributory factor in a major fraction of all traffic accidentsand fatalities. In addition, several researchers have estimatedthat heavy drinking may be a factor in perhaps one, quarter ofall automobile fatalities. Although infrequent heavy drinking andchronic alcoholism naive not been sufficiently distinguished inthe, literature, one study does indicate that alcoholics, whensober, do not appear to have an accident rate significantlyhigher than average. These points could stand furtherexamination, but additional studies are quite unlikely to refutethe present evidence which implicates chronic drinking as a veryimportant factor in fatal automobile accidents (Arthur D. Little,1966). Marihuana In our first Report on marihuana, we concluded that researchhad not proven that use of this drug significantly impairsdriving ability or performance; we cautioned, however, thatdriving under the influence of any potent psychoactive drug is aserious risk to public safety and that acute effects of marihuanaintoxication, such as spatial and time distortion and slowedreflexes, could be expected to impair driving performance. Wealso urged further research in this area. In the period between our first Report and the present oneseveral studies have been performed to determine whether or notautomobile driving performance may be adversely affected by useof marihuana. Generally, the studies indicate that marihuana use,even at dose levels normally consumed in social settings, doesimpair to a significant degree visual perceptual performance aswell as temporally controlled responses (National Institute ofMental Health, 1973). In actual and simulated driving tests, poorer automobilehandling was found among subjects under the influence ofmarihuana, including slowed reaction times and increasedfrequency of incorrect or inadequate driver-responses (Dott,1972, Kielholz, et a]., 1972. Miller, et al, 1972) In experiments designed to study the effects of marihuana ondriving-related visual functions, it was found that marihuanainterfered with peripheral vision as well as central vision. Thisdeficit was interpreted as a result of momentary lapses ofattention during marihuana intoxication (Moskovitz, 1972). Other Psychoactive Substances In contrast to the vast literature on alcohol and the growingmarihuana research, very few studies have been conductedregarding the relationship between use of other psychoactivedrugs and motor vehicle accidents. Virtually no research hasappeared on hallucinogens and cocaine, and the studies onopiates, amphetamines, barbiturates and tranquilizers are quitelimited. On the basis of pharmacologic effects, however, somegeneralizations can be made. The information presented earlier inthis Chapter regarding the influence of psychoactive drugs onperception and psychomotor function have important implicationsfor driving performance. The, amphetamines present a case inpoint. Although the stimulant properties of amphetamines andamphetamine-like drugs may appear to improve alertness andendurance, a significant highway hazard is presented by theextreme fatigue and mental depression which occur when theeffects of stimulant drugs have worn off and by the unpredictableappearance of these, effects after extended use. In sum, depending on dose, most psychoactive drugs arecapable of impairing driving performance. It can be predictedthat widespread use of any of these drugs would have a directimpact on highway safety. IV -- IMPACT ON PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE It has become increasingly common in recent years tocharacterize drug use as a public health issue, as opposed to acriminal justice. issue, or alternatively as a medical problem asopposed to a legal problem. Before analyzing the impact of druguse on the public health and welfare, this classification of druguse as a public health problem must be clarified and placed inproper perspective. A public health problem is neither synonymous with medicinenor antonymous with law. The distinguishing feature of the publichealth approach is the recognition that prevention of a definablephysical or psychological condition is beyond the competence ofthe traditional medical system. Lead poisoning, cigarettesmoking, and air pollution are public health problems preciselybecause, their prevention requires social resources and legalmeasures beyond the services of individual physicians. Publichealth is essentially a socio-medical concept, and legal actionsare generally ail integral part of the public health response toa problem, as is illustrated by enforced quarantine of Carriersof communicable diseases, compulsory vaccination, prohibition ofuse, of lead in house paint. and fluoridation of water.Prevention of certain social conditions having ail impact on thehealth and welfare of the population is the hallmark of a publichealth approach .22 22 The oft-stated distinction between the"criminal" and "medical" approaches refersprimarily to the individual drug user, rather than to the publicimpact of drug-using behavior. Many of those who characterizedrug use as a "medical problem" would prefer that theindividual be left alone and be permitted to risk his own healthif he so chooses. On the other hand, those who insist that druguse he viewed as a criminal justice problem are emphasizingeither that the person should be punished for his behavior orthat the criminal law is a necessary deterrent to drug use orboth. Persons insisting on criminal intervention may actually bedoing so on public health grounds on the theory that the criminallaw will contain drug use and minimize its potentially adverseconsequences on the public health and welfare. PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE: A PREVENTIVE CONCEPT In the Commission's view, all public health problems sharetwo common features. First, the society is confronted with asignificant incidence of a disabling medical condition or a clearpotential for development of such a situation. For example, a fewunrelated cases of pneumonia do not constitute a public healthconcern; only when a particular condition becomes or threatens tobecome of consequence to the collective well-being does it becomea public health matter. Second, the prevention and control,including perhaps even treatment of this condition is generallybeyond the capacity of the individual medical practitioner. Thesetwo elements define the existence of a public health problem. Thecontours of the public health response will be determined by the,nature of any operating),' assumption with regard to the cause orcauses of the undesirable condition, or in the absence of such ahypothesis, will be limited to research alone. The classic illustration of a public health problem is thecommunicable disease such as typhoid. Prevention (or"primary treatment" in the lexicon of public healthofficials) would include sewage systems, water purification,regulations for dish and food handling and immunizationprocedures. Strategies of control ("secondarytreatment") would be instituted upon the appearance of asingle, case of typhoid, including isolation of the carriers andother techniques for reducing the spread of the epidemic.Obviously such measures are beyond the capacity of individualphysicians and require an integrated public response. 23 In thissituation the potential impact on the public, health and welfareis substantial, the relationship between an individual carrierand the undesirable social consequences is immediate and direct,and the necessary preventive and control measures are apparent. 23 Treatment ("tertiary treatment") could beperformed by the physician, such as by administering antibiotics,etc. On the fringes of the public health concept are matters suchas disabling automobile accidents. Here we have situations wherethere is a significant incidence of a disabling medicalcondition, one which is predictable and proportionate to thenumber of drivers. In addition, the condition can presumably beprevented by eliminating automobiles or controlled by varioustraffic safety regulations. Finally, the population at-risk isdefinable and becomes larger as participants in this activitycommunicate its advantages to others. Thus, analyticallyspeaking, automobile accidents are a public health concern. Thecrucial question, of course, relates to the implications of soclassifying them, and the relevance of countervailing socialneeds and values, such as the utility of individualtransportation and the personal conveniences of relativelyunencumbered driving. This brings us to the important question. In what ways is ituseful to think of drug use as a public health problem? Theearlier discussions of drug dependence and drug-induced behaviordemonstrate that the adverse social impact of drug use arisesfrom the special capacity of psychoactive drugs to influencebehavior by direct action on the brain. The acute or chronic useof any drug, whether or not it is psychoactive, carries risk forthe physical health of the user, depending on dose, frequency andother variables; but this fact is not the one which defines thespecial public health dimension of psychoactive drug use. Themajor component of the public health concern with drugs is mentalhealth, broadly defined: the decrement in individual's social andpsychological functioning attending certain patterns of drug use.Consequently, the public "health" aspect actuallyencompasses the less tangible impact on the total welfare of theindividual and the community in terms of social and economicfunctioning. In short, the public health and welfare issuesoverlap, as do the consequences to the individual and thesociety. In terms of public health analysis, the use of psychoactivedrugs falls somewhere in between the prototypical communicablediseases on the one hand and car accidents on the other. It ispossible to predict and measure in very gross terms incidence ofdisabling physical and psychological conditions among apopulation of drug users. It is also possible to predict under agiven set of social conditions that the population at-risk willbe increased as drug users introduce their friends andacquaintances to this behavior. Finally, the harm to the socialorganism accruing from compulsive drug use is clear andsubstantial, its is apparent from the incidence and consequencesof chronic alcoholism. In this sense, then, the use, ofpsychoactive drugs particularly in intensified or compulsive usepatterns, has an adverse impact on the public health and welfare,and may legitimately be classified as a public health problem. The next question is whether and in what ways theinstitutional apparatus we call the public health system can bebrought to bear in order to prevent, control and minimize theseaspects of the problem. As preventive measures, legalprohibitions or restrictions on availability may be viewed aselements of a public health approach. Of course, the publichealth considerations may be outweighed by advantages offered bythe specific drug, whether therapeutic, recreational orsacramental, and by the impracticality of restrictingavailability under certain social conditions, as in the case ofalcohol. As we pointed out in Chapter Two, legal restrictions ondistribution can only reduce availability, not eliminate it. Given the availability of psychoactive drugs and theinevitability of their use, the public health approach must beoriented toward the amelioration of the, acute health hazards ofuse and the prevention of intensified and compulsive use, thosepatterns with direct impact on the public health and welfare. Asour earlier observations on drug dependence illustrate, thesebehavior patterns are initiated and reinforced by interrelatingfactors involving the effects of the drug, the characteristics ofthe user and the nature of the environment. Consequently,institutional efforts to prevent drug dependence are inseparablefrom the emerging concept of "total health" whichembraces the individual and his relationship with hisenvironment. It is crucial to recognize in this connection thatall intensified or compulsive drug user almost always has otherproblems as well: emotional, social, familial, medical and underour present system, legal. For this reason, the requirements of apublic health and welfare strategy is the need and ability toprovide a wide range of services to the individuals andcommunities at-risk. Before dealing with the appropriate public health response todrug use, more specificity as to the adverse impact of thisbehavior on the public health and welfare is needed.Unfortunately, however, this impact has not been measured withany degree of precision. As we pointed out earlier, the incidenceof drug use which has been measured does not define the problem.The threshold question is to determine the conditions upon whichthe psychological and behavioral concomitants of drug use are ofconsequence to the public health and welfare. ASSESSING THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFAREIMPACT OF DRUG USE The, forms of drug dependence with which society is mostfamiliar are that of the chronic alcoholic or "skidrow" drunk and the street heroin-dependent person. Somewhatless visible than these compulsive users, however, is an evenlarger group of intensified alcohol users who can be classifiedas marginal with respect to their social functioning and economiccapability. Further, a substantial number of drug dependentindividuals generally remain "hidden" from publicnotice. The opiate-dependent physician, the barbiturate-dependenthousewife and the functional alcoholic, for example, allpresumably suffer from some impairment of functioning which mightbe manifested in absenteeism, reduced performance level orneglect of family responsibility. However, since no concreteinformation is available on these matters and the social impactis not easily ascertainable, our primary focus here will be uponthat more visible group of drug-dependent individuals (generallyon heroin or alcohol), who cannot maintain an adequate level ofeconomic, social and psychological functioning and who thereforepose more, immediate consequences for the public health andwelfare. A very substantial proportion of such individuals is drawnfrom what might be called a pre-dependent or high-risk group;that is, persons who have been raised in an atmosphere rife withsocial and psychological pathology: poverty, illiteracy,malnutrition, delinquency, violence. emotional deprivation,mental illness and alcohol or other drug dependence. Thesepersons are especially at-risk because they frequently lack boththe inner strengths and the institutional supports necessary tocope successfully with the problems of living in such anenvironment. Because the environment in which heroin-dependent personsdwell is frequently and characteristically the same as that inwhich they resided prior to becoming heroin dependent, it is notsurprising to find substantial proportions of these individualswith histories of psychiatric disorders, delinquent and criminalbehavior which long preceded their heroin involvement. In suchcases, the same unhealthy conditions which existed in the pastare simply carried over into the present but are now exacerbatedby the additional problems concomitant with drug dependence. The Commission has noted an absence of reliable data withrespect t the social and economic costs of alcohol dependence,and data regarding heroin dependence are virtually nonexistent.Further, available data in specific jurisdictions are generallynot maintained in a manner which permits comparison with theexperiences of other jurisdictions. Therefore, the following information regarding the impact ofdrug dependence on the public health and welfare will be drawnprincipally from the research on alcoholism. The Population of Heavy Alcohol Users The problems associated with drinking and alcoholism havebeen demonstrated by many researchers. In a national surveyconducted by Cahalan, et al., (1969), for example, 31% of thesample indicated some problem with drinking within the last threeyears. Forty percent of the men and 15% of the women claimed somepsychological dependence on alcohol while 12% of the men and 8%of the women reportedly experienced some health problemassociated with drinking during the three years preceding thesurvey. The Cahalan, et al., 1969 survey of drinking practices foundthat 28% of the male drinkers and 8% of the female drinkers wereheavy drinkers and that half of the heavy drinkers (6% of thegeneral population) were heavy-escape drinkers who drankexcessively in an effort to avoid social pressures and personalproblems. Although such heavy-escape drinkers included most ofthose termed "alcoholics," they may also includeexcessive drinkers who have avoided much of the long-termpsychological and physical effects of alcoholism. In any case, Cahalan, et al., (1969) found that mostimportant predictors of heavy drinking to be sex, age, city sizeand social position. The proportion of male heavy drinkers, forexample, was found to be about three and one-half times higherthan the proportion of female heavy drinker (28% VS. 8%).24 Amongdrinkers, the highest proportion of heavy drinkers (30%) are menin the 30-34 and 45-49 year age groups; in women the highestproportions (10%) are found in the 45-49 and 21-24 year agegroups. For both sexes the prevalence of heavy drinking declinedrapidly after age 50. Residents of large urban areas consistentlyevidenced higher rates of heavy drinking than did residents ofsmaller towns. 24 The U.S. Department of Health. Education and Welfare foundin 1965 that at least five times as many men as women were"alcoholics." Economic Loss The available data indicate that most heroin-dependentpersons are males, under 26 years of age with a tenth-gradeeducation or less, whose age at first arrest for heroin use wasgenet-ally between 16 and 19 years. To a great extent, theheroin-dependent individual suffers the loss of his youth, hismost formative and important years for healthy growth anddevelopment, which can never be regained or recouped. And thecommunity simultaneously suffers the loss of its most valuablenatural resource. Because alcohol dependence develops gradually, economiclosses do not generally occur among younger populations, inmarked contrast to those associated with heroin use. However,once alcohol dependence develops, its impact on economicfunctioning is devastating. Gillespie (1967) found that between 27 and 81% (median 52%)of alcoholics are unemployed. Fifty-two percent of thehospitalized alcoholics in Glatt's sample (1967) lost their jobsbecause of drinking, while Robbins, et al. (1969) discovered that56% of alcoholics had job difficulties directly attributable todrinking. Among alcohol-dependent persons who remained employed,the decrement in job performance is substantial. For example, theAmerican Society for Personnel Administration (1972) hasestimated that "there are 4.4 million employed people in thecountry who are alcoholics; 90% of them have been on the job10-20 years; they're costing employers $8-10 billion peryear." Although the precise amount of absenteeism, accidents andeconomic losses attendant to alcohol use is difficult to assess,its impact is clearly considerable. Zentner (1969) found that thecost to industry primarily in absenteeism and inefficientjob performance among employed alcoholics is nearly $2 billionper year. Trice (1965) found that alcoholics use two to fivetimes more sick time than non-alcoholics and receive three timesthe, amount of disability payments. Trice and Roman (1972) notethat sickness payments for problem drinkers was three timesgreater than those for the normal worker. A review of the existing literature indicates that mostobservers generally agree that drug and alcohol dependencecontribute to increased insurance rates, industrial accidents,increased absenteeism, theft, problems of morale and discipline,impaired job performance, security risks, retraining costs andother associated problems. Death Death is a particularly finite measure of the social cost ofdrug dependence. The correlation between unnatural or prematuredeath and drug dependence is an astounding one. Because the dataregarding alcohol-related death is national in scope andreliable, while that regarding other drugs is regional andsketchy, we will have to present this information separately. Itdoes appear in general, however, that drug-dependentpersons and heavy non-dependent users are more likely than therest of the population to die by their own hand, eitherintentionally or accidentally , or by the hand of others. Alcohol Robbins, et al. (1959) reported that 26% of suicide victimswere reported to be chronic alcoholics. On the basis of a studymade one year later, 31% of the suicides were found to bealcoholics (Palola, et al., 1962). The suicide rate forhospitalized male alcoholics was reported by Kessel and Walton(1965) to be 86 times the rate expected for the generalpopulation; and 75% of the suicide victims studied by Murphy andRobins (1967) were found to suffer from either alcoholism ordepression. In addition to suicide, the excessive drinker of alcoholrisks death and injury in various other ways. Alcoholics are 2.5to 3 times as likely to die during any given time period as the,general population (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963; Brenner, 1967).The most frequent causes of death are violence 24% (9% in generalpopulation), heart disease 23% (40% in general population), andcirrhosis of the liver 14% (3% in general population). Alcoholicsare seven times as likely to die in fatal accidents asnon-alcoholics (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963). Waller (1968) found that 71% of persons who died ofaccidental poisoning had a blood alcohol content of .10% orhigher. The same was true of 58% of those killed by fire and 46%of those who drowned. In contrast, only 7% of the victims ofdeath by natural causes had significant levels of blood alcohol. Accidents in the home, on the job or on the road show veryfew factors in common other than human carelessness. It isstriking, therefore, to note how closely alcohol use iscorrelated with accidental injury. By subjecting non-fatalaccident victims to the breathalyzer test, Wechsler et al.,(1969) found that 22% of home accident victims, 30% oftransportation accident victims, and 15.5% of thosewith occupational injuries had positive blood alcoholreadings. Victims of fights or assaults showed significantlyhigher alcohol involvement, with 56% showing positive bloodalcohol readings. As we noted earlier in this chapter, a drinkeris less likely to survive than a non-drinker even when both areinvolved in the same two vehicle automobile accident. In a studyof such crashes in which one driver survived, it was thenon-drinking driver who survived in 59 of 67 cases (U.S.Department of Transportation, 1970b). The Commission's review of presently available data indicatesthat property damage, insurance costs and medical servicesconsequent to alcohol-related motor vehicle accidents ran to $1billion in 1971 (National Clearinghouse for Alcohol Information,1972). A review of highway fatalities since 1966 shows that eachyear approximately one-half are related to accidents involvingalcohol. From a public welfare standpoint, the impact isconsiderable when one considers the lost earning power of thoseinjured or killed, the social security payments to dependents ofthe deceased as well as public assistance and aid to dependentchildren-expenditures which must be maintained as the result ofsuch accidents. These data demonstrate, that the excessive drinker is subjectto significantly greater physical and social stress leading tohigher injury and fatality rates than the general population. Thegreater vulnerability appears to be due to the general stressinvolved in the alcoholic's living conditions, the presence of aninadequate diet, the diseases connected with alcohol consumptionitself, and the increased (Chance of death after injury withlarge quantities of alcohol in the blood (Brenner, 1967). Heroin National data concerning the incidence of heroin-relateddeath do not exist. The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner inNew York City, however, maintains what are undoubtedly the beststatistics on heroin-related morbidity and mortality. In 1968, heestimated that bacterial endocarditis caused about 2% of thedeaths among heroin dependent persons in New York City, a figurewhich represented about one-third of all deaths from endocarditisin that city. In that same year it was noted that more thanone-half of the patients admitted to Bellevue Hospital forhepatitis were heroin-dependent persons who injected the drugintravenously (Baden, 1970). In 1972, heroin-related deaths in New York City rose slightlyin comparison with the previous year (916 in 1971 to 924 in1972). These, statistics account for deaths due to acute heroinreaction and overdose, and deaths from hepatitis, endocarditisand other infections. lf we add to these data otherheroin-related deaths such as homicides, suicides and fatalaccidents, the total figure for 1972 climbs to 1,409 as comparedwith the composite 1971 figure of 1,268. New York City reported324 opiate-dependent persons were homicide victims in 1972, ascompared with 208 in 1971 (Markham, 197 3). Far too little is known at the present time about thesyndrome of acute fatal reaction following the intravenousinjection of heroin. Acute reaction which constitutes the majorcause of death among heroin users is commonly referred to as"overdose." Baden points out that this is an inaccuratejudgment and states that: A pharmacologic overdose can sometimes be demonstrated, butthe precise mechanism of death is not clear in most cases. Thereare probably many mechanisms for death, which may include anallergic type reaction to heroin, quinine, or other dilutents; areaction to injected bacteria or other foreign materials; or atrue pharmacologic overdose of heroin or quinine or other drugs(Baden, 1972a: 837). Presently available data point to the fact that in NewYork City, the heroin-related deaths account for the largestproportion of deaths of persons between the ages of 15 and 35years. In 1960, New York City reported 199 opiate deaths.This figure rose almost five times by 1972 when 924 deaths wereattributable to opiate drugs. Further, during the decade of the1960's, as the number of deaths from opiates significantlyincreased, the median age of such deaths decreased from 31 yearsin 1960 to 23 years in 1972. As Baden (1972b) points out: [There has been a] change in pattern of drugs abused from heroin alone to multiple drugs, most recently methadone; more than 30% of narcotic deaths in New York City this year [1972] have been associated with methadone use, licit and illicit. The majority of younger addicts now have other drugs in their tissues at autopsy in addition to heroin: alcohol, methadone, barbiturates, and others hypnotics, amphetamines, tranquilizers, analgesics, etc. (P. 1). Barbiturates Barbiturates appear to be related to death in two ways:consumption of lethal doses is a common means by which personscommit suicide; and their combined effects with alcohol sometimesresult in death even in cases where suicide is not apparent. Ithas been estimated that 400 barbiturate-induced suicides occureach year in New York City alone (Baden, 1972c). NIMH (1968)indicates that there were 1,602 suicides involving barbituratesnationwide in 1968. Many accidental deaths involving barbiturates appear toinvolve alcohol. For example, a report prepared for theCommission by the Assistant Medical Examiner of Dade County,Florida, indicates that 151 persons died from barbiturate-relatedcauses during 1970 and 1971, 133 of which were classified assuicides on the basis of other factors. Of the 132 casestested for the presence of alcohol, 35% were positive, and 40% ofthe accidental overdoses had blood alcohol levels of 0.05% ormore as compared with 23% of the suicides (Blackbourne, 1972). Medical Complications of Chronic Drug Use Disease which is related either to the life style of the druguser or to the method by which be administered the drug isespecially common among skid row alcoholics and heroin-dependentpersons. In these populations susceptibility to various ailmentsis significantly increased by virtue of life style; theseindividuals commonly live in rather poor circumstances underfrequently unsanitary conditions. Consequent to their generalinability to maintain proper nutrition and health habits, thesepersons frequently contract tuberculosis and other communicablediseases or illnesses .25 25 A substantial public health concern in this regard is thetransmission of disease, especially hepatitis, through medicallyrequired blood transfusion. It has been a longstanding and commonpractice for hospitals to purchase whole blood from proprietaryblood banks because voluntary sources, especially RedCross-sponsored programs, are frequently unable to provide it insufficient amounts. It has likewise been a common practice forpersons who are drug dependent (especially heroin andalcohol-dependent persons) to sell their blood. Cohen andDougherty (1968) found that the risk of contracting hepatitisfrom transfusion of blood from a proprietary blood bank was sixtimes greater than from a bank where blood was given free. Theydiscovered as well that the chance of contracting hepatitis fromblood donated by known or suspected heroin dependent persons was70 times greater than that of non-parenteral drug users. In addition to diseases which may be related to life style, anumber of prevalent conditions or diseases are immediatelyrelated to the method by which a drug is administered. Amongpersons who are parenteral drug users, the use of unsterileneedles and contaminated drug solutions contributes to a seriousdisease problem. Hepatitis, infectious endocarditis and tetanusare particularly common among heroin users. In New York City, tetanus is almost exclusively found amongheroin users. The Deputy Chief Medical Examiner of New York Cityestimates that between 10 and 20% of deaths amongheroin-dependent persons are due directly to medicalcomplications, particularly hepatitis, infective endocarditis andreturns. Heart damage related to endocarditis is not uncommonamong persons engaged in parenteral drug use. Baden estimatesthat 80% of the infective endocarditis cases are bacterial andinvolve the aortic and mitral valves (Baden, 1972b). Similarpatterns of disease have been noted among persons who inject"speed" or barbiturates (Canadian Commission . . .,1972). Disease and other medical complications associated withalcohol use, are both common and serious. The incidence of heartdisease and cirrhosis of the liver is disproportionately highamong alcohol users (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963). Statistics fromNew York City also point to the association of tuberculosis withboth alcohol and heroin dependence. It is estimated that 10% ofthose admitted to the Chest Service at Bellevue Hospital areheroin-dependent persons suffering from tuberculosis; 30-40% arechronic alcoholics also afflicted with tuberculosis. Cahalan, et al. (1969) found that 12% of all male drinkersand 8% of all female drinkers experience health problems relatedto alcohol use. Other researchers have noted that if a21-year-old male in good physical health starts drinking, he hasa .9% chance of deeveloping gastritis, a 1% chance of developingLaennec's cirrhosis, a 0.02% chance of developing primary livercell carcinoma, and a 0.01% chance of developing delirium tremens(Malzberg, 1960; Sundby, 1967; Victor and Adams, 1970; Brunt,1971; Goodman and Gilman, 1971). It should be noted that contrary to popular belief,alcoholism is rather common among heroin-dependent persons. A1968 report emanating from the Office of the Chief MedicalExaminer in New York City indicates that at least 20% ofthe heroin-dependent population. demonstrate heavy drinkingproblems, and many show fatty livers and alcoholic-type cirrhosisat autopsy (Baden, 1970). Impact on the Family Structure The family unit is particularly susceptible to the impact ofdrug dependence; it not only reflects but magnifies the effectsof crime, suicide, accidents, economic problems, illness anddeath. The influence of excessive drinking is deleterious to allaspects of family life and often reduces the ability of familymembers to function within them accepted limits of our society. The alcoholic marriage is generally unstable and disturbed.Chafetz, et al. (1971) found marital instability in 41% of thefamilies of alcoholics. Intense conflict appeared in 60% ofalcoholic homes (27% of the homes of non-drinkers) in a study byMcCord and McCord (1960). The Robins (1966) study revealed that55% of previously married alcoholics bad been divorced.Separations or divorces were found in 60% of the alcoholics'family units by Lemert (1960). In fact, the higher thedegree of alcoholic involvement, the lower the likelihood of anintact marriage (U.S. Department of Transportation, 1970a). In areview of 22 studies conducted between 1944 and 1965, forexample, Gillespie (1967) found that 18-55% (median 32%) ofalcoholics are divorced or separated. Pittman and Gordon (1967)noted that among their sample of chronic drinkers, 19% weredivorced and 32% were separated. The effect on children of alcoholic parents has beenespecially remarkable; between 22% and 55% of the children ofalcoholics have been reported to become alcoholics themselves(Ellerman, 1948; Prout, et al., 1950; Selzer and Holloway,1957; McCord and McCord, 1960; Moore and Ramseur, 1960; Block,1964; Bailey, et al., 1965). Goodwin, et al. (1971) reported that 67% of male felonsstudied were alcoholics or problem drinkers. Studies of thebackgrounds of alcoholic criminals seem to indicate not only thattheir family history and experiences are related to alcoholismitself, but that a significantly high incidence of violence ispart of their home environment. Social deviance found in thefamily may well be learned and passed on by parents to theirchildren, so that a pattern of deviance develops. Of all the social institutions, the family is perhaps themost crucially affected by drug dependence. Compensatory Social Costs The Commission has found that very fewjurisdictions maintain any data on public assistance payments todrug-dependent persons. However, it has been estimated thatone-third of all persons receiving welfare payments use alcoholexcessively (Rubington, 1969). Regarding heroin dependence, dataobtained from the City and State of New York in early 1973indicate that there are about 30,000 heroin dependent personsreceiving public assistance in the State of New York.Twenty-seven thousand of these are in New York City. Heroindependent persons thus comprise 1.5% of the total public welfarecaseload of New York State, estimated at 1.8 million persons. InNew York City, these persons comprise 2.1% of the publicwelfare rolls in a total caseload of 1.2 million. Of course these data represent only the tip ofthe iceberg. Social support for the families of compulsive drugusers runs into hundreds of millions of dollars, and the massiveinvestment in treatment and rehabilitation services constitutes amajor social cost of drug dependence. The federal and stategovernments spend approximately $380 million annually in connectionwith alcohol treatment and yearly expenditures for"drug" treatment have now reached $650 million. Tothese costs should be added the $100 million annually spentprocessing chronic alcoholics through the criminal justice system(President's Commission, Task Force on Drunkenness, 1967) as wellas the $475 million devoted to processing heroin-dependentpersons (McGlothlin, 1972). FRAMING A PUBLIC HEALTH RESPONSE The psychosocial, medical and economicproblems produced by and associated with drug dependence aresubstantial. Whether the drug dependence is of the"hidden"' variety in which the individual isfunctional, albeit at a reduced level, or is totallyincapacitating and visible, it is a costly proposition for thepublic health and welfare. Individuals who are sociallyincapacitated as a consequence of alcohol, heroin, or other druguse deprive the community of their participation and constitute adrain on public resources. Unfortunately, they often appearimmune to many of the traditional methods of intervention, mostof which are directed at the symptoms rather than the causes ofdependence. The Commission has observed that in order to deal effectivelywith this kind of drug dependence, reliable and valid informationabout the epidemiology of that condition is essential. Atpresent, however, few reliable or valid data exist in this area.We simply do not know the number of persons who can becharacterized as either pre-dependent individuals especiallyvulnerable to full-scale dependence, or even the number who are,already incapacitated by drug dependence. Consequently, most of the "public health" responseto drug dependence, whether labeled "control,""prevention," "treatment" or"rehabilitation," has occurred after the fact.Imperfect knowledge has been one reason for society's failure to"rehearse" the problem and formulate an effectivepreventive strategy. But, there is another reason for thisfailure: the inadequacy of the public health structure itself. In this nation's pluralistic medical and human servicessystem, the functions of health and social service agencies arelargely undefined and overlapping. The fact that a particularsituation has been defined as a public health problem does notassure that all of these resources will be harnessed in acoordinated way to deal with the problem; instead it is entirelylikely that a series of initial ad hoc responses will befollowed by attempts on the part of each of the diversecomponents of the system to define its own role independently ofthe others. This is precisely the situation that nowcharacterizes the "public health response" to theproblem of drug use. In this as in other public, health areas, a multitude ofpublic and private service agencies are involved: family andchild-care agencies, welfare organizations, business resources,law enforcement agencies, the medical profession, communitymental health centers, the schools, social service agencies andso on. There is no cohesive response as each institution dealswith a. small component of the total problem. Confusion offunding, lack of training, inadequate accessibility of servicesand insufficient assignment of priorities now characterize thissociety's response to many public health problems ranging fromnutrition to drug dependence .26 At the present time, a "public health approach" ismore a way of looking at a problem than of dealing with it.Consequently, to state that drug use is a public health andwelfare problem is only to confirm the actual and potentialimpact of certain drug-using behaviors on the public health andwelfare. Beyond this point, the determination of the appropriatepublic health strategy is plagued by the amorphous character ofthis nation's public health system, if in fact we have adefinable "system", and uncertainty about, the utilityof different responses to the problem. The Commission notes that the community mental health systemis designed to overcome these problems although administrativeand financial obstacles have continued to inhibit itsdevelopment. We would suggest that an appropriate strategy for preventingthe adverse public health and welfare consequences of drug usecan be formulated only after the following questions areanswered. What, as a practical matter, can be, done in order toprevent medical complications from drug use, to prevent chronicuse in general and to restore the health and social functioningof those who have engaged in such use? Which of the components ofthe public health and welfare system can perform those functionswhich are achievable? In what ways should the various publichealth and welfare resources be structured for delivery to theclient populations? Finally, if the existing resources areinsufficient, how should they be allocated and what new healthand welfare services should be developed? In the next chapter we will address specifically threeparticular elements of the public health response; prevention,treatment and rehabilitation and emergency intervention. As aprelude to these discussions, however, we think it important tooutline some general principles for formulating these strategies. First, the response to drug use must be part of the generalsociomedical strategy, focusing on the total person as a part ofthe total environment, including the interrelationship betweenfamily members, peers and other community influences on socialintegration and mental health. Second, the community-based response apparatus must be gearedto early detection of problems, and must have the capacity todeal with them at all stages, primary through chronic. Byfocusing on acute problems, early intervention techniques andongoing care, many drug related problems can be prevented amongthe individuals being "treated," and, most importantly,among those influenced by them. For example, early concern aboutthe, families of those who are alcohol or heroin dependent mightbe the most effective strategy for minimizing the incidence ofdependence among offspring. Third, within this overall framework, services must begeographically and economically accessible to target populations,who must be aware of their existence. These services must beadequate in terms of the training and experience of allprofessional and paraprofessional personnel '27 and in terms offacilities and equipment. Finally, the, services must becoordinated in terms of lines of communication, authorityand responsibility. 27 In this connection, the Commission notes with favor thedevelopment of regional training and resource centers dealingexplicitly with community-oriented skills and services. Thesecenters will he discussed in the following Chapter. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-11IA031-000652-B045-194http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fadafwd.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131616 text/html 5466HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:15:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:12 GMTContent-length: 5249 The Facts About Drug Abuse Foreword The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Foreword IN 1970, at the peak of the drug scare, the trustees of theFord Foundation decided that piecemeal measures were not enough.As a first step in a major program the Foundation asked PatriciaM. Wald, now a United States Circuit judge in the District ofColumbia, and Peter B. Hutt, a Washington lawyer, to undertake asurvey in depth of drug abuse and to suggest what privatefoundations might contribute to understanding, if not solution,of the problem. In their report to the Foundation published in1972 -Dealing with Drug Abuse-judge Wald and Mr. Hutt said: It is of fundamental importance that man has and willinevitably continue to have potentially dangerous drugs at hisdisposal, which he may either use properly or abuse, and thatneither the availability of these drugs nor the temptation toabuse them can be eliminated. Therefore, the fundamentalobjective of a modern drug-abuse program must be to help thepublic learn to understand these drugs and how to cope with theiruse in the context of everyday life. An approach emphasizingsuppression of all drugs or repression of all drug users willonly contribute to national problems. There is an urgent need for effective nongovernmentalleadership toward a more reasoned approach to drug abuse in thiscountry. A void exists that we believe can be filled by thecreation of a new Drug Abuse Council. In our best judgment, theCouncil could successfully exert this leadership and could have asubstantial and beneficial impact on drug abuse in this country. According to McGeorge Bundy, then President of the FordFoundation, The second important step was to join with three otherfoundations that have shared our concern with drug abuse-theCarnegie Corporation, the Commonwealth Fund, and the Henry J.Kaiser Family Foundation-in financing one of the principalrecommendations of the report, namely, the establishment of anindependent national Drug Abuse Council. (The Equitable Life Assurance Society joined the foundationsin contributing to the expenses of the Council.) The Council was organized in January 1972, but only after ithad been determined that a widely representative board ofdirectors and a highly competent staff could be assembled forabout five years of active service. The last formal meeting ofthe board was held in June 1978, and since then the President ofthe Council, Dr. Thomas E. Bryant, and the staff have beenengaged in the preparation of this Final Report. The Report demonstrates that widespread misuse or abuse ofdangerous drugs-not just heroin, marijuana, and cocaine, butalcohol and caffeine, and a great variety of stimulants andtranquilizers, some prescribed, some sold over the counter-is notan evil that can be extirpated by legislation or other means. Yetit is believed that an informed society, aware of thecomplexities of the issues and evidence, will be better able tocope constructively with the use of drugs. This belief underliesthis Final Report. It is not the function of a foreword to anticipate thefindings and conclusions of a massive study. It would, however,be gross neglect not to acknowledge in this foreword theexceptional contributions of the directors, the officers andstaff and consultants of the Council, and the foundations andmany others who have enabled the Council to apply knowledge andreason to the understanding and treatment of a major nationalproblem. These include: Judge Wald and Mr. Hutt, the Co-chairmen, and James V.DeLong, the extraordinarily able Executive Director of the FordFoundation survey staff, who produced Dealing with Drug Abuse-theseminal study that led to the creation of the Council. The directors of the Council for regular attendance atmeetings, for the information and wisdom and wit that enrichedthe deliberations of the board, and especially Dr. Bryant for thepersonal and professional qualities that underpinned hisindispensable leadership. And, of course, the Ford Foundation, the CarnegieCorporation, the Commonwealth Fund, the Henry J. Kaiser FamilyFoundation, and the Equitable Life Assurance Society, for thefinancial support essential to a major private enterprise. And the Council here records special gratitude to the seniorofficers and responsible staff of the Ford Foundation for sixyears of unfailing interest and support. BETHUEL M. WEBSTER Chairman CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-12IA031-000652-B045-216http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fadadir.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131633 text/html 9021HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:16:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:30 GMTContent-length: 8804 Board of Directors of the Drug Abuse Council The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Board of Directors of the Drug Abuse Council Bethuel M. Webster, Chairman Webster & Sheffield New York, N.Y. Daniel X. Freedman, M.D., Vice-Chairman Professor and Chairman Department of Psychiatry University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois Thomas E. Bryant, M.D., J.D., President Washington, D.C. Arnalia V. Betanzos President, Wildcat Service Corporation New York, N.Y. formerly Member New York City Housing Authority Albert H. Bowker, Ph.D. Chancellor, University of California at Berkeley Berkeley, California William A. Darity, Ph.D. Dean, School of Health Sciences University of Massachusetts Amherst, Mass. William W. Grant Attorney Denver, Colorado Boisfeuillet Jones President, Emily & Ernest Woodruff Foundation Atlanta, Georgia J. Henry Smith Retired Chairman Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States NewYork, N.Y. Dale Tooley District Attorney Denver, Colorado Eddie N. Williams President, joint Center for Political Studies Washington, D.C. Former Directors William R. Hewlett (1972-1977) President, Hewlett-Packard Company Palo Alto, California Arabella Martinez (1972-1977) Assistant Secretary for Human Development/HEW Washington, D.C. formerly Director, Spanish-Speaking Unity Council Oakland, California Eleanor Holmes Norton (1972-1977) Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Washington, D.C. formerly Chairman, New York City Commission on Human Rights Herbert Sturz (1972-1978) Criminal justice Coordinator New York, N.Y. formerly Director, Vera Institute of justice New York, N.Y. Acknowledgments The individuals cited on the title page ofeach of the staff report chapters were a major source ofassistance to the authors in the preparation of those chapters.In addition, the authors collectively wish to acknowledge theirspecial gratitude to Jean R. Johnson for her unstinting effortsin the preparation of this book, to Margo C. Backas and PaulDanaceau for their assistance in editing, and to Norman E.Zinberg, Rayburn Hesse, Sibyl Cline Halper, Carl Akins, David E.Smith, Robert Newman, James M. Duke, and Mary Ann Orlando whoreviewed the manuscripts in their several drafts. Also deservingof grateful mention are the efforts of Marie P. Thompson, JaneSilver, William P. Vasquez, and William J. Haney. The Contributors Thomas E. Bryant holds both a medical and a law degreefrom Emory University in Atlanta. Since 1971, he has served asPresident of the Drug Abuse Council. During 1977 and 1978 heshared those responsibilities with his service as Chairman of thePresident's Commission on Mental Health. Prior to the Drug AbuseCouncil, Dr. Bryant headed the Health Affairs Office of theOffice of Economic Opportunity. He is a member of the Instituteof Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences and has served asa member of the President's Committee on -Mental -Retardation,the American Medical Association's Committee on Health Care forthe Poor, the Health Task Force of HEW, and the American BarAssociation's Commission on Mental Disabilities and as Chairmanof the Interagency Committee on Emergency Food and MedicalService. Dr. Bryant is currently Chairman of the Public Committeefor Mental Health. Erik J. Meyers is a graduate of the Fordham School ofLaw and Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service. Since1974 he has been legal counsel and a policy analyst for the DrugAbuse Council. He is a member of the New York and District ofColumbia Bar Associations and has served as legal advisor to thePublic Committee for Mental Health and the National Associationfor City Drug Coordination. Peter B. Goldberg, a graduate of the State Universityof New York at Albany, has been a senior policy analyst for theDrug Abuse Council since 1971. One of the original staff authorsof Dealing with Drug Abuse, Mr. Goldberg has pursuedpostgraduate work in urban planning at George WashingtonUniversity. He helped to organize the National Association forCity Drug Coordination and is Chairman of its National AdvisoryCommittee and a member of the Editorial Board of UrbanConcerns magazine. He is currently Special Assistant to theDirector of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse andAlcoholism. John R. Pekkanen, a Nieman Fellow at HarvardUniversity in 1970-71 and a Drug Abuse Council Fellow in 1974-75,has written several nonfiction works on drug, health, andcriminal justice topics. Among his recent works are The BestDoctors in the U.S. (Seaview Books), Victims (Dial Press),and The American Connection (Follet Publishing Co.). Mr.Pekkanen has written numerous articles for Life magazine, Human Behavior,The New Republic, Atlantic Monthly, Town and Country, and isa former bureau chief for Life magazine. He is presently afreelance writer in Washington, D.C. David C. Lewis is a graduate of Brown University andthe Harvard Medical School. He has been a Senior Fellow at theHarvard Laboratory of Community Psychiatry and a Sloan FoundationFellow at Harvard Medical School. He has served as Chairman ofthe Mayor's Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse of the City ofBoston since 1972 as well as serving on the National League ofCities Task Force on Drug Abuse, National Institute on DrugAbuse's Research Review Committee and the National Associationfor City Drug Coordination (founding chairperson). Dr. Lewis iscurrently Associate Professor of Medicine and Donald G. MillerDistinguished Scholar in Alcoholism Studies at Brown University,Director of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse in the Brown UniversityProgram in Medicine, Director of the Alcoholism and SubstanceAbuse Division at Roger Williams General Hospital in Providence,Rhode Island, and former Medical Director of the WashingtonianCenter for Addictions in Boston. He has authored numerousarticles on alcohol and drug abuse issues in professionaljournals. John C. Sessler is a graduate of Rutgers Universityand the University of Southern California and holds a doctoratein physics from Georgetown University. He has been a seniorprogram analyst for evaluation and survey projects for the DrugAbuse Council from 1972 to 1978. Prior to his work at theCouncil, Dr. Sessler worked for the Center for Naval Analysis. Hehas authored several technical articles on a variety ofscientific topics, co-authored several Drug Abuse Councilpublications, and contributed a chapter to The Evaluation ofSocial Programs (Sage Publications). He is currentlyEvaluation Coordinator for the Public Health Service of theDepartment of Health and Human Services. Robert R. Carr is presently Executive Director of TheFund for Constitutional Government. He has thirteen yearsexperience in Washington as Congressional aide, public policyanalyst, political organizer, and writer. Employed since 1973 asthe Senior Program Officer at the Drug Abuse Council, he wasinvolved in drug law reform through testimony before statelegislatures, television and radio appearances, and thepublication of several articles in popular journals. In 1978, hewas appointed to the drug use/misuse task panel of thePresident's Commission on Mental Health. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-13IA031-000652-B045-250http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fadafin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131658 text/html 58660HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:16:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:25 GMTContent-length: 58442 The Facts About Drug Abuse Final Report Of The Drug AbuseCounci The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Final Report Of The Drug Abuse Council IN 1972 Dealing with Drug Abuse: A Report to the FordFoundation concluded that the national drug policies at thattime were not effective and were not likely to eliminate or evengreatly affect "drug abuse." That report, describingthe complex nature of psychoactive drug use and misuse,identified flaws in programs and laws which had been designed toreduce the harm to individuals and society of the indiscriminate,nonmedical use of psychoactive drugs. Public policy was found tobe unrealistic and unresponsive to cultural, social,psychological, and economic factors underlying the widespread useof drugs. The report to the Ford Foundation was issued at the end of adecade of increasing drug use and increasing concern about suchuse. Drugs seemed to be everywhere; a generation of youngAmericans had been urged to "turn on, tune in, and dropout" with a wide variety of mood-altering drugs. The UnitedStates was described as a nation of "pill poppers. "Deeply held public fears were heightened as city after cityreported heroin addiction of epidemic proportions. From suburbanneighborhoods, long considered secure and stable, came reports ofheroin experimentation by high school students from middle- andupper-income families. Thousands of American soldiers in Vietnamwere said to be addicted to heroin. New words andphrases-"pot," "downers," "uppers,"drug "trips"-became part of the popular vocabulary. In 1972 it was estimated that between three- and six-hundredthousand Americans-the vast majority of whom were said to beinner-city blacks and Hispanics-were addicted to heroin. Nearly25 million Americans were reported to have tried marijuana and 10million were said to use it regularly. Millions of othersregularly used stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, andtranquilizers for non-medical purposes. However, alcohol andnicotine continued to be the most widely used and misused drugsillicit drugs-marijuana, heroin, and cocaine in particular-weresingled out for attention, yet the misuse of legally availabledrugs was often ignored. While various methods or approaches for"solving the drug problem" were presented, confusionprevailed. Drug issues, particularly that of the relationshipbetween drug use and crime, were constantly publicized andpoliticized. Many Americans thought the increase in street crimeduring the late 1960s resulted largely from illicit drug use andtherefore responded enthusiastically to calls for a war on drugsto keep illicit drugs and their users apart. Heroin was labelled"Public Enemy Number One." New "get tough"laws were proposed, and many were enacted. Hundreds of millionsof dollars were appropriated for programs to stiffen lawenforcement, improve public education, and expand treatmentefforts. At the height of public concern in 1972, Dealing with DrugAbuse urged caution and restraint. It called for a climate ofreason which would permit identification of the real risks ofdrug misuse and rejection of policies and programs based onmisinformation and sensationalism. It pointed out that drug useand drug problems were not new but have persisted throughouthistory, not only in the United States but in many othercountries, cultures, and societies as well. It noted thatknowledge about the causes of drug misuse was inadequate, as wasknowledge about its -grevention and treatment. Moreover, thereport revealed much of what was then accepted as fact to beerroneous, out of date, or misleading. The authors of Dealing with Drug Abuse, the sponsoringprivate organizations which funded the Drug Abuse Council, and,subsequently, the council's board of directors perceived apressing need for independent analyses of public drug policiesand programs. They felt that lawmakers and public officials,particularly in the federal government, were reacting todrug-related problems from a limited, crisis-oriented perspectivewhen a longer-range view was necessary, and that theeffectiveness of law enforcement and treatment strategies wasoften overstated by public officials, which led to unrealisticexpectations of rapid and sweeping solutions. Thus theseindividuals and groups agreed to sponsor an independentorganization capable of providing the public with a lessemotional, more apolitical perspective. As a result the DrugAbuse Council was established in early 1972. As of this writing, the Drug Abuse Council has been inexistence for nearly seven years. During this time the councilhas, through staff-directed projects, research grants, andcontracts, assessed many aspects of the use and misuse ofpsychoactive drugs.2 This work has been undertaken with theunhampered view and resources of a national, independent,nonprofit, nongovernmental organization. The council has had resources sufficient to examinedrug-related issues in depth and over time. It began by analyzingthe assumptions underlying public perceptions and policies. Itexamined the accepted knowledge of the interaction of chemicalsubstances with the human body and mind. It studied variousaspects of contemporary society to identify socioeconomic andcultural factors relating to drug use and misuse. The council hasreviewed and assessed laws, programs, and projects-federal,state, and local; governmental and private-which have beenadopted in response to psychoactive drug use and misuse. In pursuit of its efforts to learn more about drug use andmisuse, the council gathered information from public officials,scientists, historians, and law enforcement and treatment programpersonnel. It canvassed widely and deeply the experiences andviews of current and former drug users, of minority groups andindividuals, and of other informed or concerned persons. The council has periodically published its findings on manyaspects of drugs and has sought to bring about changes inpolicies and programs it considers unsound. Through theseactivities, it has sought to provide leadership in the privatesector. When operations began in 1972, a five-year period of activitywas planned. In the fifth year, the board of directors decided tocontinue some of the council's functions for an additional twoyears. Now, as this seven year period comes to an end, we feel aresponsibility to share our major observations, findings, andsuggestions for the future in the form of a final report. This final report consists of two major sections: first, thereport of the directors of the Drug Abuse Council; and second,six chapters on various drug policy topics prepared by thecouncil's staff and consultants. While not every judgment orsuggestion advanced in these staff report chapters isspecifically endorsed by the council's board of directors, theydo form the analytic base from which the board drew itsobservations, conclusions, and recommendations. The Report of the Directors As this report developed, it became increasingly clear thatthe most valuable document we could provide would be oneaddressed to the concerned citizen, not just to the professionalin the drug field. We stepped back from the day-to-day concernsof those who work in research, treatment, prevention, and lawenforcement to begin to address the broader philosophical,social, moral, legal, and pragmatic issues influencing nationaldrug policies and the expenditure of public funds. Thus readersof this report will find few recommendations about theparticulars of program efforts in treatment, prevention, orenforcement. We do not mean by this to suggest that there are noimprovements that can be made in program operations; there are infact many. We have, however, chosen to focus our discussioninstead on the public policies and attitudes from which theseprogram efforts stem. We believe that substantial benefits cancome only as a result of a significant rethinking of our approachto drugs, not from tinkering with the mechanisms of our publicprogram response. This report is a conscious effort to stimulate publicinterest in drug policy issues and to promote greater publicunderstanding of them. By indicating the costs and benefits ofpast and present efforts, we can begin to formulate and acceptprinciples with which more reasonable and effective alternativeapproaches to drug misuse can be constructed. We have noblueprint for a step-by-step solution to the nation's -problemswith drugs; in our opinion it would be a mistake for anyone tothink such a plan could be devised, given present knowledge. Itwould, however, be equally erroneous to think that nothing can bedone to improve the current situation. Since the creation of the Drug Abuse Council in 1972, what isoften termed "the American drug scene" has changed inseveral ways. As a general observation, more Americans appear tobe using more psychoactive substances. Drug use and misuse havebecome among the most compelling realities of contemporaryexistence. Among legally available drugs, alcohol has increasedin the number of its users, particularly among younger people.Among illicit drugs, marijuana has steadily increased in use, ashas cocaine more recently. Although recent research has providedevidence of substantial numbers of occasional, nonaddicted heroinusers, federal officials report that heroin addiction hasdeclined over the past two to three years. Greater changes can be observed in the nation's response todrug use and misuse in terms of changes in laws and publiclysupported programs. In some respects, the situation has improved.Given the magnitude of federal expenditures on drug treatmentprograms and law enforcement efforts-estimated to be nearly $6billion since 1971-some improvements should be demonstrable. Forexample, the passage of the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Actof 1972 has led to the creation of a nationwide network of drugtreatment programs, chiefly for heroin dependence. As a result,treatment for those dependent on heroin is now more readilyavailable. The federal National Institute on Drug Abuse reportsthat between 1971 and 1978 hundreds of thousands of individualshave received treatment in about two thousand federally fundedclinics throughout the country. However, many more have notvoluntarily sought treatment. Another area of improvement over the past few years is inbasic research, work which has broadened understanding of theaddictive process and the biochemistry of the brain and centralnervous system. More questions remain unanswered than have beenanswered, but recent progress is encouraging. Perhaps the most significant change may be the decline in theemotional fervor that once dominated public discussion of drugs.Public concern is still intense; nonetheless, there is widerpublic acknowledgment that simple, quick solutions to our drugproblems will not be forthcoming. As a result, publicexpectations are more moderated development that may encouragemore realistic law enforcement and control objectives. While we consider these to be changes for the better, thebasic situation remains: Despite progress in a number of areas,more Americans use and misuse more psychoactive drugs than ever.Since in our considered judgment this situation will prevail atleast through the next few years, it is necessary for us as anation to plan carefully and thoughtfully how to handle it mostresponsibly. This planning requires a basic rethinking ofnational goals, policies, and strategies regarding the use andmisuse of psychoactive drugs. The underlying social dynamics andproblems that lead to drug misuse are so exceedingly complex asto as yet elude totally satisfactory solutions; the rationalcourse, then, is to begin with what has been learned fromhistory, particularly from the experience of the past severalyears. The council has several general observations that we regardas of central importance to this process of rethinking, butbefore submitting them, we emphasize again that we have nostep-by-step blueprint for solving the nation's drug problems. Wecan, however, indicate where past experience and current analysisshould direct us, and we can begin to strive toward moreconsistent, coherent, and responsible approaches to drug use andmisuse in the future. The following observations are, in ourview, central to this process. 1. Psychoactive substances have been available for use sincethe beginning of recorded time and will predictably remain so.Man will undoubtedly continue to use such substances for avariety of reasons: to relax, to escape, to enjoy, to worship, todelude, to destroy. At given times in history certain drugs havehad greater appeal or easier availability and have consequentlybeen used more widely, but the essential point is that somepsychoactive drugs are almost always readily available toenable people to achieve what they wish or need for alteration ofmood or mind. As we search for more effective policies andprograms, this certainty of drug availability should be at theforefront of our thinking. 2. While the use of psychoactive drugs is pervasive,misuse is much less frequent. A failure to distinguishbetween the misuse and the use of drugs creates the impressionthat all use is misuse or "drug abuse." This isparticularly true in the case of illicit drugs. For example,while millions of Americans of high-school and college age haveexperimented with various drugs and many use some of themregularly, clearly the majority exercises personal restraint orobeys social controls in drug-taking behavior. To state this inanother way, the number of young Americans who are in seriouspersonal difficulty because of the misuse of drugs is relativelysmall. However, the frequent depiction of the minority who domisuse drugs, especially illicit ones, as typical conveys themistaken impression that misuse is pervasive if not inevitable. 3. While not enough is known about why certain individualsmisuse drugs, it is known that there is a definite correlationbetween pervasive societal ills-such as poverty,unemployment, and racial discrimination-and drug misuse.When such conditions predominate-as they do in the inner-cityareas of many large American cities-the manifestations ofwidespread drug misuse and trafficking in illicit drugs can beseen in their most pernicious forms. So long as these adversesocial conditions persist, -widespread -drug misuse care be,expected. Drug misuse resulting from such societal conditionsaggravates other urban problems, and makes restoring the vitalityof our inner cities more difficult to achieve. 4. Attempts to control the availability of drugsoften present a conflict between the desires of individualsand the aspirations of society. When harm to both theindividual and society is clearly demonstrable, the conflict maybe resolved. When harm to either is less clearly demonstrable, itis less easily resolved. This may lead to dissension ofconsiderable magnitude, involving sensitive questions ofindividual rights and the limits of governmental powers. To stateit plainly, the price of an effective strategy for eliminatingdrug misuse would be perceived by many Americans as too high interms of the invasion of privacy and the abrogation of individualfreedoms. National drug policies must reflect careful balancingof these concerns in order to enjoy substantial public support. 5. Drug-related laws and policies center too often on thedrugs themselves and not often enough on the problems of thepeople misusing them. This leads to preoccupation with andelaboration of the adverse aspects of certain drugs, as ifthey themselves were somehow culpable. Such thinking canreinforce a focus on eliminating or legalizing the availabilityof certain drugs as "solutions" to related problems.Drug policies should instead be primarily focused on people andtheir problems. 6. Too many Americans have unrealistic expectations aboutwhat drug laws and programs can accomplish. All toooften, these laws and programs are expected to eliminate drugproblems. More disturbing, drug laws and programs have beenexpected to contribute substantially to other social objectivesas well, such as reducing crime, increasing employment, orrestoring family cohesion. Such expectations place overwhelmingand unfair burdens on laws, programs, and those administeringthem, and make failure and public frustration commonplace. Ourdrug policies and laws need to be more realistically stated tocommand public support. 7. Finally, we Americans should resist the temptation toblame our drug problems on others. We have done this too often inthe past. Our drug problems are peculiar to our own nationalexperience. They derive from our history and culturaltraditions, our mistakes and prejudices, our societal ills andflaws-not those of Turks, Mexicans, Burmese, or Colombians.Certainly, many aspects of drug problems are internationalin scope, and much can be gained by multinational research andeducation efforts. At times we must seek the cooperation of otherpeoples and other countries in order to try to curtail the flowof illicit drugs into this country. However, the chances forsuccess in these cooperative efforts would be enhanced, in ourview, if they were undertaken with an acceptance that the mostfundamental aspect of American drug problems is the magnitude ofdemand for drugs and that the problems leading people to misusedrugs will not vanish even if the supply of one or two drugsis eliminated. It is against the backdrop of these general observations thatthe council submits its conclusions and recommendations. Werepeat, they will not dispose of our drug problems. However, ifapplied they would, in our view, mitigate much of the harm thatcomes from present policies and approaches-harm that in the mindsof many is damaging in a free society. As we observed above, Americans tend to overlook the capacityfor misuse of licit drugs and overestimate the misuse of illicitdrugs. As a consequence, we pursue widely divergent courses,depending upon the legal status of a particular psychoactivesubstance. For example, some drugs, such as caffeine, are freelyavailable in a wide variety of forms. Use is frequently promotedand misuse largely unacknowledged. Other drugs, such as nicotineand alcohol, are considered potentially more harmful, but theiruse is largely controlled by social attitudes and their misuse,though discouraged, is not prohibited. Actions taken under theinfluence of such drugs that have a potential for injury toothers-drunken driving, for instance-are subject to criminalsanctions, although misuse itself is not. Still other drugs, such as barbiturates, amphetamines, andtranquilizers, have generally recognized legitimate medical uses,yet they also have significant potential for harm if misused.There is growing public awareness of this potential harm, and theavailability of these drugs is more carefully controlled, as, forexample, by prescription of licensed physicians. Criminalsanctions are employed to discourage diversion from legitimatechannels. Then there are some drugs, such as heroin and marijuana,which are considered to be harmful to individuals and society andwithout legitimate medical uses. National policy toward thesedrugs over the past seven years has been a two-pronged effort tocontrol the supply or availability and reduce the demand. Thus,laws are designed to eliminate the availability of these drugs byprohibiting their use, production, or distribution, and criminalsanctions are employed to enforce them. On the demand side,assistance-primarily treatment for heroin addiction throughpublicly funded clinics-is offered and sometimes mandated forthose using these drugs. Public drug policies are in essence a reflection ofprevailing attitudes about psychoactive drugs, and currentattitudes are, conversely, strongly influenced by past andpresent policy. In this manner current policies reflectassumptions and events more than a half century old, despite thefact that many of those assumptions were erroneous or founded indemogoguery. Unfortunately, in the view of the council, drugpolicies and prevailing public attitudes continue to representmisunderstanding and wishful thinking more than sober analysis.For example, it is still widely believed that by prohibiting theuse of a particular drug through the criminal law, that drug canbe eliminated from society. Despite sobering experiences to thecontrary, it is still hoped that more resources for lawenforcement and treatment or more stringent laws will endproblems with drugs. Individuals use and misuse all kinds of licit and illicitdrugs for a wide variety of reasons, some with greater potentialfor harm to themselves and society than others. For example, somedrug use is clearly experimental or inquisitive; individuals wantto know what a drug will do to them, how it will make them feeland act. Other drug use is recreational; individuals use drugs torelax, to enhance enjoyment of a social situation. Still otherdrug use is demonstrably harmful and antisocial; individuals usedrugs in ways harmful to themselves or society. As it is now constituted, however, national drug policy doesnot reflect an adequate appreciation of these very realdifferences in drug-using behavior-yet at the same time mostAmericans in their day-to-day experience are at least generallyaware of such differences. For example, most are aware of thedifference between social drinking and alcoholism. They perceivethe difference between taking an occasional tranquilizer andtaking tranquilizers compulsively, between taking prescribednarcotics to relieve pain and being addicted to them. ManyAmericans have begun to recognize the difference between smokingan occasional marijuana cigarette and being constantly"high" on marijuana. To command informed publicsupport, public policies must recognize these differences in thepatterns and circumstances of drug use. Public policy regarding heroin can probably never be the sameas policy respecting marijuana or alcohol. These drugs differpharmacologically, and people generally use them for differentreasons and in different situations. However, the principles uponwhich the control mechanisms of public drug policies are basedcan and should be consistent. As the public begins to appreciatethe differences in drug use patterns and behavior, some changesin attitudes and policy approaches are occurring. For example, many states have lessened the severity of theirlaws regarding marijuana possession. The use and misuse ofsedatives and tranquilizers are under scrutiny. Responsiblenational organizations such as the National League of Cities andthe U.S. Conference of Mayors have publicly called for newapproaches to heroin addition. Others have urged caution in ourresponse to the observed increase in cocaine use, lest anilladvised response make matters worse. The federal government's attitude about drugs also has beenaffected. The Ford administration's 1975 White Paper on DrugAbuse, which expressed the federal strategy, differeddramatically in tone from the "war on drugs" approachof the early 1970s. Although the White Paper had littleimmediate impact, it opened the door for substantial futurechanges. The Carter administration's appeal for the"decriminalization" of marijuana has providedadditional evidence that change is possible. Because the country does appear to be in a relatively calmmood regarding drugs and a process of rethinking is evident, itis a good time to look to the future. Given the council's beliefthat in the future there will in all probability be more, notless, use and misuse of psychoactive drugs, it is essential toconsider ways in which society may face this situation. Suggestions for the Future. To state it plainly, thechallenge facing America regarding drugs is to determine how bestto live with the inevitable availability of psychoactive drugswhile mitigating the harmful aspects of their misuse. A case canbe made that we are, in fact, learning to do just that. For example, the latest national survey indicates thattwo-thirds of American adults regularly use alcohol and some 13million adult and youthful drinkers are said to be problemdrinkers. Currently, federal efforts are increasingly focused ondetermining the underlying causes of alcohol misuse in the hopeof developing more effective preventive and treatment measures.However, despite very deep concerns, there are no seriousproposals for a return to Prohibition. The lessons of thatexperience were well learned-the criminal justice system couldnot and should not be society's chief agent for controllingalcohol abuse. Instead, attention is now directed at moreeffective public education and health measures. The public seemsto wish to reduce the dangers and risks associated with themisuse of alcohol and yet continue to enjoy the perceivedbenefits derived from responsible use. While no one argues thatwe have been successful in eliminating the enormous social costsof alcoholism and alcohol related problems, current policies arelargely regarded as both reasonable and responsible. Similarly, a case can be made that, with nearly 50 millionAmericans having tried marijuana and 16 million of thesereporting current use, the public (on the basis of opinion polls)believes that marijuana use will not decrease markedly over thenext few years and that society must adapt to this use in a morereasonable, responsible manner. While this usage, too, is seen bymany as a disturbing development, appreciable numbers think thatresponsible adaptation is possible. To date, eleven statelegislatures have removed the threat of criminal arrest andimprisonment for the possession or use of small amounts ofmarijuana. This development reflects an understanding that severecriminal sanctions against the use of small amounts of marijuanaare neither appropriate nor effective. The harm to societyassociated with the use of small amounts of marijuana is not seenas sufficient to justify the use of criminal sanctions inattempts to control it. Another case in point is the great increase in publicawareness during the past ten to fifteen years of the potentialharm of excessive cigarette smoking. Increased awareness has ledto new approaches in education and to ordinances and lawsimposing civil fines for smoking in designated "nosmoking" areas. Yet there have been no serious proposals tojail those who smoke. Since smoking is perceived as at worst apublic health problem, not a criminal activity, more effectivepublic education and health measures are seen as the mostappropriate policy response. These changes are encouraging. Perhaps they offer directionsfor changes in public policy regarding the use of otherpsychoactive drugs. In developing such new approaches to the useand misuse of these drugs, the nation must first set realistic,consistent goals. In this regard, the primary goal thecouncil urges is that society seek to minimize the harmand dysfunction that can accompany the misuse of any psychoactivesubstance, whether that drug is currently classified as licit orillicit, To accept this goal entails accepting factors which up to nowhave not enjoyed wide acceptance-e.g., the continued use ofillicit drugs by many Americans. It also entails accepting thatnot all illicit drug use is necessarily harmful. Further, itindicates that seeking to minimize harm from drug misuse is notsynonymous with seeking to eliminate drug use. If our goal is to minimize harm and dysfunction, then thetarget of national efforts should logically be the harm anddysfunction which come from indiscriminate drug use. Such atarget calls primarily for education, public health, treatment,and rehabilitation measures. Such measures could be moreeffective in reducing the misuse of drugs if other drug policiesthemselves were more reasonable, consistent, and realistic. Theexperience of decades makes it clear that only in reducing themisuse of drugs is there real hope for effectively reducing drugproblems. This is not to say that society should sanction theunbridled use of psychoactive drugs. To the contrary, publicpolicy should make clear society's strong disapproval of themisuse of such drugs. This disapproval will be more persuasive ifit is expressed in terms of concern for individual health andwell-being. This is also not to say that the nation should immediatelyabandon all domestic and international law enforcement effortsaimed at reducing the availability of illicit drugs. Though by nomeans are all drug law enforcement and control efforts effective,it would be highly inaccurate to say that they have produced nobenefits. While many of these benefits (e.g., reduction in theavailability of particular drugs) have proved temporary in thepast, even such temporary gains are welcome developments. To theextent that law enforcement efforts curtail the supply of illicitdrugs in a responsible manner, they should be continued. The problems with drug law enforcement are complicated.Americans have historically overemphasized drug law enforcementand control measures and, at least until recently,underemphasized policies aimed at reducing the misuse of drugs.In so doing we have paid enormous costs in both dollars andother, less quantifiable ways, such as increased burdens on thecriminal justice system, corruption, and decreased respect forlaw and those enforcing it. All too often these law enforcementefforts have continued blindly and repetitiously without acareful assessment and balancing of their costs and benefits. Perhaps the greatest costs have been those attendant tocriminalizing users of illicit drugs. For example, to brand ascriminals hundreds of thousands of American youths otherwiseleading normal lives, by virtue of their experimental orrecreational marijuana use, presents a fundamental problem in asociety founded on principles of justice and respect for law. Itleads directly to suspicion of and disrespect for the law.Similarly, to -persist in depicting addiction to opiatedrugs as leading inexorably to violent criminal behavior fostersfurther disrespect for law. As is well documented, many opiateaddicts do engage in certain kinds of criminal behavior,particularly "crimes against property" in order toraise funds to support their drug habits; but addiction itself,whether to narcotics, alcohol, or nicotine, is essentially apsychological and physiological phenomenon. There are social,cultural, and economic factors which demonstrably influence thisphenomenon or are intimately related to it, but addiction is a"crime" only because we have traditionally labeled itas such. At this stage in our history, there is a clear need toredress the longstanding imbalance between publicly fundedefforts to reduce misuse and efforts to reduce supply. Theprimary focus of public policy should be on the former. We submitthat such a redressing would encourage more realisticexpectations-even public acceptance-of what law enforcementstrategies and agencies can accomplish in reducing drugavailability. The most important aspect of such a change in emphasis wouldbe that public policy would reflect contemporary and foreseeablerealities in a straightforward manner. By placing the major emphasis on reducing the misuse ofdrugs, society will be confronted with the necessity of improvingprogram effectiveness in that regard; the record of the past isnot exemplary. There is an urgent need to expand the base ofknowledge concerning educational, preventive, and treatmentmethodologies and techniques. This means a far greater investmentin basic and applied research and evaluation. In addition toincreasing the research investment, it will be necessary todevelop a national research strategy which can provide directionand coordination to these efforts. Since it is unlikely thatanswers will be instantly forthcoming, this strategy should beapplied for the next several years and assure continuity of theresearch effort. Public officials must also be more willing tochange policies if necessary in response to expanded knowledge.Only by taking these steps can there be a realistic expectationof attracting the calibre of research scientists that could makea difference. While we think such an expanded research effort will producemore understanding and better guidance for educational,preventive, and treatment approaches, certain steps can be takennow, based on available knowledge and experience, to make thepublicly funded response to drugs more reasonable and moreeffective. At the federal administrative level, for instance, thereshould be much closer coordination between domestic andinternational drug law enforcement efforts and agencies on theone hand and prevention and treatment strategies and agencies onthe other. Effective coordination can occur only at the highestlevels of the executive branch of government, whether by aspecial-purpose, cabinet-level committee or by a special staff inthe executive office, because the important drug programfunctions are lodged in several departments and agenciesthroughout the executive branch. Such a high-level coordinating body or staff could meet twoessential criteria for greater effectiveness in national drugpolicy development and implementation: First, it could develop acohesive policy, and, second, it could advise the President andprovide accountability to Congress, and thereby to the public. This concept is, of course, not new. The 1972 Drug AbuseOffice and Treatment Act created the White House Special ActionOffice on Drug Abuse Prevention which was succeeded in 1976 bythe Office for Drug Abuse Prevention. This latter office ceasedto function in 1978, to be succeeded-at least in some of itsfunctions-by a Special Assistant to the President for drugissues, a small staff within the White House's Domestic PolicyStaff, and a Federal Strategy Council composed of publicofficials and private citizens. However, while it thus appearsthat a coordinating mechanism does now exist at the highest levelof the executive branch, it is our impression that this mechanismis not currently achieving its major objectives, namely, thedevelopment and implementation of a cohesive national drug policyand closer coordination of law enforcement and treatmentagencies. In addition to the more effective coordination mechanism thatwe recommend, other improvements in the performances of drugagencies are possible. This is as true for treatment andprevention programs as it is for law enforcement agencies,particularly as they relate to heroin addiction. Again, however,we stress that for such improvements to make a lasting impactthey must be preceded by substantial changes in public policy. In drug treatment activities at present, improvements areboth possible and needed. Some improvements can come by applyingthe new knowledge gained in recent years; others can come byseeking more aggressively to increase that knowledge. At the sametime there is a need to acknowledge the limitations of drug,treatment, imposed by social and economic conditions well beyondthe influence of drug treatment programs. One development that has begun to affect drug treatmentduring recent years is change in the concept of heroin addiction.There is convincing evidence that more individuals use herointhan are addicted to it. Since most heroin treatment has beenfounded on the principle that to use heroin is to be addicted toit, the existence of large numbers of nonaddicted heroin usershas substantial implications. It is also known that the typicalheroin addict, once thought to use heroin to the exclusion of allother drugs, is more likely to use many drugs, some in concertwith heroin, others when heroin is unavailable. One implicationof this is that when heroin is unavailable today's heroin addictsare as likely to turn to other drugs as they are to treatment. The past eight to ten years have seen substantial progress inthe treatment of heroin addiction. Various treatment approacheshave evolved, the most widely publicized of which has been theuse of the synthetic opiate methadone as a"maintenance" drug for individuals addicted to heroin.There are currently seventy-eight thousand individuals enrolledin methadone maintenance programs throughout the country, themajority of which are publicly funded. During this same period there has been a correspondingincrease in the number of individuals enrolled in what are mostoften termed "drug free" treatment programs, i.e.,those based on the principle of abstinence from drug use andusing psychological and behavior modification techniques toachieve this goal. There are currently an estimated 132,000individuals receiving treatment in this type of program. There now exists a nationwide network of treatment programsand facilities none of which existed prior to 1972. This networkwas initiated primarily by federal grants and contracts throughstate drug abuse coordinating agencies to local governmental ornonprofit programs. As a result, federal officials are frequentlyquoted as saying that any heroin addict who wants treatment canreceive it. While this statement may be theoretically accurate,there are two major caveats. First, the accomplishments oftreatment efforts are limited by lack of funding, societalconditions (e.g., the general employment picture), and thedifficulties of providing "successful" treatment underany circumstances. Second, for every heroin addict who is intreatment on any given day, there are an estimated three who arenot. They have neither volunteered nor been referred by thecriminal justice system. While there has been dramatic progress in making treatmentmore available, serious problems remain. Perhaps the mostfrustrating of these problems is the fact that no one-includingthe council-appears able at this time to provide definitive,persuasive answers about the comparative effectiveness of thevarious treatment approaches. The basic problem with ascertainingtreatment effectiveness is that there is no public orprofessional consensus about what treatment should accomplish orwhat constitutes "successful" treatment. Differentapproaches-e.g. abstinence, methadone maintenance, anddetoxification-are needed to respond to the broad diversity ofpeople in trouble from the misuse of drugs. Treatment successshould be gauged by the improved function of the individual insociety as measured by personal stability, employment, andrelated criteria. Treatment for drug dependence need not have asits primary goal abstinence from all drug use for its own sake.To the extent that abstinence is attainable for certainindividuals, it should be a goal; for others, such a goal may beunrealistic, premature, or even self-defeating. Treatment goalsshould reflect the complex nature of drug dependence, whichvaries from person to person. Successful treatment for drug dependence may-foster-such a degreeof stability in an individual that he or she is able to begainfully employed; employment may in turn become a majorreinforcing factor in the success of treatment. It is, however,unrealistic to expect too much regarding employment fromtreatment and rehabilitation efforts since the individuals intreatment often have little or no work experience and few skillsto offer in a job market characterized by fluctuating economicconditions. Successful treatment may also result in suchstability that the individual no longer engages in criminalactivities to support a costly drug habit. In each case, the goalof drug treatment should be the degree of stability necessary tolead to later developments, not those developments themselves.While some may brand such differences as only matters ofsemantics, we believe they are of crucial importance to thesearch for realistic goals in the treatment of drug dependence. Further problems with treatment become evident when attentionis focused on the quality of different programs. There are notenough programs which offer the wide range of assistance neededby those dependent on drugs who seek rehabilitation. Numerousfactors have contributed to this situation, not the least ofwhich is the rapid proliferation of programs which occurred inthe early 1970s. Many weak programs were funded then and arestill in existence. The nature and quality of the clinicalprocess in many programs have also been adversely affected by theincreased number of treatment clients coming to them by referralfrom the criminal justice system. This development has led somedrug treatment programs away from a properly therapeutic functioninto an increasingly custodial role with their patients. Health and drug treatment providers should not have to becomesociety's agents for the control of social deviance or criminalactivity. The primary responsibility of treatment systems shouldbe treatment. If modification of drug-taking behavior, even oflife styles, is a component of treatment then it should bepresented as such. Treatment for drug dependence should beavailable chiefly because people need help, not as a behavior orcrime control measure. Conversely, efforts to curtaildrug-related crime should be presented as such and not mislabeledas therapeutic approaches to drug dependency. For now, pending the outcome of further study and evaluationas well as research developments, there is a clear need tointegrate the treatment of heroin addiction more closely with thegeneral health care system. Drug treatment is now too isolated;the cross-fertilization of new ideas and trends from otherdisciplines which should be occurring is not observable. For drugtreatment to retain its vitality in the immediate future, itcannot remain entirely apart from the mainstream of traditionalphysical and mental health care, nor on the other hand can it betotally absorbed by that system. Our final suggestion on treatment is that we should immediatelyenter into a more active phase of research and experimentationwith heroin, particularly regarding the potential of using thedrug itself in the treatment of heroin addiction. Wedo not know enough about the treatment of heroin addiction orabout what types of treatment are effective to be able to closeour minds to alternative approaches. Through experience we havelearned much about the use of methadone in treatment; we need tolearn more about the potential of similar use of heroin. Severalhighly qualified research scientists have designed a variety ofresearch protocols which call for the use of heroin at some stagein the addiction treatment process. Under present law, theseprojects could be funded; we are convinced that the mostpromising of them should be. This research should emphasize local and state options andflexibility. What may prove efficacious in one setting may not inothers, and what may prove effective for one individual may beinappropriate for another. While we have much to learn from theexperience of other countries, particularly England, heroinaddiction in America presents unique problems requiring creativeapproaches. Thus, our call for research and experimentation intothe use of heroin in treatment should not be misconstrued as anendorsement of the concept of heroin maintenance (i.e., theprovision of heroin to registered addicts). We have seriousreservations as to whether such an approach would provebeneficial in this country. On the other hand, we submit that wedo need direct experience with the use of heroin in treatmentsettings; otherwise, we will not be able to learn what we shouldknow before making decisions regarding fundamental policychanges. just as we think treatment program efforts and policies canbe improved, we feel that drug law enforcement can also beimproved. The basic problem with law enforcement efforts lieswith the drug laws themselves. As long as these laws separatedrugs into licit and illicit categories, there will be anecessity for such agencies as the Drug EnforcementAdministration, with its primary mission of controlling theavailability of illicit drugs. The elimination of theavailability of these drugs is in our view unachievable; still,as long as the laws remain in effect, they should be responsiblyenforced. Earlier we indicated our belief that national drug policyought to be based on the way in which a drug is used rather thanon the properties of specific drugs. This enlightened approach isgenerally characteristic of our public policies with respect toalcohol, tranquilizers, and a host of other potentially abusabledrugs. Society accepts responsible use of these drugs, whileseeking to prevent their misuse and, if necessary, punishing boththose who jeopardize the safety of others by irresponsible usagebehavior and those who illegally manufacture or sell such drugs.However, our laws regarding illicit drugs such as marijuana,cocaine, and heroin do not distinguish responsible fromirresponsible use; thus, under the law, any use of these drugsconstitutes misuse or "drug abuse." Drug lawenforcement is consequently directed, at least theoretically,against all users and suppliers of illicit drugs. This is whereproblems with drug law enforcement begin. It is not, however,where they end. Many proponents of a national policy of total prohibition ofillicit drug use are beginning to acknowledge the impossibilityof achieving such a goal. Revised goals, such as containmentrather than elimination of availability, are now being advanced.Infrequently acknowledged, however, even with the more cautiousgoals, are the attendant costs of attempted prohibition, such ascriminalizing and stigmatizing hundreds of thousands of users andusing questionable practices in developing cases against them. Nor are we convinced of the supposed benefits of many currentdrug law enforcement efforts. It is commonplace to assume thatlaws and law enforcement efforts decrease the number of peoplewho would otherwise use these contraband substances. However,there are reasons to doubt this assumption. Exhaustive study hasrevealed little deterrent impact from the so-called "gettough" drug laws of New York State. This study showed littlechange in the incidence and prevalence of heroin or other illicitdrug use as a result of the new law. Similarly, in Oregon, whereannual surveys have been conducted to assess the impact of thatstate's enactment of marijuana"decriminalization," no appreciable increase in use hasbeen observed over time or in comparison to other jurisdictionswhere marijuana penalties have remained stringent. In fact, othersurveys indicate that the primary reason people have choseneither not to begin use or to discontinue it is simple lack ofinterest; -the existence of criminal sanctions against use ranksquite low as a reason given for not using marijuana. While suchexamples do not offer sufficient evidence from which to draw firmconclusions, they do raise important questions requiring carefulexamination. The most important recommendation the DrugAbuse Council can make in the area of drug law enforcement haslittle to do with specific law enforcement approaches. Wepropose a major research effort to analyze the actualeffects of drug laws and drug law enforcement on personaldecisions to use or not use illicit drugs. A well-designednational study, similar to that of New York drug laws undertakenin 1974 by the Bar Association of the City of New York, couldfurnish much useful guidance in this sensitive area. In addition to encouraging us to recommendsuch general policy research, our years of examination of theissues involved in the widespread use of marijuana incontemporary society have convinced us, beyond a doubt, that theuse of criminal law and criminal procedures to deter marijuanause results in more harm to society than is warranted by presentknowledge regarding its potential harm with moderate use. Thisconviction should not be misconstrued as giving marijuana a cleanbill of health. Much about this drug remains unknown. Researchshould continue, particularly multi-year studies which seek toexamine the consequences of marijuana use by humans over longperiods of time. Enough is now known to warrant considerablecaution with its use, particularly heavy use; use by pregnantwomen and by adolescents should be avoided. However, we alsobelieve that legislative efforts to decriminalize atfederal andstate levels the possession of small amounts of marijuana forpersonal use should continue. States should be encouraged to trydifferent legislative models, the effects of which could beassessed over time, in an effort to learn which works mosteffectively to minimize potential harm from theindiscriminate use of marijuana. The above observations and suggestions aboutdrug treatment and law enforcement lead us to the conclusionthat, by adhering to an unrealistic goal of total abstinence fromthe use of illicit drugs, opportunities to encourage responsibledrug-using behavior are missed. Individual decisions about druguse invoke value judgments seldom made in isolation; peerpressure and social, economic, and cultural variables must all betaken into consideration as we seek to minimize harm and preventmisuse. Public education efforts should attempt toplace the use and misuse of psychoactive drugs in accurateperspective for all members of society, notjust younger members. In order to be helpful in minimizing theharm of drug misuse, information must be credible, coherent, andverifiable. It must be believable when placed in the context oflife experiences. For example, it strikes us as inconsistent toissue calls for total abstinence from some drugs while"happy hours" with two drinks for the price of one arepromoted for another. Such inconsistencies are readily apparentto the youth of our country and engender skepticism on their partas to the wisdom of official drug policies-and of the oldergeneration in general. Many of our suggestions and observations have been directedtoward policyrnakers in the public sector, those elected andappointed public officials who make national drug policy throughtheir actions and decisions at federal, state, and local levels.It is no less true today than it was seven years ago when theDrug Abuse Council was created that the views of these officialstend to be crisis-oriented and short-range. While publicofficials have a duty to lead as well as to administer, there arelimitations to their ability to go much beyond prevailing publicattitudes in matters as volatile as drug issues. The privatesector, on the other hand, can and should play a critical,responsible role in developing longer-range views and policiesand improved public attitudes. The Drug Abuse Council has been one such effort in theprivate sector. Other alternatives either already exist or couldbe created. Any such entity will require the exertion ofprivate-sector leadership and the investment of resourcessufficient to undertake independent research and legislative,budgetary, and policy analyses. Much basic examination andreexamination has occurred and does not require repeating. Withmodest annual expenditures, an organization within the privatesector could help keep the American public informed and provideleadership for the development of broad public support forsensible drug policies and programs. It is our conviction thatthe private sector needs to continue to take an active role inboth developing and assessing public drug policies and programs. A Final Thought and Suggestion. The goal of the council wasstated in its 1972 Annual Report. The chairman said, The Directors of the Drug Abuse Council, widelyrepresentative in personal and professional exposure andinvolvement, are determined not to look to exhortations or crashprograms for illusory solutions or cures. Instead, because theCouncil was initiated and is supported as a private independentagency, unencumbered by shibboleths or taboos or political orbureaucratic pressures, the Directors have been free-and haveexercised their freedom-to begin to learn, and to publish whatthey have learned, about drug abuse and treatment in. a drugusing society. Since 1972 the many publications of the council-and ofpersons and agencies supported by the council-have reported whatwe have learned about drugs, about their use, misuse, and ourresponse to them. In the concluding paragraphs of one of the lastand most significant studies initiated and supported by thecouncil, The Nation's Toughest Drug Law: Evaluating-the NewYork Experience ' it is stated that, First, the use of heroin and other opiates is but one elementof a larger problem. The misuse of all dangerous drugs-alcohol,cocaine, opiates, and other mood-changing drugs, some prescribedand some sold over the counter-all together constitutes "thedrug problem." Problems with so many components do not yieldto one-dimensional solutions. As no single drug treatment methodis suitable for all users, so there is not likely to be a singlelegal approach that is suitable for all offenders. Second, whether or not illicit drug use is for the most parta medical concern as some contend, it is incontrovertibly deeplyrooted in broader social "maladies." Narcotics use inparticular is intimately associated with, and part of, a widercomplex of problems that includes family break-up, unemployment,poor income and education, feeble institutional structures. andloss of hope. The final observation is a corollary of the second: it isimplausible that social problems as basic as these can beeffectively solved by the criminal law. If this statement is accurate-and we are convinced that itis-it reinforces our considered judgment that drug misuse isprimarily a social, medical, and public health problem, a problemthat will not yield to single or simplistic solutions orapproaches. And it reinforces our judgment that solutions orapproaches that might be useful in one place or with someindividuals would not necessarily be so in another setting orwith other people. Recognizing that deeply felt attitudes and establishedpolicies reflect fears and judgments that will yield slowly, ifever, to facts and conditions described in the council'spublications, we recommend that serious consideration be given tothe use of individual state or local option as a means ofattempting solutions appropriate in one place but not in others.Local option could encourage greater flexibility and ingenuityrather than reliance upon an unrealistic, rigid homogeneity innational drug policy. We need to respond to the diversity ofpeople who use and misuse drugs, base all our policies on aconsistent set of principles seeking to discourage misuse, andkeep our seemingly innate drug-using behavior within reasonablelimits through means which do not themselves cause more harm thanthey prevent. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-14IA031-000652-B045-289http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fada1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131715 text/html 127631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:16:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:16 GMTContent-length: 127412 The Federal Government's Response to Illicit Drugs,1969-1978 The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 The Federal Government's Response to IllicitDrugs, 1969-1978 Peter Goldberg Note on Acronyms ACRONYMS ARE USED throughoutthis chapter for a number of federal agencies. Among those mostoften referred to are: ADAMHA Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAdministration BNDD Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs DEA Drug Enforcement Administration FBN Federal Bureau of Narcotics NIDA National Institute on Drug Abuse NIMH National Institute of Mental Health ODALE Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement ODAP Office of Drug Abuse Policy OMB Office of Management and Budget SAODAP Special Action Office for Drug AbusePrevention Introduction Throughout the twentieth century thegovernment of the United States has engaged, in one form oranother, in efforts to prevent its citizens from using certaindesignated psychoactive drugs. The use of nonapproved drugs hasbeen defined as illegal, and billions of taxpayer dollars havebeen spent and millions of man-hours devoted to curtailing theavailability of such drugs. Yet in spite of these efforts thereare now as many users and abusers of illicit drugs as everbefore. Similarly, the misuse of legally available drugs hasdramatically increased. Data on the use of illicit drugs do notconclusively demonstrate that the federal government's antidrugefforts have failed, but they do provide compelling reasons toundertake a thorough reappraisal of federal policies andprograms. Evaluations made by both federal government studygroups and private organizations' have resulted inchanges-particularly in preventive and treatment approaches-butfederal drug policies have remained fundamentally the same fordecades. This chapter will concentrate on the responseof the federal government to the issues of illicit drug use andmisuse from 1969 to the present. It was during this periodthat our country experienced an unprecedented growth in thegovernmental response to the use of illicit drugs. This periodalso roughly coincides with the years during which the Drug AbuseCouncil has been studying drug issues and policy. To understand the U.S. government's responseto illicit drugs in the 1970s it is necessary to know somethingof the history. Our nation's current drug policies and programsare the result of over seventy years of development. Detailedanalyses such as those provided by David Musto2and Rufus King3 offer insight into thisprocess. It is clear from these analyses that the government'sresponse to public fear of certain drugs and drug users hasprimarily consisted of law enforcement or quasi-enforcementstrategies intended to prohibit both new and continued use ofnonapproved substances. The belief that some drugs are soinnately harmful that the citizens of this country should andcould be prevented from using them has been the basic tenet ofAmerican drug policy for the past seven decades. Historical Review Several major pieces of drug legislation andpresidential initiatives have shaped public policy in the drugfield. The first pertinent legislation in this area passed byCongress was the District of Columbia Pharmacy Act in 1906.4 Although this act appliedonly to the District of Columbia, it set a precedent for Congressto deal with drug issues. This act permitted a physician toprescribe narcotics to addicts, but only when "necessary forthe cure" of addiction; the prescription of narcotic drugsto nonaddicted persons was limited to the treatment of injury ordisease. The intent of the act was to prevent the further -spreadof addictive drug use. It first raised the difficultphilosophical question of government regulation of physicianprescribing practices with respect to addictive drugs, an issuestill actively debated. The Harrison Narcotic Act,' passed in late1914, marked the official entry of the government into the areaof narcotics control. This act simplified record keeping on thedispensation of certain narcotic drugs, and required thatstandard forms be filed and maintained for two years on the salesof narcotic drugs. Revenue agents could inspect these records atwill. However, physicians were allowed to dispense drugs withoutkeeping records if in actual attendance on their patients.Numerous patent medicines containing small amounts of morphine,cocaine, opium, and heroin were still permitted to be sold bymail order or in general stores. Through regulations issued by the TreasuryDepartment pursuant to the Harrison Narcotic Act, the federalgovernment hampered the treatment of heroin and morphineaddiction to such a degree that by the early 1920s those clinicsin the country which regularly provided opiates to registeredaddicts (so-called "maintenance clinics") were closed,and few private physicians dared to provide these drugs toaddicts . 6 Thiseffectively ended the medical profession's active involvement inthe treatment of drug addiction until the 1960s. From the 1920son, the federal government was for all practical purposes incharge of attempts to control illicit drug use. Although therewere, at the time, serious questions raised about theconstitutionality of using federal police powers to restrict, andeventually prohibit, the use of certain drugs, the popular beliefwas that the use of these drugs must be eliminated even whenoccurring in the context of medical treatment for addiction. In 1929 Congress passed the Porter Act 7 ostensibly addressing thetreatment needs of convicted addicts. The Porter Act called forthe building of two narcotics "farms" in which thoseconvicted of the "crime" of drug addiction would behoused in order to receive compulsory treatment. The underlyingassumption of the act seemed to be that treatment-enforcedabstinence-required isolation and a controlled environment.Although the Porter Act became law in January 1929, the firstfarm did not open until 1935 in Lexington, Kentucky. A secondfarm opened in 1938 in Fort Worth, Texas. The treatment renderedat these farms was not successful, with most addicts returning toaddiction after discharge." In reality the farms were littlemore than specialized prisons. In fact, Musto reports that"not until the late 1960s were the bars removed from theLexington facility and the cells turned into rooms."9 In 1930 the first federal agency specificallydevoted to the control of illicit drugs, the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics (FBN), was established. Because the federal regulationof narcotic drugs was based on the taxing power of Congress, theFBN was made part of the Treasury Department and was concernedonly with enforcement issues. The FBN was responsible, at leastinitially, for enforcing the Harrison Narcotic Act andcontrolling only what were then thought of as the most dangerousdrugs-cocaine and the opiates. The FBN's policies were predicatedon the belief that "the most effective way of gaining publiccompliance with a law regulating a dangerous drug was a policy ofhigh fines and severe mandatory prison sentences for firstconvictions." 10 The FBN did not initially support a federalantimarijuana effort. However, newspaper accounts of seriouscrimes attributed to marijuana users and the drug's "Mexicanpurveyors" triggered a series of events that culminated inthe passage of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. 11 The FBN changedits policies after this act was passed, vigorously enforcing thefederal laws prohibiting marijuana. 12 Passage of the Marihuana Tax Act in effectimposed a total prohibition on marijuana use. Marijuana wasdescribed in congressional hearings as impairing the ability tothink rationally, dangerous to the mind and body, and leading toinsanity. It was further claimed that marijuana led to thecommission of violent crimes, spread drug use to school children,and resulted in impotence in the habitual user. It was not untilthe early 1970s that many of these views began to be modified. Tothis day, however, their effects on public attitudes and policieslinger. During the late 1940s and early 1950s therewere reports that rates of heroin addiction had risen,particularly in inner-city minority communities. This periodcoincided with the beginning of the so-called "McCarthyera," a time when public fear of nonconforming behavior washigh and tolerance of it low. Drugs were linked to communism. AsDavid Musto has written, "The Federal Bureau of Narcoticslinked Red China's attempts to get hard cash, as well as todestroy Western society, to the clandestine sale of large amountsof heroin to drug pushers in the United States."13 Inaddition, a theory that addicts began with marijuana use andmoved inexorably to the use of heroin (or morphine orcocaine)-the progression" or "stepping-stone"theory-was widely believed. In this atmosphere, the Boggs Act14 was passed in late 1951. The BoggsAct increased penalties for all drug law violators and for thefirst time made penalties for violation of the marijuana laws thesame as those for narcotic drugs. This act also introduced, atthe federal level, the concept of minimum mandatory jailsentences for drug law offenders. The Boggs Act-and later amendments whichfurther increased penalties 15 -reflected an undeviatingreliance on law enforcement activities and harsh penalties todeal with the perceived "drug menace." The BoggsAct-and the later Narcotic Control Act of 1956-passed after onlycursory hearings, which did not delve into either the causes orthe nature of the use of illicit drugs. The widespread fear ofcommunism and intolerance of nonconforming views and behavior atthe time made it politically feasible-even desirable-to advocatereliance on the criminal justice system to control and punishnarcotics users. The need for treatment was ignored. MostAmericans directly affected by these laws were politicallyimpotent, disliked, and distrusted because of prevailing racialand ethnic prejudices. The first notice of change in officialattitudes came in 1963 with President Kennedy's appointment of anAdvisory Commission on Narcotic and Drug Abuse (the PrettymanCommission) to review the nation's drug problems and thegovernment's response to them. The Prettyman Commission report 16 challenged many of theassumptions which had long dominated official thinking in thedrug area. It recommended a decreased use of minimum mandatorysentences, an increase in appropriations for research, and thetransfer of the FBN to the Department of Health, Education, andWelfare. It also recommended that the final judgment on thelegitimate medical use of narcotics be given back to the medicalprofession. The Prettyman Commission noted thefragmentation of federal activities in the drug field andrecommended that "the President appoint a Special Assistantfor Narcotic and Drug Abuse from the White House staff to providecontinuous advice and assistance in launching a coordinatedattack. " 17 Althoughthe commission made many recommendations, few were implemented atthat time. One recommendation of the commission which didreceive attention was that a civil commitment system beestablished "to provide an alternative method of handlingthe federally convicted offender who is a confirmed narcotic ormarijuana abuser." Such a system was instituted by theNarcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966 (NARA)."'Although NARA ostensibly considered drug addiction a"medical problem," addicts committed under NARAprograms were basically perceived as prisoners. By the mid-1960s, illicit drug use had becomea highly visible and emotional issue throughout the UnitedStates. It was widely believed that illicit drug use wasincreasing rapidly and for the first time reaching into thesuburbs and affecting white middle-class youth. News reportsoften tended toward sensationalism in presenting stories on LSDand hallucinogenic drug use on college campuses. Anti-Vietnam Warprotesters became identified with marijuana use. The use ofillicit drugs was, in general, identified as an antisocialgesture and was associated in the public's mind with mentalillness and rising rates of street crime. In February 1968 President Johnson established"a new and powerful Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs(BNDD)" within the justice Department."' Johnson hadseen that the federal enforcement of narcotics laws wasfragmented. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics in the TreasuryDepartment had some responsibilities, while the Bureau of DrugAbuse Control (BDAC)-an agency created only three years earlierin 1965 in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare-hadbeen assigned certain regulatory functions having to do withnonnarcotic drugs. In an attempt to unify the federal response,the FBN and BDAC were abolished and the new BNDD was given fullauthority to enforce all U.S. narcotics laws, from worldwideoperations to work with state and local law enforcementofficials. In addition, BNDD was directed to "conduct anextensive campaign of research and a nationwide public educationprogram on drug abuse and its tragic effects." In fact, inPresident Johnson's message to Congress proposing ReorganizationPlan No. 1, the only mention of any federal effort in research-treatment, or education was in the context of the justiceDepartment's BNDD. The emphasis was again on law enforcement andthe relationship between drugs and crime. Understanding the Growth of theGovernmental Response to Illicit Drugs During Richard Nixon's presidential terms, theissue of "drug abuse" was given a higher priority andgreater visibility than at any other time in our country'shistory. In January 1969 the annual federal. budget for drugtreatment, education, research, and law enforcement was $81.4million; five years later it was $760 million-nearly a tenfoldincrease. A series of major legislative, organizational, andprogrammatic changes accompanied these dramatic budget increases.The reasons for this enormous increase in the federal responsecan be traced to three unforeseen circumstances of need andopportunity. The Need to Reduce Rates of Urban StreetCrime. Rising street crime was a keyissue in the 1968 presidential campaign. The urban riots of themid-1960s and the rising crime-rate figures issued by the FBIprovided fuel for much of the campaign rhetoric about the growing"lawlessness" and "violence" of America."Law and order" emerged as the dominant domestic themeof the 1968 Republican presidential campaign .20 Campaign promises to "get tough"with urban street crime are historically easier to make than tofulfill. The jurisdiction and power of the federal government toprevent burglaries and armed robberies-among the most commontypes of urban street crime--are limited. Except in the Districtof Columbia, such violations are usually matters for state, notfederal, action. Even if Congress had extended the legalauthority of the federal law enforcement agencies, these agencies(FBI, IRS, BNDD) did not have the manpower to address urbanstreet crime effectively. In spite of the passage of "tough"legislation such as preventive detention, harsh prison sentences,and "no-knock" warrantless searches, crime ratescontinued to rise, as reported by the FBI, jeopardizing theadministration's promised law and order. Even in the District ofColumbia, where the federal government could exercise somecontrcl, the crime rate increased during the first year of theNixon presidency. Clearly, from a political perspective theNixon administration needed to show progress in some area ofcrime control before the 1972 election. This was one elementunderlying the growth since 1969 of the federal government'sefforts to control the use of illicit drugs. The Public's Increasing Concern AboutHeroin Addiction. The association ofillicit drug use with street crime and violence developed over along period of time. By the late 1960s, the relationship betweenheroin "addiction' and street crime was generally acceptedas fact, despite the absence of any careful research anddocumentation. 22 Heroin had become inextricably linked in thepublic's mind with the urban crisis; and as public anxiety aboutcrime grew, so too did the fear of heroin and heroin addicts. The public's fear of heroin was intensified byreports of increased use of narcotics among American soldiersstationed in Vietnam. The thought of "soldier-junkies,"trained in guerrilla warfare, returning to the streets of urbanAmerica heightened public concern and led to further demands forgovernment action. "Drug abuse" (particularly heroinaddiction) rapidly became a major public concern, as reflected inthe opinion polls of that time, adding another argument for anexpanded government effort. But neither the need for an effective crimereduction program nor the growing public concern about heroinexplain by themselves the increased federal response: a thirdelement was crucial. In all likelihood the government's effortsto prevent "drug abuse" would have expanded withoutthis third element, but it is doubtful that the expansion wouldhave been anywhere near the same magnitude. * In the late 1960s no distinction was madebetween heroin use and heroin addiction-all use of heroin wasbelieved addictive. More recent studies indicate that this is notnecessarily accurate.21 The Emergence of New Approaches to theProblem of Heroin Addiction. Three newavenues of response to the problems of heroin addiction andheroin-related crime emerged. Although distinct from one another,these three approaches in time became interrelated in subsequentgovernment programs. The opportunities they presented led-somesay misled-federal policyrnakers to believe that they couldrespond to the problems of heroin addiction more successfullythan previously. First, the legislative basis for federal druglaw enforcement efforts changed. Federal regulations and controlson drugs before 1970 were based primarily on the power to levytaxes and prohibit traffic in smuggled goods. Thus virtually allfederal drug law enforcement programs were administered by theTreasury Department-until the creation of the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs in the justice Department by executive orderin 1968; simultaneously the Treasury Department's Federal Bureauof Narcotics was abolished. This transfer of jurisdiction wasgiven a statutory basis in 1970 with the passage of theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act.2" This act addressed a broad range of drugprogram efforts, providing increased support for drug treatment,rehabilitation, and education as well as enforcement. Theenforcement provisions of this legislation (Title II of the act)were part of a larger attempt to reduce criminal activity throughimproved federal law enforcement. Congress and the Nixonadministration sought through this legislation to recodify theexisting drug laws into one comprehensive law. Most narcotics lawenforcement powers were given to the justice Department, thusallowing the Attorney General to exercise control over alldangerous drugs (e.g., amphetamines and barbiturates) andnarcotics. This was the first federal law making it illegal totraffic in or possess certain drugs which did not refer to thetaxing authority. Instead, the justification for federal-asopposed to state-enforcement was shifted to the power of Congressto regulate interstate commerce. The concept of the"interstate commerce" powers of Congress had greatlyexpanded in the decades prior to this new drug legislation.Supreme Court rulings on the "New Deal" legislation ofthe 1930s and 1940s and on the civil rights cases of the 1960shad clearly broadened the scope of activities that Congress couldregulate under its constitutional authority to regulate"interstate commerce." This shift in the constitutional basis of druglaw enforcement allowed the federal government to become moredirectly involved in suppressing one presumed major cause ofurban street crime about which there was great public fear. Itoffered some hope that expanded and intensified efforts to combattrafficking in illicit drugs could succeed where past efforts hadfailed. A second new avenue of response centeredaround bilateral agreements to reduce the international flow ofillicit drugs-particularly heroin-into the United States. Formore than sixty years, beginning with the Hague InternationalOpium Convention of 1912, the United States has negotiatedbilateral and multilateral international agreements to keepillicit opiates out of the country. Since opium, of which heroinis a derivative, is not grown anywhere in the United States, allthe heroin used by addicts in this country comes from foreignsources; hence the concept that if opium is not cultivatedelsewhere, heroin will not be available for use here. Since,however, it is virtually impossible to prevent the growth of theopium poppy everywhere, a second line of defense has been todisrupt international trafficking in opium, its chemicalconversion into heroin in foreign laboratories, and itssubsequent shipment into the United States. In January 1969, up to 80 percent of theheroin used in the United States was believed to be of Turkishorigin. The major processing country for converting Turkish opiuminto heroin for shipment to American East Coast port cities wasreputed to be France. The operations in these two countries werefrequently blamed for the rising rates of heroin addictionreported in the United States in the late 1960s. The Nixon administration sought greaterinternational cooperation to keep illicit drugs from entering theUnited States .14 Inearly 1971, just as public concern about heroin was reaching itspeak, separate agreements were reached with France and Turkeyenlisting their formal assistance in keeping heroin out of theUnited States. The French government agreed to take steps toclose down the clandestine laboratories operating principallyaround Marseilles and to prevent the traffic of opium into, andheroin out of, France. The agreement with Turkey-the culminationof five years of negotiations-amounted to a total. ban on -poppycultivation in Turkey in return for American financial aid forcrop substitution programs and income compensation for Turkishfarmers. It was anticipated that these two agreementswould significantly reduce the flow of heroin to the UnitedStates, and that the resulting shortage would reduce the levelsof heroin addiction and heroin-related crime. Thcy were touted asmajor victories on the international front of the new "waron drug abuse." The federal government sought to capitalizeon these agreements by negotiating agreements with otherpotential "source" and "processing"countries. The hoped-for success of these efforts to controlinternational supplies thus emerged as the second new avenue ofthe government's heroin control effort. The third new avenue of response was the useof methadone to treat heroin addiction. Methadone is a syntheticanalgesic developed by the Germans during World War 11 as asubstitute for morphine. After the war and throughout the 1950s,methadone was used in the United States as a detoxifying agentfor heroin addicts. In 1964 Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie E.Nyswander of the Rockefeller Institute in New York City foundthat they were able to maintain six heroin addicts on a stabledosage-level of methadone without their craving heroin. Dole andNyswander soon began an expanded program of methadone maintenanceto both demonstrate methadone's potential and evaluate theprogram's impact. In 1966 they reported the initial results oftheir work: Among the most widely publicized of their results wasthat criminal activity among the enrolled addicts had been"virtually eliminated. '125 Public and government interest in the concept ofmethadone maintenance grew, and by the late 1960s methadoneprograms were in operation in many urban centers, providingaddicts with an alternative to the more traditional forms oftreatment which emphasized abstinence, and which had not provedsuccessful for large numbers of addicts. While methadone maintenance programs aregenerally considered "treatment," particularly by theirstaffs and clients, the idea of using methadone treatment as partof the larger national effort to reduce urban street crime hadbegun to take hold by late 1969. The proposition put forth wasthat if an addict's dependence on heroin was broken (bysubstituting legally prescribed methadone), the crime rate wouldbe reduced, because-so the theory went-addicts committed a largeproportion of the street crime in order to feed their illicithabits. A 1970 Domestic Council Summary Option Paper on Drugsstated, "The Federal government has only one economical andeffective technique for reducing crime in the streets-methadonemaintenance. -26 Methadone thus offered an important new formof treatment to heroin addicts as well as a possibility ofreducing urban street crime. Which aspect was considered moreimportant is difficult to determine. In any event, the emergenceof methadone treatment was a crucial -part of the developing"solution" to the problems of heroin addiction andheroin-related crime. Thus in the late 1960s and early 1970s severalnew and potentially significant approaches developed. Manybelieved that if effectively applied in concert they couldsubstantially reduce the rate of heroin addiction and associatedproblems, particularly the crimes committed to raise money tosupport heroin addiction. These developments, coinciding as theydid with the political commitment to reduce urban street crimeand respond to the growing public concern about heroin addiction,had much to do with the enormous growth of the federal responseto illicit drugs which began in 1969. The Federal Response, 1969-1971 In January 1969 the federal government'sresponse to illicit drugs as measured in dollars spent was small;$86 million was spent in fiscal year 1969 (FY 69), and only amodest increase to $101.9 million was requested for FY 70 .27 The principal federal agencies involved in thedrug field during this period were the National Institute ofMental Health (NIMH) in the Department of Health, Education, andWelfare; the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs in thejustice Department; and the Customs Bureau of the TreasuryDepartment. These three agencies accounted for the bulk of thefederal drug effort in four operational areas: treatment andrehabilitation; education, prevention, and training; research;and law enforcement. NIMH was the major federal sponsor of allnon-law-enforcement programs, while BNDD and Customs each heldsome responsibility for the federal drug law enforcement effort.The emergence of BNDD created an intense bureaucratic rivalrywith Customs regarding jurisdictional responsibilities for druglaw enforcement programs. Although this dispute was supposed tohave been settled in 1969 when BNDD was authorized to conductoverseas operations and Customs was restricted to bordersearches, it has surfaced frequently in subsequent years; evennow the situation seems merely a temporary truce. (See StaffPaper 2, "Drug Law Enforcement Efforts," below.) The FY 71 budget was the first to becompletely developed by the Nixon administration, and in it thefederal drug budget more than doubled to a total of $212.5million. The major increases in the FY 71 budget were fortreatment and rehabilitation and education, prevention, andtraining. While the drug law enforcement budget rose by more than50 percent, it was for the first time surpassed in absolutenumbers by expenditures for treatment and rehabilitation, whichby this time were assuming added dimensions as part of the crimereduction effort (see Figure 1. 1). Since the use of illicit drugs was of growingpublic concern and government interest, federal budget makerswere clearly more receptive to agency budget requests for newdrug programs, and by FY 71 there were fifteen separate federalagencies involved in some kind of drug-related effort. For some,such as the Office of Education, the Veterans Administration, andthe Department of Transportation, FY 71 marked the first yearthey had undertaken specific drug activities. For others, such asthe Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Office ofEconomic Opportunity, drug-related expenditures, which until thenhad been minimal, rose dramatically. This expansion of thefederal drug budget was accompanied by greater problems ofinteragency coordination. Although federal response to the use ofillicit drugs was growing, it generally lacked cohesion andoverall purpose (other than a commitment to "solve the drugproblem"). This lack of coordination led Hutt and Wald tocomment in 1972, "Federal activities in the drug abuse fieldtend to be ad hoc reactions to current crises rather thanwell-considered, long-term programs.11211 The proposed FY 72 budget, announced inFebruary 1971, projected a drug budget of $265 million-anincrease of just over $50 million. This proposal envisionedfederal expenditures of $96 million for law enforcement, $101million for treatment and rehabilitation, $24 million forresearch, and $44 million for education, prevention, andtraining. By this time there were sixteen separate federalagencies involved in the drug effort, with little coordinationbetween them. The resulting bureaucratic nightmare wasgraphically depicted in a government report covering all federaldrug efforts except law enforcement (Figure 1.2). In early 1971, the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse began work on the first of twoconsecutive one-year studies it was to undertake. The appointmentof this federal study commission, the scope of its work, and theschedule for the completion of its two reports had beendelineated in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and ControlAct of 1970. (The Senate and the House of Representatives eachappointed two members to the thirteen-member commission;President Nixon selected the remaining nine.) Congress hadstipulated that the commission first complete a comprehensivestudy of marijuana-related issues by March 1972 (discussed morefully in Staff Paper 5, "Marijuana and Cocaine,"below). in the commission's second year, Congress directed it tocomplete a more general examination and analysis of the nature,causes, and significance of the "drug abuse" problem inthe United States, and further directed it to presentrecommendations for legislative and administrativ6 actionsconsistent with the commission's findings and conclusions. However, on June 17, 1971, long before thescheduled completion of the commission's second report, PresidentNixon sent to Congress a special message on drug abuse in whichhe requested a supplemental budget of $155 million and areorganization of responsibilities regarding drug treatment,education, prevention, research, and, most notably, coordination.Citing the immediacy of the drug problem and the need for a moreeffective response, Nixon simultaneously issued an executiveorder establishing the position of Special Consultant to thePresident for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs in order to"institute to the extent legally possible" thelegislation which he proposed to Congress. It was at this pointthat the fundamental restructuring of the federal government'sresponse to illicit drugs began. President Nixon's Message to Congress, June17, 1971.19 President Nixon's messageto Congress on June 17, 1971 raised the issue of illicit drug useto the highest level of government concern and responsibility.This statement was the culminating step in the declaration of astrong and irrevocable public commitment to reduce the crimeheroin addicts were thought to commit and bring the problems ofillicit drug use under control. "If we cannot destroy thedrug menace in America , Nixon informed Congress and the Americanpublic, "then it will surely in time destroy us. I am notprepared to accept this alternative." Although the Presidentspoke of the general problems of "drug abuse," there islittle doubt that the chief problems and concerns to which hereferred were those relating to heroin addiction. Clearly, public alarm about heroin-relatedcrime and addicted Vietnam veterans demanded a more effectivegovernmental response than previous ones. Equally clear was thefact that increased funding alone had not been successful.According to Nixon: "We must now candidly recognize that thedeliberate procedures embodied in present efforts to control drugabuse are not sufficient in themselves. The problem has assumedthe dimensions of a national emergency." Forceful measures were required, so thethinking went, if the twin problems of heroin addiction and urbancrime were to be curtailed. Speed was essential to the Nixonadministration because of the political aspects of illicit druguse. Predictably, the policies and programs it advocated wereconsistent with enforcement and quasi-enforcement approacheswhich had characterized past federal efforts. The government'sresponse to the use of illicit drugs in 1971 sprang from the sameassumptions about their innate harmfulness and arrived atfundamentally the same conclusions as had been espoused for morethan sixty years. The changes proposed were those of technique,size, and scope only. The president acknowledged the problems ofundirected growth in the government's response. We must recognize that piecemeal efforts, evenwhere individually successful, cannot have a major impact on thedrug abuse problem unless and until they are forged together intoa broader and more integrated program involving all levels ofgovernment and private effort. We need a coordinated effort if weare to move effectively against drug abuse. A two-sided approach was developed tocoordinate the federal drug effort. On the "supply"side were all federal drug law enforcement efforts to halt theillegal production, distribution, and use of prohibitedsubstances. On the "demand" side were all federallysponsored efforts at treatment and rehabilitation and education,prevention, training, and research. Each approach was envisionedas separate and independent of the other, although they sharedthe same goals of eliminating illicit drug use and drug-relatedcrime in America. To control "demand" the Nixonadministration proposed a dramatic reorganization which wouldtemporarily centralize responsibility for all federally sponsoredefforts in drug treatment, rehabilitation, education, prevention,training, and research in a new White House Agency, the SpecialAction Office for Drug Abuse Prevention (SAODAP). Thedirector of SAODAP was to be immediately accountable to thePresident. From an organizational standpoint it made sense tocoordinate the many federal agencies involved. To have ignoredthe management problems displayed in Figure 1.2 above would haveled to further chaos and undercut the potential of any federalresponse. However, this does not explain why such coordinativeresponsibilities were lodged in the White House underpresidential supervision. Other federal programs also involved anumber of federal agencies, yet coordination could usually beachieved through more regular bureaucratic measures such ascabinet- or sub-cabinet-level working agreements. What made thedrug issue different? One explanation lies in the deterioratingrelationship at that time between the White House staff andvarious federal agencies. Particularly with respect to thefunding of methadone maintenance programs, the White House feltthat there was considerable bureaucratic "foot-dragging. "30 Administration officialshad become persuaded of the benefits of methadone maintenance asa way to reduce "heroin and criminal recidivism," butthey had been unsuccessful in gaining the full support andcooperation of NIMH, the agency which normally would have fundedand overseen these programs. NIMH officials were cautious ofgovernment "sanctioning one addiction [to methadone] inorder to reduce the burden on society of heroin addiction,' andcontinued to resist White House pressures to fund a greaternumber of methadone programs .31 The administration contended that NIMH opposed theprograms because to endorse the concept of methadone maintenancewould have been tantamount to admitting the failure of thepsychiatric profession to successfully treat heroin addiction .32 While mention of methadone is made only oncein President Nixon's message to Congress, the proposed creationof SAODAP and the accompanying redelegation of authority wouldhelp circumvent NIMH and increase federal support for methadone.The administration sought thus to bypass-since it could notcajole-a reluctant bureaucracy. The president's designation ofDr. Jerome Jaffe-a prominent supporter of the use of methadone intreatment-as his Special Consultant for Narcotics and DangerousDrugs until SAODAP could be legally constituted by Congress leftno doubt as to the administration's intention. Indeed, when Dr.Jaffe assumed leadership responsibilities in mid-1971, there were135 federally funded drug treatment programs; eighteen monthslater, with a significantly increased drug treatment budget, thenumber had nearly tripled to 394 .33 Treatment for heroin addiction was emphasized in thisprogram expansion and the rate of growth of methadone treatmentprograms was accelerated. A second explanation for centralizingdrug-policy-making responsibilities in the White House is thatthe administration anticipated a successful campaign againstillicit drug use and drug-related crime and wanted to takepolitical credit for it. If the needs were great, so were theopportunities. The president's message to Congress exudedconfidence in spite of the crisis rhetoric in which it wascouched; the message sought to portray illicit drugs as thevillain in a domestic war which could only be won by forcefulpresidential leadership, as the following excerpt suggests. Narcotics addiction is a problem whichafflicts both the body and the soul of America. It is a problemwhich baffles many Americans. In our history we have faced greatdifficulties again and again, wars and depressions and divisionsamong our people have tested our will as a people-and we haveprevailed. The threat of narcotics among our people isone which properly frightens many Americans. It comes quietlyinto homes and destroys children, it moves into neighborhoods andbreaks the fiber of community which makesneighbors.... And we are not without the will to deal with thismatter. We have the moral resources to do the job. Now we needthe authority and the funds to match our moral resources. I amconfident that we will prevail in this struggle as we have inmany others. But time is critical. Every day we lose compoundsthe tragedy which drugs inflict on individual Americans. Thefinal issue is not whether we will conquer drug abuse, but howsoon. The message drew upon traditional perceptionsand fears of illicit drugs and illicit drug users in order torally public support for a renewed crusade against a social evil.The rhetoric was consistent with the tenor of the times. Leadinga war against illicit drugs was certain to enhance anypolitician's popularity. And, although the public pronouncementstended towards the dramatic, the reorganization and expansioncalled for, particularly regarding federal efforts in drugtreatment and prevention, were clearly warranted. The president's message leaves no doubt thatthe administration thought a war against illicit drugs could bewon. The president proposed only a three-to-five-year life forSAODAP because it was to be "an emergency response to anational problem which we intend to bring under control."This "war" was going to be swift, requiring immediateand decisive action and sufficient financing. SAODAF's role wasto give the White House direct involvement, visibility, andcredit. Development of the Expanded FederalResponse Having made a public commitment to respondforcefully to the problems of illicit drug use, theadministration commenced a period of whirlwind activity. Each ofthe three new avenues of response-methadone treatment,international negotiations, and domestic drug law enforcementprograms-were vigorously pursued in an attempt to launch acomprehensive attack on the perceived problems. Funding wasincreased commensurately. In his message to Congress thepresident had requested a supplemental budget of $155 million tobolster the new drug programs. When passed by Congress, thissupplemental appropriation raised the FY 72 drug budget to $418million-four times what it had been only two years earlier. Treatment. When he took office in 1971,President Nixon's new drug advisor, Dr. Jerome Jaffe, turnedfirst to the problems of the Vietnam soldier and veteran, amongwhom rates of addiction were reported to be extraordinarily high.The drug treatment programs of the Veterans Administration (VA)were expanded; many new centers opened, enabling the VA toattract more addicted veterans into treatment. And to stem thereported flow of drug-addicted soldiers returning to the UnitedStates, the Defense Department initiated amassive urinalysis detection program to screen all Vietnamservicemen for illicit drug use before they left Southeast Asia;any heroin- or opiate-using soldiers testing positive were to bedetained for treatment and rehabilitation. President Nixoninformed Congress, "We will be requesting legislation topermit the military services to retain for treatment anyindividual due for discharge who is a narcotic addict. All of ourservicemen must be accorded the right to rehabilitation. 1134 In all, nearly $50 million ofthe president's supplemental budget was applied to expanding thedrug treatment and rehabilitation capabilities of the DefenseDepartment and Veterans Administration. The SAODAP staff also immediately assumedresponsibility for directing the expansion of drug treatmentprograms throughout the United States. Although NIMH received anadditional $51 million for treatment and rehabilitation as aresult of the supplemental budget, raising its total treatmentand rehabilitation budget to $100 million, control of theexpenditure of these funds was largely shifted from NIMH toSAODAP and the White House staff. With respct to programexpansion, the emphasis was placed on heroin addiction treatmentand "there was a massive expansion of methadone maintenanceprograms throughout the country. "35 The first new goal of treatment was to enableany addict who wished it to obtain it without delay. This meanteliminating the waiting lists for entry at many programs, andexpanding treatment in communities where it was needed but notyet available. When Dr. Jaffe assumed responsibilities in June1971, federally funded treatment programs were located in 54cities; only eighteen months later the number of cities involvedhad quadrupled to 214 .36 The speed and size of this expansion was dramatic by anyaccount. The earliest available federal estimate places thenumber of clients in federally funded treatment programs at justovar twenty thousand in October 1971; by December 1972 the figurewas over sixty thousand .37 The only recognized approaches for heroinaddiction other than the expanding methadone treatment wereabstinence oriented and usually took place in a residentialcommunity setting. While popular and sonletimes effectivetreatment approaches for small numbers of addicts, theseabstinence programs had not and-according to federal policymakerscould not have a significant impact on urban crime.Methadone thus became a new hope, in spite of the objections ofthe Food and Drug Administration about insufficient research orthe opposition from minority communities about the underlyingphilosophy of using one addictive drug to treat another .311 In December 1972, the Foodand Drug Administration published new regulations which loosenedfederal controls over methadone, changing its status from that ofan investigational new drug to a new drug requiring ongoing,long-term study .39 ByOctober 1973, nearly eighty thousand persons were enrolled inmethadone maintenance programs .40 Some of these programs were federally funded; alloperated with federal government approval. From the government's perspective, methadonetreatment programs had certain advantages over therapeuticcommunity programs. Methadone allowed greater numbers of peopleto be treated in fewer programs, thus making rapid programexpansion easier. For a large number of heroin addicts unable tosuccessfully remain drug-free, the expansion of methadoneprograms offered an invaluable alternative to heroin addiction.Moreover, the cost per client of methadone maintenance wassubstantially less than the cost in a therapeutic community. Andalthough methadone treatment could not meet the public's demandfor drug abstinence, it could satisfy the even more populardemand for a reduction in heroin-related crime. Finally,methadone programs staffed with medical doctors and operated inmore traditional medical clinical style could be more easilyunderstood by the public. The encounter sessions and heavypsychological orientation of the therapeutic community were oftenmisunderstood, even though the drug-free orientation wascommended. Thus, the expansion of heroin treatmentprograms-particularly using methadone treatment-became SAODAP'sfirst objective. International Activities. In his June 1971 message to Congress, President Nixonhad proposed an all-out global war on international drugtrafficking. To dramatize his intentions, Nixon called togetherthe U.S ambassadors to Turkey, France, Mexico, Luxembourg,Thailand, the Republic of Vietnam, and the United Nations todiscuss ways to encourage greater cooperation from other nationsin the effort to control the illegal growing and trafficking ofopium worldwide. "I sought to make it . . . clear," hetold Congress of this meeting, "that I consider the heroinaddiction of American citizens an international problem of graveconcern to this Nation, and I instructed our Ambassadors to makethis clear to their liost governments. We want good relationswith othe@r countries, but we cannot buy good relations at theexpense of temporizing on this prob- lem . -41 Two weeks later President Nixon formallyannounced that the Government of Turkey had agreed to impose atotal ban on opium poppy cultivation following the 1972 harvest.In return the United States pledged $35.7 million in aid over afive-year period to compensate Turkey for the projected financialloss on legitimate sales of opium, and to help Turkish farmersdevelop substitute crops offering new sources of income. Theagreement was hailed as a "most significantbreakthrough" even though the ban was not to take effectuntil a year after its announcement .42 The Turkish agreement was intended to help launch aconcentrated American effort to halt all illicit opium productionthroughout the world. During the following twelve months,however, that effort far surpassed any tangible results. In September 1971 President Nixon establisheda new Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control, tooversee the further development of U.S. international drugcontrol efforts. The Cabinet Committee, chaired by the Secretaryof State, directed the U.S. embassies in fifty-nine countries toprepare Narcotics Control Action Plans to be used as a basis fornegotiating bilateral agreements with foreign countries infurtherance of U.S. international drug control programs.Apparently, however, it was decided that other countries were notto be offered the same type of broad-based economic assistancewhich had been extended to Turkey. Rather, the Narcotics ControlAction Plans were to be more limited in scope, essentiallyoffering law enforcement assistance to improve the"intelligence capability and law enforcement capacity of thehost . `43 Furthermore,whereas Turkey had been offered the "carrot," othernations were threatened with the "stick" of, amongother things, termination of economic and military assistance .44 This change in strategysuggests that the administration was aware, even before theTurkish ban took effect, of the severe limitations of thisapproach. There simply were too many countries where opium couldbe grown and converted to heroin for sale in the lucrative U.S.market .45 It wouldhave been difficult to negotiate similar agreements with allother potential "source" countries, and even ifdiplomatically possible the cost would have been prohibitive.Moreover, because of the remoteness of many areas from theirgovernments, not every country could successfully impose an opiumban even if it agreed to try. Gradually, therefore, internationalinterdiction efforts replaced prevention of opium cultivation asthe major objective of the U.S. international drug controleffort. Thus, despite active presidential involvement,no dramatic bilateral agreements other than that with Turkey andthe aforementioned one with France were produced to show successon the international front. In addition to bilateral efforts, efforts werealso made to strengthen the enforcement provisions of the 1961Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the governing internationalagreement on illicit drug control. In 1971 the United Statessubmitted proposed amendments to the Single Convention which werelargely directed toward improving controls on illicit opiumcultivation in source countries. These amendments were formallyagreed upon at a plenipotentiary conference in 1972 and submittedto the signatory countries for their ratification. The Nixonadministration apparently regarded the amendments as a bold newapproach in international narcotics control, despite theineffectiveness of the basic treaty .41, In return for strengthening the 1961 SingleConvention, the opium growing countries pressured the UnitedStates to support a second international agreement which wouldfor the first time place multinational controls on synthetic,"psychotropic" drugs such as hallucinogens,amphetamines, barbiturates, and tranquilizers. This treaty, alsodrafted in 1971, became known as the Psychotropic Convention.47The opium-producing countries viewed its ratification as ademonstration of the industrialized nations' seriousness aboutcontrolling the spread of nonnarcotic drug misuse. Americansupport of the Psychotropic Convention thus became a necessaryquid pro quo for support from the opium-producing nations onstrengthening the Single Convention. President Nixon sent the PsychotropicConvention to the Senate for approval on June 29, 1971. Theproposed treaty met strong opposition because it threatened tolimit domestic flexibility in regulating various psychoactivedrugs. It was argued that the treaty would further remove themedical and scientific professions from decision-makingresponsibilities in U.S. domestic drug policy. To date neitherthe Psychotropic Convention nor the changes in domestic law thatit would have required have been passed. Domestic Drug Law Enforcement. Until 1970 BNDD and its principal predecessor, theFederal Bureau of Narcotics, were often accused of concentratingtoo much law enforcement effort on users and street dealers inorder to inflate the number of arrests made. In 1970 BNDD claimedthis policy had been reversed, with efforts being redirected tothe higher levels of the illicit drug distribution structure.BNDD director John Ingersoll explained the anticipated result ofthis change to a House Appropriations subcommittee in March 1970. The shift in emphasis of federal narcotic anddangerous drug law enforcement from the addict, abuser, andsmall-time street peddler to the important illicittraffickers and illegal supply sources will undoubtedly result infewer total arrests. But those made should have a greater impacton the supply of narcotics and drugs available for distributionto the consumers in this country than a larger number of lesssignificant arrests. 48 However, in 1971 the administration sought toincrease the number of arrests by getting BNDD to move once againagainst street-level dealers.49 The administration apparentlybelieved that this would suggest a more active and successful"offensive" in its "war" on illicit drugs anddrug users. BNDD resisted the change, contending that suchefforts should be carried out by state and local agencies, and itcontinued to go after the higher levels of the drug distributionsystems. Like NIMH, BNDD was not immediately responsive to theadministration's wishes. And so once again the White Housecreated a new agency under direct White House control. In January1972 the Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement (ODALE) was createdby executive order within the justice Department.50 ODALE wasmade "responsible for the development and implementation ofa concentrated program throughout the federal government for theenforcement of federal laws relating to the prevention of drugabuse and for cooperation with state and local governments in theenforcement of their drug abuse laws ."51The director of ODALE was also made aspecial consultant to the president for drug-abuse lawenforcement, thus becoming the nation's chief drug lawenforcement spokesman. Within a month after its establishment, ODALEhad selected thirty three target cities and had deployed strikeforces consisting of federal investigators and agents, assistantU.S. attorneys, and state and local police officers. These strikeforces concentrated on the lower and middle levels of thedomestic heroin distribution systems, and, according to oneobserver, -were instructed -to "make arrests by any lawfulmeans possible, even if it meant bypassing the normal channels. `52 By combining the specializedenforcement authorities and powers of various federal agenciese.g., the Internal Revenue Service, Customs, BNDD, theImmigration and Naturalization Service, the Alcohol, Tobacco, andFirearms Agency, etc. -ODALE was in a unique position to"bypass normal channels." The strike forces weresufficiently funded to be able to make extensive use ofundercover agents and "buy money" to purchase drugs andpay infofmants; investigative grand juries were empaneled; andODALE was empowered to use court-authorized wiretaps and"no-knock" warrants in making arrests. As expected, thenumber of arrests rose quickly and the increased figures werepublicized. Rapidly and dramatically, ODALE became a prominent,highly visible part of the administration's "war ondrugs." The Congressional Response: Passage of the Drug AbuseOffice and Treatment Act of 1972 Congress responded to President Nixon'schallenge for quick and decisive action by passing the Drug AbuseOffice and Treatment Act of 1972 (P. L. 92-255), just nine monthsafter his June 1971 message and a year in advance of thescheduled completion of the second report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse .51 This new legislation reorganized a major part of thefederal drug effort, effected important changes in the roles ofstate and local government in the planning and funding of drugtreatment services, and expanded the overall size of the federaldrug effort by voting higher budget authorizations. Compared withmost major legislation, action on this bill was quick andthorough: Two Senate committees and one House committee heldhearings on the proposed legislation; after the Senate and Housepassed differing versions, a Conference Committee ironedout the differences, and then both bodies passed the compromiselegislation by unanimous votes. The final wording of the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act showed Congress and the president to be in generalagreement on the best organizational arrangements for effectivelycoordinating the federal drug effort. The basic"supply" and "demand" approach was adopted,and SAODAP was established to coordinate and oversee thedevelopment of federal drug-abuse prevention activities,* the"demand" side of the equation. Congress acceded to thepresident's request that SAODAP be made a part of the executiveoffice of the president. Since at this time the question of thelimits of executive authority was uppermost in the minds of manylegislators, this was generally interpreted as a strongaffirmation of congressional intent to deal decisively with thedrug issue. Congress agreed with the president that SAODAP needbe only a temporary agency, and established June 30, 1975 as thedate by which SAODAP -would be -replaced by a new NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, operating within the traditionalchannels of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. SAODAP's primary responsibilities were toreorganize and direct the federal programs in drug treatment,rehabilitation, education, prevention, training, and research.Moreover, SAODAP would be responsible for coordinating these"demand" efforts with the federal drug law enforcementprograms, though the agency would have no authority over thelatter. SAODAP's position was a difficult one: Congress and thepresident expected it to coordinate, "from outside andabove," the activities of fourteen agencies that until thenhad existed in relative autonomy; to attain its goal in a shortperiod of time; and to coordinate these activities in a fieldwhere there was considerable disagreement as to the mosteffective means of dealing with the problems. *The legislation used the term "drugabuse prevention" to refer to all non-law-enforcement drugefforts including treatment and rehabilitation; education,prevention, and training; and research. To help the new agency accomplish theseformidable tasks, Congress included in the legislation severalprovisions designed to insure a coordinated federal drug effort. 54 First, it established SAODAP asa kind of mini-Office of Management and Budget, though limited tothe drug abuse prevention programs of the various federalagencies. -SAODAP was empowered to reprogram an agency'sdrug-abuse prevention funds if necessary to insure greaterconformity with the overall policies and priorities it would set.Second, Congress established a special fund of $40 million forSAODAP for each of three fiscal years "to provide additionalincentives to Federal departments and agencies to develop moreeffective drug abuse prevention functions and to give theDirector [of SAODAP] the flexibility to encourage, and respondquickly and efficiently to, the development of promising programsand approaches." Although Congress stipulated that at least90 percent of these funds had to be spent by federal agenciesother than SAODAP, they had to be spent according to SAODAPdirectives. Third, SAODAP received the power of "managementoversight review." This -power, although never actuallyexercised, gave it the authority to assume the drug-abuseprevention functions of an uncooperative federal agency for up tothirty days. The explicit legislative granting of such power isvery rare; the potential authority is usually enough to persuadeany recalcitrants of the advantages of cooperation. Although the purpose of this reorganizationwas to streamline, coordinate, and make more efficient thefederal response, it also effectively muted opposition. In fact,when he signed the legislation enacting SAODAP, President Nixonwarned that "heads will roll" if the agency directorsdid not cooperate with the new office.51 The president named Dr.Jaffe -to direct SAODAP and expand the work he had already begununder executive order. When SAODAP formally began in March 1972,policy and programmatic decisions had essentially been made; itwas simply a matter of carrying them out. What reservations therewere within and without government were largely ignored oroverridden. Recommendations such as those put forth by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse in 1972 and 1973were quickly rejected because they were inconsistent with thepolicies and programs the administration had already chosen topursue. In sum, up to and through the 1972presidential elections the Nixon administration sought to be (1)responsive to the public concern about heroin addiction andheroin-related crime, (2) effective, in contrast to thelack of success which had characterized past drug efforts, and(3) quick, so that "progress" could be claimedat the earliest possible moment. Most of the bureaucraticrestraints which might have impeded the Nixon administration's"war on drugs" had been overcome, so its potential to"solve the drug problem" could be tested. Deemphasis of the Drug Issue and Emergenceof the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NI15A) Eighteen months after the enactment of theDrug Abuse Office and Treatment Act, and only ten months afterhis reelection, President Nixon signaled a change in direction byannouncing in September 1973, "We have turned the corner ondrug addiction in the United States."511 Although caveatsfollowed this declaration, the announcement was an importantmilestone in the history of the government's response to illicitdrugs. In addition to being a statement of "victory,"the president's message also implied disengagement from the war. In the days and weeks following thisannouncement, administration officials offered evidence insupport of the President's statement .57 This "evidence" included claims of an apparentshortage of heroin on the East Coast, an increase in the streetprice of the drug, an increase in the number of drug seizures andarrests, the expansion of drug treatment availability andutilization, a reported decline in the incidence of new heroinuse, and heroin-related crime being down. Not everyone agreed:Some challenged the accuracy of the statistics, others challengedtheir interpretation. Still others accepted the evidence, butcautioned that the downward trend might only be temporary. In retrospect, it is clear that the "turnthe corner" speech was based on more than statistics. Otherfactors were also at work, and a brief review of certain eventswhich occurred between June 1971 and September 1973 will help toexplain the turnabout. First, the 1972 presidential election hadpassed. Though it is difficult to assess what part this may haveplayed in the administration's response to the drug issue, thereis little doubt that it had some importance. Illicit drugs were amajor political issue, and anyone running for national electiveoffice was expected to address it. Second, the armies of addicted Vietnamsoldiers never materialized. The severity of the problem had beenoverestimated; among those soldiers who did use opium or heroinin Vietnam, subsequent research showed that relatively few wereeither dysfunctional or addicted users after their return to theUnited States .58 Third, public interest in the drug issuedwaned. There were a host of possible explanations for this: Theproblems had been overdrarnatized and public fears exaggerated,the rate of urban crime had leveled off, other domestic issueshad taken precedence, the media had run out of things to say, orit was simply part of the natural ebb and flow of publicinterest. Whatever the reasons, there is little question that thepublic's attention had become diverted elsewhere. Fourth, the new avenues of response to the useof illicit drugs, which had been pursued with varying degrees ofsuccess, had in their combined effect failed to measure up tooriginal expectations, and it seemed unlikely that any furtherimprovement would result from a widened or intensified effort inthese areas. For example, federal law enforcement effortsagainst street-level drug activities had backfired. ODALE was notalways well received by local law enforcement agencies, and itsability to have a significant impact on street-level drugactivities was seriously questioned.59 In April 1973, ODALEagents were involved in two criticized "no-knock"entries into homes in Collinsville, Illinois. The events inCollinsville precipitated a thorough review of the agency and areevaluation of the need for unique enforcement authoritiesagainst drug dealers and users. In effect, ODALE had gone too farin "bypassing the normal channels." Instead of becominga positive symbol of how to win a war on drugs, ODALE became thefocal point of criticisms about the excesses of that war. On June30, 1973, ODALE was abolished in yet another drug-law-enforcementagency reorganizations The position of special consultant to thepresident for drug-abuse law enforcement matters was alsoabolished, and Congress subsequently repealed the no-knock andpreventive detention sections of the federal statutes. Federallaw enforcement strategy reverted to a concentration on the upperlevels of drug distribution systems. The Turkish opium ban did contribute to ashortage of heroin in 1973, principally in the eastern UnitedStates. But because the government had been unable to negotiateany other significant bilateral agreements, it became clear thatthe Turkish ban would have only a temporary effect. The periodimmediately after the Turkish ban took effect was the high pointin terms of any practical significance which it could have had.The demand for heroin and the consequent profits to be realizedwere bound to generate new supplies and supply routes-it was onlya matter of time. Bilateral agreements thus failed to provide anylasting "solution." Drug treatment programs, methadone programs inparticular, had been expanded to a point where everyonevoluntarily seeking treatment could get it. Overall, the qualityof the treatment offered in methadone as well as drug-freeprograms improved. Program personnel gained experience and withit increasing expertise. Increased funding assured greaterprogram stability. However, treatment supply exceeded treatmentdemand; in this crucial respect the administration's goal hadbeen reached: Unless more people were to enter treatment, themaximum short-term impact of this approach had also probably beenreached. The administration, through SAODAP, had alsoachieved a more coordinated federal effort on the"demand" side. Much overlapping, duplication, andinefficiency had been eliminated. Within the framework of itspolicies and programs, the federal response was functioning muchmore smoothly. And the budget was sufficient; the total FY 74drug budget was $760 million. Lack of funds no longer limited thepotential of the federal drug response; at the same time therewas no indication that increasing the budget further wouldmeasurably improve the situation. There seemed little need to any longermaintain a strong White House identification with the drug issue.Within the framework of the policies and programs theadministration had chosen to pursue the situation was probably asgood as it would get in the foreseeable future. Politically, thismay have suggested to the federal government that the issue couldbe returned to a more "normal" status within thebureaucracy and be dealt with like most other urban and socialproblems. Whether or not the president's assessment ofthe situation in his "turn the corner" speech wascorrect, it triggered a turn in government activity in the drugfield. The more extraordinary measures of the previous yearscould no longer be justified, On the contrary, it becamenecessary for government budget- and policymakers to make majorchanges in the federal drug effort in order to prove that avictory had been won. Even before the president's pronouncement,drug law enforcement programs had been moved away from activeWhite House involvement to a newly formed Drug EnforcementAdministration within the Department of justice. Federal effortsagainst street-level drug dealers and users were quietlyabandoned. International efforts to curtail illicit drugcultivation and trafficking continued, but were less publicized.SAODAP remained in existence until June 30, 1975, but it lost itsinfluence after the "turn the corner" speech. The trendin budget requests was also reversed: The overall treatment andrehabilitation budget for FY 75 (proposed in January 1974) was$33 million less than in the previous fiscal year, marking thefirst drug budget cutback in the Nixon administrationsFurthermore, the administration sought increasingly to shift drugprogramming responsibilities to the states, under the aegis ofits "new federalism" policies. The combined effect of these actions wassignificantly to reduce the visibility and controversy of thefederal drug effort. This was beneficial in the sense that thedrug issue was temporarily freed from the political rhetoric thathad bound it. But the loss of momentum was unfortunate to theextent that the government's opportunity to shape a morecomprehensive approach to drug problems in America was notdecisively acted upon. One of the most important and lastingbyproducts of this chain of events was the creation of a newagency, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) within HEW.This was created by a departmental reorganization announced bythe Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare on September 23,1973. The announcement occurred more than a year in advance ofthe congressional requirement in the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act of 1972 for the creation of such an agency no laterthan December 30, 1974 .113 Organizationally, NIDA was made a fourth-levelagency in HEW. As Figure 1.3 illustrates, the director of NIDA isone of three agency directors reporting to the administrator ofthe Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental. Health Administration(ADAMHA). The administrator of ADAMHA is, in turn, one of sixPublic Health Service officials reporting to the assistantsecretary for health, who in turn is one of many assistantsecretaries reporting to the secretary of HEW. Despite this organizational arrangement, NIDAwas charged with providing "leadership, policies and goalsfor the Federal effort in the prevention, control and treatmentof narcotic addiction and drug abuse, and the rehabilitation ofaffected individuals." Clearly, NIDA was intended to succeedSAODAP as the lead agency on the "demand" side of thefederal drug effort. But NIDA was not and could not be a substitutefor SAODAP. SAODAP was designed to be a policy and coordinatingoffice, with minimal direct program responsibilities. NIDA wasgiven the bulk of drug treatment program responsibilities butvery limited coordinating powers. Much of SAODAP's authority wascontained in P. L. 92-255, and most of those powers were nottransferable to NIDA without congressional approval. Even if thepowers were to be transferred, the decisions and directions takenby NIDA, buried as it was within HEW, would obviously haveattracted less attention and carried less weight than when thevery same actions were announced by a White House office. Although the earlier-than-anticipatedemergence of NIDA and diminution of SAODAP made many of thoseinvolved with drug treatment and prevention anxious about thefuture, some found solace in the fact that the drug treatment andprevention effort had been removed from the immediate control ofNIMH. Under the HEW reorganization NIDA was established asseparate and equal to NIMH. Similarly, responsibility in thealcoholism field had been removed from NIMH and given to anothernew separate and equal agency, the National Institute on AlcoholAbuse and Alcoholism. The effect of removing NIMH control fromthese fields was to allow each to more fully develop its ownapproaches. Inasmuch as drug problems in many respects lieoutside traditional mental health concerns, the creation of NIDAindependent of NIMH was applauded by many people in the drugtreatment and prevention fields. The Arguments for and against the Continuation of SAODAP Even though NIDA was in full operation bymid-1974, SAODAP continued to function until its expiration dateof June 30, 1975, though with greatly reduced staff levels anddiminished bureaucratic status. It was maintained to exercisethose coordinating functions which could not legally betransferred to NIDA. Moreover, it provided the drug treatment andprevention fields with a symbolic organizational parity with druglaw enforcement concerns, a role which NIDA could not fulfill. By early 1975, questions were being raisedabout the implications of SAODAP's impending demise. The futuredirection and scope of the federal drug effort seemed uncertain.Gerald Ford had succeeded Richard Nixon as president, and Ford'sviews and commitment regarding the drug field were largelyunknown. In March 1975, Senator William Hathaway,chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Narcotics,introduced legislation amending the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act of 1972. The proposed legislation called for amodified version of SAODAP, to be called the Office of Drug AbusePrevention Policy (ODAPP), which would continue certainpolicymaking and coordinating functions of the predecessoragency. The expiration of SAODAP along with other provisions ofP. L. 92255-including funding authorizations for future federaltreatment, prevention, and research efforts-gave Congress itsfirst opportunity to review both the 1972 legislation and thestatus of the federal response.114 This congressional review prompted PresidentFord to direct the Domestic Council to undertake its ownassessment in order to define more clearly the administration'sdrug policies and prepare the administration's response to anycongressional action .6' These congressional and executive office assessmentsreconsidered the tone and approach of the government's responseto illicit drug use in a distinctively less politicized way thanhad marked the crisis atmosphere during the Nixon administration. Both Congress and the administration sought toback away from the warlike rhetoric of the Nixon administration.The emphasis on "victories" and "solutions"was replaced by more cautious statements about "goals"and "objectives." Congress amended its Declaration ofNational Policy by adopting more temperate wording. The DomesticCouncil Report to the president was even more straightforwardwith respect to its assessment of goals: We should stop raising unrealisticexpectations of total elimination of drug abuse from our society.At the same time, we should in no way signal tacit acceptance ofdrug abuse or a lessened commitment to continue aggressiveefforts aimed at eliminating it entirely. The sobering fact isthat some members of any society will seek escape from thestresses of life through drug use.Prevention, education, treatment, and rehabilitation will curtailtheir number, but will not eliminate drug use entirely. As longas there is demand, criminal drug traffickers will make somesupply available, provided that the potential profits outweighthe risks of detection and punishment. Vigorous supply reductionefforts will reduce, but not eliminate, supply. And reduction inthe supply of one drug may only cause abuse prone individuals toturn to another substance. All of this indicates that, regrettably, wewill probably always have a drug problem of some proportion.Therefore we must be prepared to continue our efforts and ourcommitment indefinitely, in order to contain the problem at aminimal level, and in order to minimize the adverse social costsof drug abuse."" This acknowledgment of the persistence of drugproblems and the impossibility of achieving a quick victory hadno direct effect on the operational aspects of the various drugprogramming efforts; it only sought to adjust public expectationsof them. Congress and the Ford administration relievedsome of the anxieties felt in the drug treatment field after the"turn the corner" speech by halting the one-year budgetcutback which had been initiated with that speech. Althoughquestions were raised about the adequacy of the administration'sbudget proposal, many agencies and individuals were pleased-simply by this temporizing action. More serious difficulties between Congress andthe president arose over whether some modified version of SAODAPshould be continued. Many in Congress argued for such an agency;President Ford and his administration were opposed to it. Theproponents of a successor agency to SAODAP contended that WhiteHouse coordination of the drug effort was still necessary .7 Theyheld that without some successor to SAODAP the earlierorganizational Difficulties could easily reappear, maintainingthat the logic which dictated congressional approval of SAODAP in1972 extended to the proposed Office of Drug Abuse PreventionPolicy in 1975. Congressional proponents further argued thatNIDA, as a fourth-level HEW agency, would never be able toexercise any real control over the "demand" side of thefederal drug effort. They pointed cut that 51 percent of allfederal expenditures for drug prevention programs were made byagencies other than NIDA, and thus concluded that "for NIDAto coordinate and lead the Federal drug abuse prevention effort,both from a structural and from a fiscal perspective, would bedifficult at best and, more likely, actuallyimpossible.""" President Ford and the Domestic Council TaskForce agreed on the need for continued coordination, but theydiffered with the proponents of ODAPP on the way to achieve it.Rather than have a special White House agency just to coordinatethe "demand" side of the federal drug effort, PresidentFord opted for "strong Cabinet management" of theprogram. In April 1976 he created the Cabinet Committeefor Drug Abuse Prevention (CCDAP), chaired by the Secretary ofHEW, which included the Secretaries of Defense and Labor and theadministrator of the Veterans Administration. CCDAF was givenresponsibility for the oversight and coordination of all federalactivities involving drug prevention, treatment, andrehabilitation, integrating the efforts of all the cabinetdepartments and agencies involved. Moreover, CCDAP was expectedto "give HEW, ADAMHA, and NIDA the organizational strengthand authority to provide the interdepartmental and interagencycoordination needed to maintain the progress which has been madein drug abuse treatment and prevention. " ODAPP's sponsors sought to extend itsprojected responsibilities of review, -formulation, andcoordination of drug policies and priorities to all drug policiesand programs, including drug law enforcement programs andinternational negotiations. This was to be the major differencebetween ODAPP and SAODAP, whose authority had been confined todrug treatment, rehabilitation, education, prevention, andresearch. This proposed extension of authority for ODAPP gainedsupport for several reasons: First, it sought to reconceptualizethe federal drug effort by bridging the gap between theenforcement and treatment approaches. ODAPP was envisioned as theforum in government by which the long-standing philosophicalconflicts between the medical and law enforcement communitiescould be faced and, ideally, reconciled.70 At the very least,ODAPP was being designed to insure a more comprehensive review ofthe drug programs and policies of the various federal agencies. Second, this extension of ODAPP's authoritywas proposed at a time when the balance between drug lawenforcement and drug treatment and prevention programs was onceagain shifting in favor of law enforcement.71 The drug lawenforcement budget was rising while drug treatment and preventionfunds remained level; and, bureaucratically, DEA was a higherlevel agency within the justice Department than was NIDA in HEW.ODAPP was supported partly in the hope that it could keep abalance between these two principal agencies and their respectiveapproaches to the drug problem. Third, support for ODAPP stemmed from thecongressional desire to have one single administration officialwith overall responsibility for national drug policy who would beaccountable to Congress. At the time Congress was consideringODAPP, officials of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)were refusing to testify before Congress on drug policy issues,and the directors of the various drug agencies (NIDA and DEA inparticular) spoke only for their own programs and policies. Theunresolved areas, as well as the overall concerns, of nationalpolicy could easily be unintentionally overlooked in thissituation. ODAPP was designed to rectify this.72 President Ford and the Domestic Council TaskForce also recognized the need to coordinate treatment andenforcement approaches. In its report the Domestic Councilstated, "Strong coordinative mechanisms are necessary toensure that the efforts of these [Federal] departments andagencies are integrated into an effective overall program, andthat the approach adopted in each is consistent with thePresident's priorities."" However, the administrationmaintained that such coordination could be attained without aWhite House agency. Instead, it chose to formalize the divisionof the drug functions developed during the Nixon administration.Thus the government's response split the effort into threeseparate areas, each with a "lead agency . '174 The Drug EnforcementAdministration was designated as the "lead agency" fordrug law enforcement, the State Department for internationalactivities, and NIDA for prevention and treatment. To strengtheninteragency coordination within each functional area, PresidentFord convened three separate cabinet committees, each withoversight and coordination responsibilities within one area. Going a step further in acknowledging someneed for "program oversight and limited interagencycoordination at the Executive Office level "75President Ford and the Domestic Councilaccordingly made several more recommendations.76 Foremost amongthem was the recommendation that the Strategy Council on DrugAbuse* be revitalized to provide overall policy guidance, andthat a small staff at OMB be maintained to assist the StrategyCouncil and executive office in formulating drug policy. However,these recommendations fell considerably short of a White HouseOffice for drug abuse. *The Strategy Council, mandated in 1972 byP.L. 92-255, consists of government officials and privatecitizens appointed by the president. The argument that Congress needed one personor office to be accountable to it for total federal drug policywas rejected by the administration. "The best places to getsuch information and to seek accountability for progress,"said President Ford, "are the departments and agencies whichhave direct responsibility and program authority."77 In point of fact, the arguments raised bothfor and against ODAPP were illusory. There were other ways tosatisfy the needs cited by the proponents of ODAPP, and thecreation of ODAPP would not have guaranteed the advantagesenvisioned anyway. For example, the Ford administration couldhave coordinated its response to the drug problems of Americawithout an ODAPP, just as it could have allowed the partitionsbetween the medical and legal approaches to continue despiteODAPP's presence. The ODAPP concept was strongly supportedby the majority of individuals, associations, and privateorganizations working in the drug treatment, rehabilitation,education, prevention, and research fields. All had feltseriously threatened by the funding cutbacks of the Nixonadministration's last budget, and the elimination of SAODAP hadadded to the uncertainty about future federal commitment.Accordingly, these associations and organizations, many of whichhad developed during the years of budget expansion, vigorouslylobbied Congress to support the small White House agency fordrugs as a sign of their support for the drug field.Congressional spokesmen took note of the symbolic importance ofODAPP, explaining that "there is a clear danger thatelimination of that office [SAODAP or ODAPP] would have enormoussymbolic significance to this field. There is no way in whichthis move [the elimination of SAODAP], coupled with recentproposals to cut funds, can appear to be anything but a drasticretrenchment in Federal priorities ."711 The Ford administration's opposition to ODAPPwas also symbolic, but not in relation to the drug field.President Ford had committed himself to a reduction of executiveoffice power and a restoration of the powers of the variouscabinet departments and federal agencies. He wished to reversethe concentration of power in the White House which hadcharacterized the Nixon administrations trend to which SAODAP wasboth a symbolic and a real contributor. To the Fordadministration, the negative symbolism of a new White House drugoffice-even a small one-overrode any positive symbolism it mighthave conveyed to the drug field. In March 1976, eight months after SAODAP hadexpired, Congress passed legislation creating in the White Housethe Office of Drug Abuse Policy (ODAP, a slight shortening of theoriginally proposed name) .71, Compared to SAODAP, ODAP was organizationally small andits legislatively granted powers limited, but its coordinatingresponsibilities extended to law enforcement and internationalnegotiations, thus giving it broader scope than its predecessor. President Ford signed the legislation creatingODAP only because sections of the same bill contained thenecessary funding authorizations to continue federal efforts indrug treatment and prevention. The president remained steadfastlyopposed to ODAP in principle, and in signing the legislation hesaid: I have voiced strong opposition to thereestablishment of a special office for drug abuse in the WhiteHouse. I believe that such an office would be duplicative andunnecessary and that it would detract from strong Cabinetmanagement of the Federal drug abuse program. Therefore, while Iam signing this bill because of the need for Federal funds fordrug abuse prevention and treatment, I do not intend to seekappropriations for the new Office of Drug Abuse Policy created bythe bill. 110 This impasse continued throughout Ford'spresidency; ODAP had been legally constituted but remained a"paper" agency with neither staff nor funds. Instead,President Ford continued his plan for supervision of governmentresponse to illicit drug use through three cabinet committees,one each for law enforcement, international narcotics control,and treatment and prevention. Government Response under Presidents Fordand Carter Drug problems and issues faded from thelimelight during the Ford administration, a change generallyviewed as salutary when compared to the tumultuous yearspreceding it. Funding levels in all areas remained reasonablystable, as did program operations. Although whatever gains hadresulted from the Turkish opium ban were reversed by the newavailability of Mexican heroin, no new "wars" wereproclaimed. Utilization of existing treatment capacity didincrease throughout the country and funding was increased totreat several thousand more people. The Drug EnforcementAdministration continued to confiscate large amounts of illicitdrugs, but the overall impact on illicit trafficking wasmarginal. Guided by the Domestic Council's "WhitePaper on Drug Abuse," the Ford administration accepted theverdict that the "drug problem" could not beeliminated. Instead of trying to rally public support to end"drug abuse," the administration started seeking todevelop greater public tolerance of this ineradicable phenomenon. Although the style was different and the goalsless ambitious, the Ford administration's response to illicitdrugs was largely predicated on the same assumptions about theinnate harmfulness of illicit drugs that have guided thegovernment's response to drugs throughout the twentieth century.The administration's response continued to rest upon lawenforcement or quasi-enforcement strategies fundamentallyintended to prohibit new or continued use of nonapprovedpsychoactive substances. Though these assumptions were notchallenged, the limits of any attempt to "solve" theproblems of illicit drug use were at last openly acknowl-edged-asignificant change from previous administrations. In his one major public statement on the useof illicit drugs, President Ford devoted less than threeparagraphs to treatment and prevention issues. The remainder ofhis six-page message to Congress" addressed the drug-crimenexus, law enforcement efforts, proposals for mandatory minimumsentences for traffickers and bail denial, the activities ofCustoms, use of the Internal Revenue Service to go aftertraffickers, international control and cooperation, and the like.Support for programs in treatment and prevention was derived, aswith enforcement, from the longstanding fears and assumptionsabout illicit drugs, their users, and their effects on society. When Jimmy Carter became president someobservers of the drug field expected swift and significant policyand programmatic changes to result, in part because of Carter'sclose association with Dr. Peter Bourne, a highly regarded drugprogram expert. In March 1977, under some pressure from Congress,President Carter activated ODAP, naming Dr. Bourne as itsdirector. It was believed that ODAP might devise a more unifiedand coordinated government response to illicit drugs, melding thegoals and concerns of the treatment, prevention, and enforcementcommunities. No sooner had ODAP been activated, however,than President Carter announced his intention of abolishing theoffice. This announcement was made as part of the ReorganizationPlan No. 1 of 1977, in which President Carter sought tostreamline and reduce the White House staff. As a result, ODAPexpired in April 1978, after completing a series of drug policystudies spanning the treatment, prevention, and enforcementfields. 82 ODAP'slegal functions were transferred to the president. Dr. Bourneremained as special assistant to the president in part to"advise the President on drug policy and assist in thecoordination of interagency efforts," until his resignationin July 1978. Several ODAP staff members were transferred to theDomestic Policy Staff, where they continue to provide someoverall review of drug policy issues. The results of thisreorganization resemble the plan of strong cabinet managementwith "some" executive coordination advocated by theFord administration. Shortly after announcing his reorganizationplan, President Carter presented Congress with his first majormessage on drug issues.113 His primary concern was thefragmentation and lack of coordination among drug programs andagencies. (This organizational problem has persisted in spite ofall the attention it has received.) President Carter stressed thecontinuing need for international cooperation, and directed theindividual agencies involved to give the drug issues a highpriority. Like Presidents Nixon and Ford before him, Carterstressed international law enforcement efforts to eradicate theillicit cultivation of drugs and interrupt internationaltrafficking networks. And like his predecessors, he urgedCongress to ratify the Psychotropic Convention. With respect to law enforcement, PresidentCarter announced support for programs which would promise"swift and severe punishment" to traffickers in drugs.These programs include the investigation of links betweenorganized crime and drug trafficking, revocation of passports andfreezing assets of known major traffickers, support oflegislation raising the dollar value of property seized from andforfeited by a drug violator through administrative action, studyof possible denial of bail or any release prior to trial forcertain major drug-traffic offenders, and the possible emendationof the Tax Reform Act to allow for easier investigation of majortraffickers (if this would not infringe on the privacy ofcitizens). For the most part, these proposals are conceptuallyindistinguishable from those made by Presidents Nixon and Ford;all sought to enact measures that would deter major drugtraffickers in the hope of reducing the availability of illicitdrugs at the street level. As for drug treatment, President Carter calledupon NIDA to include more programs for abusers of barbiturates,amphetamines, and combinations of drugs (including alcohol). Hesupported expansion of rehabilitation and job-training programsfor former heroin addicts. President Carter also expressed theneed for better coordination of federally sponsored researchefforts on a variety of drugs, including opiates, alcohol, andtobacco. He expressed the hope that this would save money and"lead to greater scientific understanding of addictionproblems." In recent years the barbiturates have beenrecognized as a major drug problem (this problem has resulted inpart from their widespread licit medical use). The specialattention that President Carter directed to be given to these andother sedative-hypnotic drugs will cover the whole gamut offederal drug response: Prescribing practices of physicians willbe reviewed, more intensive efforts will be made to prosecutephysicians who deliberately overprescribe, DEA will investigatestreet marketing activities and audit companies lawfullymanufacturing the drugs, and HEW will study the question whetherbarbiturates should remain on the market. In focusing suchspecific attention on barbiturate abuse, President Carter took asignificant step toward extending the federal government'sresponse to drugs beyond a traditional concern with such illicitdrugs as heroin, cocaine, and marijuana. And in what amounted to his most significantpolicy break with Presidents Nixon and Ford, Carter endorsed thedecriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana forpersonal use, noting that "penalties against possession of adrug should not be more damaging to an individual than the use ofthe drug itself." Nevertheless, the overall thrust of PresidentCarter's first major statement on drug issues does not suggestany fundamental changes in the specifics of government response.The tone does suggest a less emotional approach than that of theearly 1970s; the inclusion of licit drugs which can bedangerously misused suggests a broader understanding of theconcept of "drug abuse"; and the adoption of amarijuana decriminalization position suggests that fundamentalchanges in government response could occur after current policiesand programs are clearly, repeatedly shown not to work. But in abroader context President Carter's drug statement furtherreflects the tortuously slow process by which public opinion andpublic policy change. Some Concluding Thoughts The overriding observation which emerges froma review of the federal government's history of response toillicit drugs is that its drug policy changes slowly if at all.Federal drug programs have changed considerably in thepast decade, but policy remains essentially unchanged. Faithremains strong in the power of criminal sanctions to deterillicit drug use and the effectiveness of law enforcement effortsto eliminate that use which does occur. Two deeply rooted premises have guided federalresponse: One is that there are certain drugs which people shouldbe prohibited from using under any circumstances. The secondis that the government can then prevent their use. The firstpremise is philosophical in nature, the second pragmatic. The philosophical question of thejustification of prohibition can always be argued at greatlength; there is no single "answer" as such. Withrespect to the pragmatic issue, the belief that government canprevent illicit drug use, there is more concrete evidence toanalyze. The experience of the 1970s clearly shows that even withan extensive, generally efficient, and popularly supportedfederal effort, it is impossible to prohibit the presence ofnonapproved drugs in American society. It is difficult toconceive how that effort might have been expanded or intensifiedto be more successful while still respecting the traditionalvalues of a free society. Federal policymakers are by now generallycognizant of the limits of current federal drug policy. Why thendo they continue to pursue the same fundamental policies? Becausethe public demands it; to relax the prohibitionary goal istantamount to being "soft on drugs" (a most pejorativeterm that has been used in ugly ways to cast aspersions on thosewho question the wisdom of prohibition). In a democratic society,policymakers cannot stray too far from what the public wants orthey will simply be replaced. Federal drug policy will not changesubstantially until there is public support to do so. But federal drug officials have not conveyedto the public an understanding of the limits to their potentialaccomplishments; it is far easier politically to highlightoccasionally successful programs and to emphasize long-rangegoals or aspirations. Policyrnakers also seem reluctant to engagethe public in a discussion of the philosophy of drug prohibition.One reason for this difficulty is that for many years the federalgovernment fueled the popular demand for drug prohibition. Yetthose who are familiar with drug policy recognize now that thedesignation of certain drugs as illicit and as targets forprohibition has roots in racism, hysteria, and sensationalism. Itis also now apparent, based on current knowledge about drugs andtheir effects, that prohibition has been based on muchmisinformation and misunderstanding. In the context of these general observations,the following concluding thoughts are offered: 1. The most important contribution whichfederal drug agencies can now make to future drug policy is toprovide the American public with opportunities to carefully andsensibly reexamine the wisdom of drug prohibition. Even thoughthey are now more than five years old, the two reports of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse would still makean excellent starting point for this reappraisal process. 2. Until the drug issue becomes lessvulnerable to sensationalism, there is no way to guarantee thatexcesses in the federal drug effort, such as those of the early1970s, can be prevented. Federal drug policies and programs oughtto be the product of careful, thoughtful consideration.Impulsive, hastily conceived programs such as ODALE can do greatdamage to our society. 3. The federal drug effort needs greatercoordination; the treatment, enforcement, and internationalcomponents cannot be left to go -their own -ways. Coordinationwithout "teeth" has beer, more superficial. thansubstantive. 4. From a policy, bureaucratic, and budgetaryperspective, criminal justice and drug law enforcement agencieshave been too dominant in our national response to the abuse ofpsychoactive drugs. This dominance has not served society well;rather than bringing out the best in us, it has led us to relytoo heavily on our meaner, more punitive instincts. APPENDIX A: A Budget Perspective Overview of Fiscal Years 1970-1978. It isimpossible to account exactly for all funds expended on thefederal government's response to illicit drugs. The figurespresented in this report are, however, sufficiently accurate tobe used for an overall fiscal analysis and review of significanttrends and priorities. Table 1. 1 presents the federal drugbudget by function for fiscal years 1970-1978. From July 1969 through September 1978, thefederal government spent approximately $5.7 billion on itsdrug-related efforts. Of this total, $2.4 billion was spent ontreatment and rehabilitation, $2.3 billion on law enforcement,and the remainder ($.95 billion) was spent on education,prevention, and training ($.4 billion), research ($.4 billion),and planning ($.15 billion). The effect which the "war on drugabuse" had on the budget is clearly demonstrable beginningwith FY 72 (which began July 1, 1971, two weeks after PresidentNixon's special message to Congress). (See Figure 1.4.) The mostrapid expansion of the federal drug budget occurred during FY 72and FY 73. After FY 74 and Nixon's "turn the corner"speech, the rate of budget expansion slowed considerably. (Infact, if adjusted for inflation, the buying power of the federaldrug effort was lower in FY 78 than it had been since FY 72.)Still, although the annual rate of growth of the federal drugbudget slowed, the absolute size at which its annual totalmore-or-less leveled off was much higher than ever before. Theaverage annual federal drug expenditure for the years 1974-78 wasover $800 million; for 1973-78-a six-and-one-quarter-yearperiod-it totaled $5 billion. Perhaps the most useful index of federalpriorities in the drug area is a comparison of the treatment andrehabilitation budget with the law enforcement budget. Figure 1.4displays the rapid growth of the treatment and rehabilitation budget between FY 71 and FY 73; however, since FY 73 it hasalternately declined and increased, ending up at nearly the samelevel as in FY 73 ($366 million in FY 78 compared to $350 millionin FY 73). The drug law enforcement budget, on the other hand,has risen steadily, doubling in size from $200 to $400 million inthe same time period. If we look at these items in a slightlydifferent way-as a percentage of the total federal drugexpenditure for each year-we find a rapid expansion of thetreatment and rehabilitation strategy between FY 71 and FY 73 anddetectable slippage since FY 73 (Figure 1.5). In contrast, thepercentage of the total drug effort allocated to law enforcementrose from a low of 29 percent in FY 73 to 45 percent, its highestlevel, in FY 78. This apparent reversal in strategy in theperiod FY 71-73-with treatment more heavily funded thanenforcement-is explainable insofar as one accepts the thesis thatdrug treatment programs-in particular, methadone treatmentprograms-derived at least part of their government support fromconcern more with reducing criminal recidivism that with reducingheroin recidivism. If so, then recent government response toillicit drug use has remained rather consistently dominated by anenforcement approach, as indeed it has since the early 1900s.Moreover, insofar as drug treatment has been funded because ofits crime reduction potential, it may have been in partill-defined as "treatment" in a traditional healthcontext. The pursuit of this avenue of response-crime reductionthrough treatment-may offer a reasonable explanation for thebrief reversal during FY 71-73 in the traditional balance betweentreatment and enforcement approaches. If so, this adds greatercredence to the contention that the underlying assumptions andstrategies of the government's response to illicit drugs haschanged very little in the 1970s. The FY 79 BudgetRequest. President Carter released his proposed FY 79 budgeton January 20, 1978. Inasmuch as this budget request is the firstone fully prepared by the Carter administration it is logical toturn to it for any signs of impending changes in the governmentresponse to drugs. The currently available budget documentssuggest that it will remain essentially unchanged. However, acomplete analysis is precluded because neither OMB'nor ODAP hascompiled drug-related expenditures on an agency-by-agency basisas they previously did every year since 1971. Without thatcompilation it is not possible to add in agency expenditures forthird-party reimbursement, nor is it possible to estimateaccurately either the non-line-item expenditures of federalagencies or how block grants will be used. Thus at this time it is not possible toinclude the FY 79 figures in our tables and figures. This absenceof an overall analysis of the drug budget by either OMB or ODAPcould allow a return to a situation where agency drug budgetsdictate overall federal drug policy rather than the other wayaround. In the absence of an overall analysis of thefederal drug budget, the budget proposals for NIDA and DEA-thetwo principal federal drug agencies-may serve as a usefulsurrogate. NIDA's budget will increase to $275.2 million in FY79, a $13.1 million increase over FY 78. The greater part of thisincrease-$11.8 million-is earmarked for research, in response tothe preliminary recommendations of the president's Commission onMental Health. NIDA will continue to support a treatment capacityof 102,000, with a maximum local matching rate of 40 percent; thetreatment budget will remain at $161 million. The Drug Enforcement Administration willreceive a modest budgetary increase if President Carter's requestis approved; the DEA budget for FY 79 will be $193 million,compared to $188.5 million in FY 78. Funding for directenforcement activities will increase by $4.2 million to a totalof $137.2 million, while DEA's research and development programwill be cut by more than half to $2.3 million. Overall, the FY 79 federal drug budgetproposal seems to maintain the status quo. The total expenditurewill increase a little, as it has in each of the past severalyears; the relationship between treatment and enforcementapproaches will remain essentially unchanged. APPENDIX B: A Comment On The Role of State and LocalGovernments* The material for this appendix is largelydrawn from a paper by Peter Goldberg, "The Role of the Cityin Responding to the Problems of Drug Abuse," in RehabilitationAspects of Drug Dependence, ed. Arnold Schecter (Cleveland:CRC Press, 1977). In addition to the federal government, stateand local governments have been active in the drug field.However, the activities and directions of state and localgovernments vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, thus makingit impossible to generalize about these efforts as if they wereuniform. In recent years, organizations such as the NationalAssociation of State Drug Abuse Program Coordinators, theNational League of Cities, and U.S. Conference of Mayors haveattempted to catalog expenditures at the state and local leveland offer some general analysis of policy decisions and programdirections. The Drug Abuse Council cannot add substantively tothat information. One important issue, however, deservescomment, that of the intergovernmental system for planning andprogramming established by the Drug Abuse Office and TreatmentAct of 1972 (P. L. 92-255). The system, perhaps inadvertently,has resulted in a nearly total absence of any sustained,systematic large-city government participation in the state orfederal policy making and program planning processes. It is aninexplicable situation, since the nation's most severe drugproblems are concentrated in its large central cities. The conditions of heroin addiction and crimewhich initially prompted an expanded federal response to illicitdrug use in the early 1970s were concentrated in the largercities of this country. In fact, the increased federal responsewas required partly because the scope and extent of the problemsassociated with addictive drug use had far transcended theability of city governments to respond effectively. Also, stategovernments-whose legislatures were frequently dominated by ruraland suburban interests-were often reluctant to become extensivelyinvolved in what they felt was essentially a central-cityproblem. Before the passage of the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act of 1972, only New York, California, and Illinoishad undertaken major efforts in drug treatment and prevention. Nevertheless, when the federal governmentbegan its large-scale expansion of the drug effort, the stateslobbied for and succeeded in obtaining the major role in thateffort. The role of local government was ignored; largecities-where the social costs of illicit drug use are the mostsevere-were left out of the formal policyrnaking and fundingprocess. This imbalance between city and state responsibilitiescan be traced to the congressional authorization of annualformula (block) grants to states, detailed in Section 409 of theDrug Abuse Office and Treatment Act. In return for the blockgrants, Congress required each state to establish a drug abusecoordinating agency and annually prepare a drug abuse plan tomeet treatment and prevention needs. Thus Congress, in effect,required even nonurban states such as North Dakota, Vermont, andMontana-states having comparatively small drug problems-to plan adrug abuse response effort, while cities such as Newark, Detroit,New Orleans, Boston, and Los Angeles were ignored in thelegislation. The resulting problems were first of allpolitical. Large-city concerns and needs tend to beunderrepresented at the state level of government, where ruraland suburban interests are disproportionately powerful. Moreover,blacks and other minority populations have added yet anotherpolitical concern, most clearly articulated in a resolutionpassed by the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials inJune 1974. Whereas, unfortunately, the problems of drugabuse have disproportionately affected large numbers of Black andSpanish-speaking Americans, these minority populations tend to bemost underrepresented at the state level where drug abusepolicies are being increasingly formulated, thus creating a largediscrepancy between those most afflicted by the problems andthose establishing the policies and procedures to solve theproblems. In addition to these political concerns, thedrug problems themselves in rural and suburban areas are oftenquite different from those in the central city. While heroin maybe the major drug of abuse (alcohol excepted) in the largecities, other parts of a state are usually concerned with otherdrugs. And while treatment may be the most pressing need indealing with heroin addiction in the central city, the emphasisdesired or demanded by the rest of the state may be for educationand prevention programs. Although the larger cities may wantincreased funding for methadone programs, other areas of thestate where heroin is not a problem may be unsympathetic to thisuse of one addictive drug to treat another. In the finalanalysis, different units of government are bound to havedifferent needs, priorities, and philosophies, all justified fromtheir own perspectives. The imbalance between state and large-citydeterminations of problems and priorities has become furtheraggravated as the principal federal drug treatment and preventionagency, NIDA, has sought to become more reliant on state plans indetermining federal funding decisions. In fact, NIDA has recentlyannounced its intention to fund virtually all of its treatmentand prevention efforts through statewide services contracts withstate governments by 1979. It is argued that this will beadministratively efficient; but this increasing substitution ofstate decision making for federal does not augur well for thelarge cities, where drug and drug-related problems are mostsevere. In some instances a strong state role hasworked well; this is most often true in states where there are nolarge urban centers. But in many other instances, potentiallyserious problems between state and large-city governments haveimpeded the effective flow of funds and delivery of services.City organizations such as the National League of Cities and theU.S. Conference of Mayors have repeatedly expressed theirdissatisfaction with the lack of state responsiveness to largecity needs in the drug area. Representatives of a number oflarge-city governments have also voiced strong and specificcomplaints about this. There is clearly a need to make someadjustments in the state planning process so that plans moreadequately and appropriately allow for large-city needs andparticipation. Such adjustments can be made without dismantlingthe state planning system. NIDA and the cities need to communicate moredirectly on drug issues and learn more from one another. To anunfortunate extent federal drug policies are formulated withoutdiscussion or collaboration with local elected officials fromareas where drug and drug-related problems are particularlysevere. This situation must be remedied if our drug policies andprograms are to work more efficiently. NIDA needs to developmechanisms by which it can more aggressively and systematicallyseek large-city government input in its deliberations, and,conversely, cities need to develop a better understanding of whyNIDA does what it does. The concept of an Office of UrbanServices within the NIDA bureaucracy to facilitate these crucialinteractions would seem to have merit. Finally, NIDA should seriously considerinitiating a program to fund city coordinating agencies withresponsibility for developing city-wide drug abuse plans in anumber of cities with the highest concentrations of drug-relatedproblems. These plans should provide for interaction with thestate government. Cleveland needs such an agency and plan farmore than does the state of Idaho, Atlanta more than Vermont. A federal system that funds only state drugabuse plans and agencies is either focusing solely onadministrative ease or operating in ignorance of the actualproblems. Plans should not proliferate uncontrollably across thecountry, but if the federal government is to require planning itshould at least make certain that there will be directparticipation from those areas most afflicted and concerned. Anadditional benefit of funding city agencies would be that itwould give local elected officials a dependable and developedlocal source of advice and assistance on drug issues andproblems. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-15IA031-000652-B046-21http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fada2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131726 text/html 95235HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:17:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:50 GMTContent-length: 95017 Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts John R. Pekkanen When the city of San Francisco passed an ordinance n 1875banning the smoking o opium in opium dens." it marked thefirst time a law prohibiting the use of narcotics was enacted inthis country. Since then cities, states and the federalgovernment have enacted a great number of drug laws. Some havebeen stringent, others more lenient. Some were passed duringpolitically volatile periods when "get tough"approaches were thought to be the answer; others were passedduring calmer times when more moderate approaches were sought. To understand why we embarked on a course of prohibition forparticular drugs is a difficult and elusive undertaking, tooaffected by deeply rooted attitudes and prejudices to allow forcompletely dispassionate inquiry. Drug laws from their inceptionwere a special breed. In effect, the passage of these prohibitorylaws created crimes by definition; drug activities derived theircriminal label more from prevailing attitudes and prejudices thanfrom actual threats to persons or property. These were laws bywhich people could and did express social disapproval, and werenot in the tradition of laws enacted to protect us from those whosteal, murder, or commit fraud. They were the means by whichright and wrong were distinguished according to popular butarbitrary national values and mores. In many instances, a proposed drug law would begin as anattempt to control the use of a certain substance, such as opium,cocaine, or marijuana. The rhetoric surrounding the proposedantidrug law would usually call for the preservation ofpredominant social and moral values, and it would be offered as ameans of restoring those "lost" values. Frequently sucha law would be directed at an outcast or minority segment ofsociety identified with the use of the drug. I Supporters of thelaw would offer it as a solution to a wide range of social,moral, racial, political, and economic problems-from unemploymentand crime in the streets to preserving the white race. Early in the consideration of the Harrison Narcotic Act (thefirst major federal antinarcotics act2), there was somediscussion about the hazards of legislating morality, but thesecautions were soon put aside. In essence, the Harrison NarcoticAct was a tax law enacted to achieve a moral end, similar in thatregard to the Volstead Act prohibiting alcohol. Since then, druglaws and the enforcement policies which flow from them have neverbeen seriously challenged. In his study of alcohol prohibition, Symbolic Crusade: StatusPolitics and the American Temperance Movement,3 Joseph Gusfieldexamines the components of criminal law and separates them into"instrumental" and "symbolic" aspects.Applied to antidrug laws, the "instrumental" aspect iswhat the law states as its intention-i.e., the prevention of theuse and availability of certain drugs. The "symbolic"aspect may have an importance as great as or greater than that ofthe instrumental*: In the case of antidrug laws, part of thesymbolic function has been to define users of particular drugs asabnormal and to designate their behavior as criminal. When thislabelling process was attempted with alcohol prohibition as well, it failed because the number of alcohol users in the countrywas so large and diverse that no one group could be singled outand designated as "abnormal" exclusively because ofdrinking alcohol. *These two functions of the law were best exemplified by thereport of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,which called for the retention of laws against simple marijuanapossession but not enforcement of those laws. The law by itselfwould discourage use, it was argued, and not enforcing it wouldavoid stigmatizing those who did use the drug. However, the use of certain drugs, such as opium, heroin,and-until the 1970s-marijuana was most often primarily confinedto subgroups and minorities, whose separation and isolation weremore easily accomplished. This fact partly explains why onlycongressional approval was needed to ban narcotics and marijuana,while alcohol prohibition required a constitutional amendment,and why when antidrug laws have appeared to be unsuccessful theirtotal repeal has never been seriously considered, although repealwas possible with alcohol prohibition. In the material that follows, the law enforcement approach tothe control of certain drugs will be discussed from fiveperspectives: the development of the laws themselves; how theagencies charged with enforcing drug control laws have gone abouttheir task; the relationship between drug use and crime; a casestudy of the impact of the nation's "toughest" drugcontrol law, the New York State Drug Law Amendments of 1973; andthe impact of drug law enforcement on illicit drug-usingbehavior. Drug Control Laws and Policies Efforts to control certain drugs have come in cycles,focusing on specific drugs during specific periods. 4 Generally,the demand for tough drug control has been most vociferous duringperiods of economic or political turmoil in the United States.The antiopium crusade began during the depression of the 1870s;the anticocaine crusade came during a period of racial turmoil inthe South . 5 Federal sanctions against selected drugs toughenedconsiderably between 1915 and 1920, during the first "RedScare"; the prohibition of alcohol was of course alsoeffected during this period. Later, during the depression of the1930s, the entry of many Mexicans and Mexican-Americans into thelabor market in the Southwest appears to have been a major causeof the antimarijuana crusade and attendant laws. The creation ofthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) in 1930 established thepreeminence of law enforcement in the drug field, a fact whichhas not changed over the years. The FBN's initial major drugtargets were heroin and marijuana; this policy lasted for morethan thirty five years." In the 1940s drug control activities remained relativelystable. There were no new demands for harsh laws or policies.States adopted legislation comparable to the Harrison Act, themajor federal drug law, and this tightened the nation's drugprohibition policy, There were also outbreaks of concern over themisuse of legitimately produced drugs-amphetamines andbarbiturates were the most widely abused-but these drugs escapedthe full force of the antidrug effort. By 1950, however, theatmosphere had changed, and many voices demanded new, tougherantidrug laws.7 Between 1947 and 1950, an apparent increase in illicit druguse was reported among blacks and Puerto Ricans in many northerncities. This caused alarm, creating support for passage of a new,more stringent drug law in 1951. Commonly called the Boggs Actafter its sponsor, the late Representative Hale Boggs, it enactedthe harshest penalties for drug law violations to date . 8Historian David Musto notes in The American Disease, "HaleBoggs's bill, which contained mandatory sentences, was passed in1951 at the beginning of the McCarthy era and fears of Sovietaggression, the 'betrayal' of China to the Communists, andsuspicion of domestic groups and persons who seemed to threatenoverthrow of the government."" In 1956 an even moresevere federal narcotics bill was enacted which empowered a juryto impose the death penalty on anyone over the age of eighteenselling heroin to anyone Under the age of eighteen. 10 Severalstates also enacted extremely harsh laws during this period,imposing heavy penalties for both sellers and users. This "tough" approach was eventually moderated: themid-1960s marked the beginning of a more comprehensive approachto drug law enforcement. New criminal laws regulated"dangerous drugs"-i.e., legally produced hallucinogens,stimulants, and depressants. These laws were more moderate intone and substance, and marked a belated attempt at more uniformpolicy at the federal level for the control of legitimate andillegitimately produced drugs. The previous concern had beenexclusively with a very few illicit drugs like heroin, cocaine,and marijuana. The present era in drug law enforcement, an outgrowth of the1960s, was inaugurated during the Nixon administration whichorganized an intensified, coordinated federal antidrug program.This was the heralded "war on drug abuse."" TheComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970replaced the former crazy-quilt of criminal drug law statuteswhich had been gradually patched together since the beginning ofthe century. 12 Through the Controlled Substances Act portion ofthe legislation, psychoactive drugs were placed into fiveschedules according to their presumed potential hazards. Thefederal drug bureaucracy, which had gradually grown since the1920s, was restructured and further expanded. As important as these steps were in modernizing the Americanapproach to drug control and in moderating the Draconian criminalpenalties of the 1950s, the new era did not break significantlywith the past in any fundamental way. The law enforcementapproach to drug use remained fixed and, except for a relativelybrief period, continued to receive the bulk of federal dollarsexpended in the drug field. Popular notions about drugs were notsignificantly altered, nor were traditional responses seriouslyquestioned. The beliefs in the almost mystical power of illicitdrugs over people may have become more sophisticated, but theydid not change radically. Users of opiate drugs, instead of beingviewed merely as criminals, were now charitably viewed as"sick" criminals. But they were still viewed ascriminals, and still are. Perhaps one of the most important ideas to remain unchangedwas the belief in a direct link between illicit drugs and crime.This presumed link, which had been the basis for the harsh druglaws of the past, remained a permanent fixture. The nature ofthis assumed relationship-as is discussed in later sections ofthis chapter-has undergone some changes, but the basic belief ina causal link has not. Whatever the causes and motives behind the nation's druglaws, the inescapable conclusion from the more than one hundredyears of experience since the first prohibitory law was enactedis that they have not stopped or even diminished the use ofillicit drugs. For example, in 1924 the U.S. Public HealthService estimated the opiate addict population at two hundredfifteen thousands ; although imprecise, this figure is consideredto be the most reliable of that period. In 1976 the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) estimated the heroin addictpopulation at five hundred thousand; other recent studiesindicate that the figure for all types of heroin users may be twoto four million. 14 Allowing for population increases, there aremore heroin users today than there were a half century ago. Thesame appears to hold true for users of other illicit drugs. Because of such findings, our drug laws and policies are moreopenly questioned today than at any point in the past. On onehand there are those who argue that government has no right atall to intervene in the private lives of individuals. This viewholds that drug use is essentially a private act, and thattherefore government ought not intervene unless drug-taking leadsto socially disruptive or criminal behavior. A more pragmaticaspect of this position is the feeling that laws and policies cando little to diminish the supply of illicit substances because ofthe enormous profitability involved and the consequentdevelopment of highly organized "black market"distribution networks. It is argued that the government'sresources could be better used in attempting to change theconditions that contribute to illicit drug use-i.e., poverty,unemployment, and other social problems-than to continueself-defeating efforts to eliminate the supply and use ofparticular drugs. On the other hand, there are those who feel the government'santidrug effort is doing about as well as can be expected incutting back the supply of illicit drugs, short of abridgingeveryone's civil liberties. They argue that if law enforcementprograms did not attempt to diminish supply and frighten someindividuals from using drugs, our drug problems might be fargreater than they are. Then there are those who argue we are notdoing nearly enough, that more severe and repressive approachesand policies are needed if we are to combat and eradicate the"enemy, drug abuse." In its extreme form, this latterview holds that no price is too great to pay in order to achievethis end. However, much of the debate over drug control laws has failedto focus sufficiently on the difficulties involved in enforcingthem. Passing a drug law is only one part of a control effort;enforcing it is quite another. It is important to understand thateven when operating at maximum effectiveness, there are seriouslimits to what law enforcement agencies can achieve. One of the primary problems that American drug lawenforcement must face is that the drug laws and drug policieshave been consistently oversold by public officials. Burglarylaws are not expected to eliminate burglary, and penalties forarmed robbery are not expected to eliminate that crime; yet druglaws are expected to eliminate illicit drug sale and use- astandard has been set for drug laws that was never set for otherlaws. More has frequently been promised than could possibly bedelivered. Consequently, as long as illicit drug use haspersisted, the policies against it have been regarded by some asabject failures. What is needed in any discussion of drug controlpolicies is a realistic notion of what they can and cannotachieve, and what their costs and benefits are. Only when weunderstand this will the long cycle of overreaction to the use ofparticular drugs subside. Law Enforcement Activities Basically, there are two strategies by which law enforcementseeks to discourage illicit drug use: The first seeks to disruptand discourage use by enforcing domestic laws against drug useand internal trafficking; the second seeks to prevent supplies ofillicit drugs from entering the country, either by preventingtheir cultivation abroad or by intercepting shipments to theUnited States. The latter strategy is largely the work of federalagents, although state and local agencies may occasionallyparticipate. The efforts to control illicit drug use within theUnited States are conducted by federal, state, and local agents.Occasionally these different levels of government join forces andwork together; all too frequently, however, they actindependently, jealously guarding their "turf" (i.e.,their resources and sources of information) from one another. At the federal level the Drug Enforcement Administration(DEA), at present the chief drug enforcement agency, has overfour thousand employees, of whom over two thousand are agents. 15(While this number may sound impressively large, it merelyapproximates the size of the New York City Transit AuthorityPolice, a force that patrols the subways and buses in that city).Several other federal agencies play various roles in theenforcement of federal drug laws: Among these are the CustomsService, which attempts to screen incoming persons and freightfor illicit drugs; the Internal Revenue Service, which pursuestax law violations of illicit drug traffickers; the LawEnforcement Assistance Administration, which provides researchand funding support for state and local drug enforcement; and theU.S. Coast Guard, which patrols coastlines and harbor areas forillicit drug trafficking. At the state and local level there is a substantially largernumber of personnel actively engaged in drug enforcement-thepolice; but an exact count is not available, since regular-patrolmen generally enforce drug laws along with their otherduties. Special narcotics units have been established invirtually every major-city police department as well as in manystate police departments; most major cities also give some druglaw enforcement training to their uniformed patrolmen. The strategies for controlling both drug use and suppliesincorporate a number of variables. The analyses that followattempt to summarize each strategy and identify some of theircosts and benefits. Controlling Drug Use. Drug enforcement is unlike most othertypes of police enforcement activities where generally a crime iscommitted and reported and the police investigate, gatheringevidence and making their case. The victim is central to thisprocess; he or she initiates the police investigation; it isoften the testimony of the victim during the trial that convictsthe offender. In drug cases, police usually do not have victims on whom torely. Not only are there no complainants, but everyone involvedconspires to conceal the crime from the police. As a result mostillicit drug offenses go entirely undetected; the percentage ofviolations which result in arrest are extremely low.17 Of those drug violations which do result in arrest, more than75 percent are "spontaneous" arrests involving no priorpolice investigation. 18 These drug arrests are often incidentalto an another investigation. For example, if the driver of anautomobile is stopped for a traffic violation and the arrestingofficer sees marijuana or suspects its presence and findsevidence of a drug law offense, a drug arrest may follow. Sucharrests are not due to any overall drug enforcement strategy, butare rather the result of normal, day-to-day police enforcementactivities. This helps explain why the overwhelming number ofdrug arrests are for simple possession, with a majority of theseinvolving marijuana. Arrests for simple illicit drug possession have little if anyimpact on the overall availability of illicit drugs because theylargely fail to affect drug distribution. The major distributorsof illicit drugs conduct their drug transactions in secret, and,as in other activities involving drugs, there are nocomplainants. Major drug dealers have developed verysophisticated methods of concealment, including drop systems andother subterfuges. Even well-known dealers are usually able toavoid creating probable cause for arrest. Because of this secrecyand the absence of complainants, the fundamental problem policeface in making arrests for drug trafficking is proving thatsomething illegal took place. While this can be difficult enoughin cases of simple possession, it is extremely difficult withdrug trafficking, particularly in developing the so-called"high-level" cases. While many who use illicit drugsparticipate to some degree in drug distribution (whether forprofit or not), those who import and deal in large quantities ofparticular illicit drugs are not easy to identify, apprehend, orsuccessfully prosecute. Undercover Investigations. Narcotics officers at the federal,state, and local levels often work undercover, and may becomeparticipants in aspects of the offense in order to gathersufficient evidence to prove a crime has been committed. Thiswork is hazardous, time-consuming, and, as one former DeputyAttorney General told Congress, "a dirty, miserablebusiness.""' The most serious practical shortcoming ofundercover operations is that, despite the publicity suchoperations receive when successful, they result in the arrest ofonly a miniscule proportion of those engaged in major drugtrafficking. Moreover, each undercover operation is sotime-consuming, and the number of policemen with the temperamentand skill for this work so limited, that the percentage of majorarrests would not increase substantially even if every undercoveroperation were successful. These problems of investigation are as true at federal as atstate and local levels. In fact, one of the persistent criticismsof the federal drug enforcement effort is that the overwhelmingmajority of arrests are of relatively low-level dealers. A 1975analysis by the Government Accounting Office of 1974 DrugEnforcement Administration (DEA) arrests revealed that only 604(3.6 percent) of the total 16,796 arrests were Class I violators,and of these only 63 were convicted. 20 (Class I violators aremajor international drug traffickers, drug laboratory operators,or wholesalers.)" In addition, GAO found only 5 percent ofthe arrests to be Class 11 violators, a lesser but stillsignificant category of offenders. However, followingcongressional hearings and considerable public criticism, DEAappears to have made a major effort to pursue more Class I and Hoffenders even at the expense of overall arrest figures. DEAstatistics for 1976 show only 6,143 total drug arrests, but ofthese 15 percent were for Class I and 1 1. 9 percent for Class 11offenses. Still, nearly three-quarters of the arrests were ClassIII and IV arrests, a statistic that indicates that major drugtrafficking arrests continue to be elusive in spite of increasedefforts . 22 An important consequence of undercover operations is thatwith arrest and trial of the suspect the undercover officer'scover is "blown" and his usefulness in that line ofwork in that region is usually ended. This is a serious problem,because good undercover officers are few and far between.Undercover operations also pose a number of legal problems; forexample, defense attorneys often argue, sometimes successfully,that the undercover officer is guilty of "entrapment"by having enticed the defendant into committing the crime inquestion. Another hazard here is the potential for police corruption.The possibility of corruption through payoffs is always present,because the sums of money involved in illicit drug traffic areenormous-generally estimated to involve several billions ofdollars nationally per year-and because the salaries of policemenare generally rather low. Additionally, substantial amounts of"buy" money are provided by law enforcement agenciesfor this work; in fiscal year 1976, for example, the DEA budgetcalled for $9 million for "buy" money to be used inprocuring information and allowing agents to "buy into"drug transactions in the gathering of evidence .23 All major-cityand state narcotics enforcement agencies have substantial amountsof this "buy" money. With these great sums of money thepossibilities for corruption can be great. Temptation can beabetted by the fact that the undercover agent is operating in alawless environment where one's normal sense of right and wrongcan become distorted. In New York City the corruption ofnarcotics investigators reached serious proportions .24 After theKnapp Commission revelations, the New York City Police Departmentinstituted a procedure whereby any undercover officer on theStreet Crime Unit is required to obtain specific approval by asuperior officer to make a drug arrest, and, furthermore, thatarrest must be witnessed by the superior officer. This rathercumbersome policy is still in effect today. Not all forms of corruption involve money, however. Asmentioned above, there can also be a corruption of attitudecaused by a police officer's constant exposure to the mores ofthe underworld. In Buy and Bust Mark Moore writes, "They[undercover agents] will know more about the violation and theviolators they attack than police usually do, and will sometimeshave personal interests at stake in the arrests. This invitesthem to exercise their authority in accordance with theirintimate knowledge rather than what the law requires. 1125 Forexample, in some cases undercover police might protect certaindealers who have acted as informants and select others forarrest. Such choices are made not on the basis of law but uponpast collaboration or even friendship. Close relationships bredby undercover ' work can influence a police officer to change hisviews on the law, what it means, and his requirements to upholdit. 211 Intelligence Gathering. Many critics have argued that if drugenforcement agencies were to gather and organize intelligence ina more systematic way, more could be done to successfullyinvestigate major drug traffickers. Such intelligence presumablywould give more detailed information about the methods drugtraffickers employ and accordingly provide a better overallpicture of trafficking operations. However, the assumption thatbetter intelligence would lead to more successful enforcementhere is open to question. Nevertheless, this debate doeshighlight another basic problem: That drug enforcement agentstraditionally have been hostile toward intelligence functionsperformed by special units within their own agencies. As Moorenotes, "No investigator would be happy to admit [to anintelligence analyst] that he had not mined the files of hisorganization for every nugget of relevant information. 1117 Oneresult is that different agents with different items ofinformation, which if systematically collected and analyzed mightprovide greater information about drug transactions and networks,often do not share it. Thus the efforts of intelligence unitswithin the DEA and other drug enforcement agencies are oftenthwarted. I Lack of Coordination. Although many state and local policeagencies rely on federal help to train and establish theirnarcotics units, there is a notable absence of uniformity andcoordination between the various levels of law enforcementagencies. As a police chief in one large American city hasremarked, It's always been a problem over the years to sort out theroles of federal, state and local agencies. My obligations to thecitizens of my city are not the same as the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs [now the DEA], for example. They take asystems approach, then make a management by objectives analysis,they can target people and work on them. In the metropolitanpolice departments, such as this one, we're at the low rung ofthe law enforcement ladder, and we can't do that. We have to beresponsive to the citizen who calls in with just a meager amountof information but expects and is entitled to action on it. 28 Overlapping jurisdictions, as well as the different emphasesgiven to different drugs and to various aspects of enforcementmodels, have created conflict. As a result, some local policebelieve federal drug enforcement should confine itself tointerstate and international trafficking and should not involveitself in "local" investigations. While the basic assumption has been that local police willenforce laws against small-time street dealers and users, statepolice will enforce laws against the larger dealers, and thefederal government will concentrate on the major traffickers andwholesalers, this has not always been the case. The federalgovernment investigates cases throughout the country, sometimesinforming state or local police agencies and sometimes not doingso; its cases do not necessarily involve truly major interstateor international violations. Because of these overlaps, the threelevels of drug enforcement remain to this day uncoordinated,competitive, and at times conflicting. This continuing lack ofcoordination, coupled with the other pitfalls of domestic drugenforcement, have at times led to an acute sense of frustrationon the part of police, policymakers, and the public. As aconsequence, excessive measures periodically find support. Onerecent, well-known example of this process of frustration andoverreaction involved the now defunct Office of Drug Abuse LawEnforcement. ODALE: A Case History. The Office of Drug Abuse LawEnforcement (ODALE) was established in early 1972 by executiveorder of President Nixon and charged with the mission of wagingan even tougher "war" on illicit drug users and dealersthan had been attempted in the past.211 The brief history of thisshort-lived agency illustrates the excesses to which a "waron drugs" philosophy can lead. It also highlights thedifficult position of drug law enforcement in attempting toenforce the law justly without overstepping constitutionalsafeguards. ODALE was criticized from its inception for being an"election-year stunt" while being simultaneously laudedas a bold attempt to fight drug traffickers. ODALE was ostensiblycontrolled by the justice Department but actually operated bydirection of the White House. Its initial creation was somethingof a curiosity in that the federal government already had twocompeting agencies, the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs(BNDD) and the Customs Bureau, in the forefront of its drugcontrol effort. ODALE's potential for engendering yet morebureaucratic rivalry was soon realized; within the space of a fewmonths, the agency had eclipsed the other traditional federaldrug enforcement efforts in influence. 30 ODALE was staffed by employees from a number of federalagencies, including BNDD, Customs, the Internal Revenue Service(IRS), and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. Theagents from these departments were deployed into "strikeforces" which were authorized to use "no-knock"search warrants, court-authorized wiretaps, and other searchprivileges when "incidental to arrest." Furthermore,ODALE could forward the names of suspected drug traffickers to aspecial committee in IRS which could then initiate special auditsor investigations of them.31 ODALE received most of its funds from the Law EnforcementAssistance Administration (LEAA), which is empowered by Congressto fund state and local law enforcement units. While it was notwithin the authority of LEAA to directly fund ODALE, a federalagency, this barrier was skirted by having LEAA make grants tolocal police departments participating in drug raids with ODALEagents. This funding process also allowed ODALE to circumventbudget appropriation proceedings in Congress. These steps, whileapparently within the letter of the law, were not in its spirit,but they went largely unchallenged in the name of fighting"drug abuse. "32 One of ODALE's first acts was to establish the "heroinhotline," a toll-free number which people could call if theyknew or suspected someone of dealing in illicit drugs. Althoughthe "hotline" received abundant publicity itsaccomplishments in aiding drug enforcement were minimal at most.Only a few months after it was installed, "hotline"callers were told by a recording to call another number; the"hotline" was out of business .33 The excesses this new agency fostered came vividly to lighton the night of April 23, 1973 in Collinsville, Illinois, whenODALE agents broke into the house of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert J.Giglotto, asleep at the time, routed them out of bed, roughedthem up, and accused them of drug dealing. But the ODALE agentshad made a mistake and come to the wrong house. They made asecond mistaken raid in another home that very night. Theseevents led to the suspension of the involved agents. Eventuallythey were brought to trial on criminal charges, but wereacquitted.34 The adverse publicity generated by the Collinsville raidscrippled ODALE's effectiveness and power. But the creation ofthat agency and the extraordinary powers given to it demonstratehow the impulse to combat the use of particular drugs and theuncritical attitude accompanying that impulse can lead to anoverzealous approach which can seriously erode constitutionalsafeguards. The excesses of ODALE were almost predictable, as inpast instances when the climate for stamping out illicit drug usewas equally extreme. A number of questions surround ODALE even after itsbureaucratic demise. Was it created solely to combat illicit druguse? Why was such a unique agency with unique powers believed tobe needed? The answers to these questions are not and may neverbe clear, because of different interpretations of what ODALE wasor attempted to be. What does seem to be clear, however, is thatODALE represented one more attempt to allay public fears bystriking hard at illicit drug use with tough enforcement. What isalso clear is that in spite of the hoopla surrounding itsinception, ODALE's arrest statistics reveal that virtually everyindividual arrested by the agency was a minor, street-leveldealer of little or no consequence. 35 Controlling Drug Supplies. In addition to efforts to controlthe numbers of users and distributors of illicit drugs throughthe criminal justice process, the federal government also hassought to reduce the quantity of illicit drugs available for use.There are two ways American law enforcement agencies have soughtto control the supply of illicit drugs: intercepting them as theycome into the country, and destroying them at their source inother countries. Interdiction. Many of the illicit drugs used in this countryare produced in foreign nations. One exception is marijuana,which is grown both within and without the United States,although the bulk of it is produced in foreign countries; otherexceptions are synthetic psychoactive drugs produced inlaboratories (rather than refined from a harvested plant)-e.g.,amphetamines, barbiturates, and some hallucinogens. Cocaine andheroin, officially considered to be the major illicit drugs ofabuse in the United States, originate in other countries. Anobvious --some might say simplistic-drug control strategy is totry to prevent these illicit substances from reaching thiscountry. Upon closer examination, this strategy proves to be anawesome task. Anyone who has ever passed through American Customs at theCanadian or Mexican borders or our sea- or airports realizes thatthere is rarely any thorough inspection. The vast numbers whodaily cross into and out of American jurisdiction make thoroughinspection of every traveler a practical impossibility. Inaddition, American borders have traditionally been open;constitutional safeguards define the manner and circumstances ofsearches. Successful seizures of illicit drugs therefore dependmore on intelligence information than on the luck of randomsearches. This intelligence information is usually supplied byAmerican drug agents in foreign countries, who attempt toidentify drug traffickers to later be either arrested at theborder or kept under surveillance and arrested within the UnitedStates. * However, even with good intelligence information, preventingillicit drugs from entering this country is a difficult, indeednearly impossible task .311 When the estimated amount of illicitdrugs consumed in this nation is compared with amount seized atour borders or other ports of entry, it is clear that only a verysmall percentage of the drugs being smuggled into the country areconfiscated. It is estimated, for example, that from twelve to twentythousand pounds of high-purity heroin are smuggled into thiscountry each year"; but in fiscal year 1974 only 115 poundsof high-purity heroin was seized at all U.S. borders and ports.This means that, combining this with the amount of heroin seizedinternally by the authorities in domestic operations, only 670pounds of heroin were confiscated that year .38 By fiscal year1976, after intensive effort, domestic seizures had increased toa total of 1,124 pounds of heroin, still far short of the totalincoming amount. The publicity accorded these seizures, however,often has conveyed the impression that law enforcement agenciesare making major inroads against illicit drug smuggling. To alarge extent this publicity has been generated by the agencyinvolved in the seizure, for both political and bureaucraticreasons. Perhaps the most widely used technique for embellishing theimportance of a seizure of illicit drugs is to state the"street value" of the seized drug.311 A seizure offifteen pounds of heroin, therefore, might not be merely afifteen-pound seizure, but a seizure of "thirty milliondollars' worth of drugs." The "street value"figure is elastic and sometimes exaggerated; it often reflectsthe most optimistic price a dealer might possibly ask for hisdrugs. This is analogous to estimating the value of rustledcattle by the price they would bring as steaks at the bestrestaurants. What is omitted in these claims of the "streetvalue" of drugs seized is the fact that between $5 and $11billion worth of illicit drugs is sold in this country each year.40 Thus, $30 million or even $300 million, while significant, isstill but a tiny fraction of the total, and has little if anyimpact on the total amount of illicit sales. However, whenseizures drop, enforcement agencies frequently also use thedecline to indicate the success of their efforts. *Additionally, international interdiction also has includedinvestigations by U.S. agents abroad in cooperation with foreigngovernments, and the arrests of drug traffickers in certaincountries. However, U.S. agents are now prohibited by law fromparticipating in the arrest of individuals in foreign countries. By this self-serving logic, the drug law enforcement agenciesnearly always can appear to be successful. Although drug seizure data have often been misused bycompeting drug agencies to enhance their public images, seizurescan have a disruptive effect and present an economic risk to drugtraffickers. In addition, limited amounts of these drugs are ofcourse kept out of the illicit market. Historically, border interdiction has been a major source ofrivalry among the federal agencies charged with controllingillicit drugs-specifically, between the Customs Bureau and thejustice Department's drug agencies, from the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to thepresent Drug Enforcement Administration." Governmentreorganizations, as well as a number of other attempts toreconcile these disputes-such as specifying which internationalareas each agency should be responsible for-have not completelysucceeded in quieting this rivalry, although DEA's incorporationof some of the drug enforcement duties of Customs has certainlyallayed it. These jurisdictional disputes have appeared at many criticalpoints in the federal drug enforcement effort. For example, whendrug agents in a foreign country obtain information regarding asignificant drug-smuggling attempt, this information wouldideally be relayed to the U.S., in order to effect an arrest onU.S. territory; here, however, the federal drug law enforcementprocess often broke down. In some cases Customs would insist thatthe drugs be intercepted at the border, to make certain they didnot enter the country, while FBN, BNDD, or DEA would insist thatthe smuggler be allowed through the border, whence he might leadto "higher ups" in the smuggling operation. In point offact, however, many times the true reason for these differenceswas the desire of each agency to make the drug seizure and arrestitself. The competing agencies eventually began circumventing oneanother, refusing to reveal what they were doing or whom theywere investigating. Sometimes one agency would deliberatelyinterrupt the investigation of another with a premature arrest.In one celebrated instance, two agencies, unknown to one another,were involved in the same investigation; in a showdown shootingerupted, with agents from two federal agencies of the UnitedStates government mistakenly shooting at each other." Howoften disruptions of this kind occurred is difficult to estimate,but it is clear that the rivalry was a serious impediment toeffective federal drug control and an embarrassment to thegovernment generally. Another problem with border interdiction is simply that ourborders with both Mexico and Canada are so easily accessible;trying to make them less accessible in order to seize more drugswould not only erode freedom of entrance and egress, but probablywould not work anyway. As noted, the major border drug seizuresgenerally result from intelligence information supplied to borderagents. Few illicit drugs are uncovered in random searches, asOperation Intercept-an attempt to cut off drug supplies at theMexican border-amply demonstrated in September 1969. That effortaffords another illustration of the ineffectiveness of extrememeasures taken in the name of fighting illicit drugs. Operation Intercept: A Case History. The Mexican border hastraditionally been a major trafficking point, both because largequantities of illicit drugs are produced in Mexico and becausethe 1,945-mile border is mostly unguarded. In addition to bridgeand river crossings, it is believed that 200 aircraft carryingillicit drugs daily fly illegally from Mexico into the UnitedStates. 43 In September 1909 President Nixon ordered "the country'slargest peacetime search and seizure operation by civilauthorities" along the United States-Mexico border. 44 Twothousand Customs and border patrol agents began systematicallysearching all cars and persons coming from Mexico into the UnitedStates. There were delays of several hours in what is normally avery quick crossing process over the border. Individuals whoappeared suspicious or argumentative were often stripped andbodily searched. The tourism traffic between the two countrieswas seriously interrupted. And although more than five millionpeople passed over this border during the three weeks OperationIntercept was in full gear, virtually no heroin or any otherillicit drug was confiscated. In defense of the project, thegovernment later explained that its primary intention was not tointerdict drugs at the border, but rather to pressure Mexico intoeradicating its crops of marijuana and Opium.41 While it may havehad this effect eventually, the project had little direct impacton illicit drug trafficking. Elimination of the Supply. The most recent major Americansupply reduction strategy is "eradication at thesource." This policy was created in part because of the lackof success in controlling supply through traditional domesticenforcement and international interdiction and in part becauseadvanced technology seemed to make it more feasible than before.In brief, the objective is to eliminate the crops which furnishillicit drugs to the American market. Bolivia, Peru, and Columbia are the major U.S. sources ofcocaine, while opium (the raw material for heroin) is grown inmany countries throughout the world, including Thailand,Cambodia, Vietnam, Mexico, Turkey, India, and Iran. Marijuana isgrown throughout Mexico and Central and South America in additionto the United States. However, heroin is the major drug priorityof the federal government, and the most advanced"eradication at the source" program underway now isagainst the opium poppy. Although substantial amounts ofcocaine-from fifteen to one hundred tons annually-regularly flowinto the United States, cocaine remains a lower priority .411 Nomajor cocaine eradication program has been attempted, because ofthe hardy nature of the coca plant (from which cocaine isderived) and because these plants are grown near drinking watersupplies and closely intermingled with food crops, makingeradication programs extremely difficult if not impossible toaccomplish in safety. Marijuana, despite official disclaimers ofinterest, results in the greatest annual seizures47 and is theobject of current American-supported eradication efforts inMexico .41 The key to any eradication program's success is thecooperation of the foreign government in whose country the drugis grown and the ability of that government to effect aneradication policy in its rural areas. Basically, the theory oferadication rests on the simple premise that if opium poppies ormarijuana plants are-eliminated in sufficient numbers the drugthey produce will also be largely eliminated. To this end, theUnited States now actively participates in eradication programsfor both of these illicit drugs. Opium poppies are grown in many regions of the world; nospecial climate or soil conditions are needed. The mainrequirement is cheap, abundant manual labor to do the painstakingwork of harvesting. It is estimated that only sixty to onehundred tons of raw opium are required each year to supply theentire illicit U.S. market with heroin, an amount which could beproduced from only ten square miles of opium poppies." (Onehundred tons of opium yields approximately ten tons of pureheroin5O; the raw opium, which is extracted directly from theopium poppy, is converted into a morphine base and then intoheroin by a relatively simple cooking and chemical-bondingprocess.) There are two other significant factors which work againstthe success of the eradication strategy. First, the opium poppyhas a long tradition in many cultures where it is grown; it isused for fodder, fuel, oil, and as a pain-killing agent. In manyregions of the world indigenous families have been growing opiumpoppies for centuries. Second, opium poppies are a valuable cashcrop in those regions. Even when sold legally, the poppy cropssupport many farmers and their families. There are few substitutecrops that will earn more per unit of land.51 Although the United States has encouraged worldwideprohibition of illicit opium cultivation through bilateral andmultilateral agreements for more than sixty years, these effortshave largely failed. One of the reasons for this is that ourprohibition of heroin has inflated the price of the drug, therebymaking it even more profitable to cultivate opium poppiesillegally. In 1971 this country launched a major effort to restrict thecultivation of foreign opium when it reached an agreement withTurkey to ban the cultivation of opium poppies there. In return,the United States agreed to reimburse the Turkish government $35million for lost revenues. (Ultimately, only part of this amount was actually paid toTurkey. )52 Although the United States selected Turkey as thesite for trying its new policy because Turkish opium was believedto account for 80 _percent of the illicit heroin used in theU.S., there was no way to verify this estimate, since it isnearly impossible to trace heroin back to its original source. 53It is in fact uncertain that Turkish opium poppies did supply 80percent of American heroin, since it is also believed that Turkeygrew only about 8 percent of the world's opium poppies.54 Inaddition, the existence of other opium-growing areas and theprofitability of the American heroin trade would make thelong-term impact of such a ban questionable; other countriesgrowing larger amounts of opium had controls as lax as Turkey's,and much of the opium from these countries also found its wayinto the black market. It has also been suggested that Turkey wasselected because, as a NATO ally, it was more susceptible to U.S.leverage than many other countries. Whatever the reasons for choosing Turkey, the results of theopium ban not only failed to stop the flow of heroin into thiscountry but seriously strained relations between the twocountries until Turkey unilaterally rescinded the ban in 1975 .5-1 In place of the opium-growing ban, the Turkish government atthis time initiated a centralized poppy-harvesting method calledthe "poppy straw process": This process requires thatthe opium poppies be harvested whole rather than lanced, meaningthat the raw opium is brought to secure, central locations beforethe extraction process is carried out, and forbids farmers tolance the poppy pods themselves. This change has reduced if noteliminated the export of illicit Turkish opium. This stoppage ofTurkish opium, however, led to a substantial increase in illicitheroin from Mexican sources. As one study noted, Although the opium ban in Turkey, together with a majorenforcement effort in France which broke up a ring of French andFrench-Corsican chemists and traffickers in 1973, did put atemporary crimp in the supply of heroin in the U.S., Mexicanopium growers and traffickers rapidly took over the market. By1975 the U.S. government was declaring that over 80 percent ofthe heroin available in the U.S. came from Mexico, instead ofTurkey. " As the illicit Turkish opium supply dwindled and the price ofheroin rose in response, the economics of heroin trafficking thusbecame even more favorable, and new suppliers were attracted toit. For example, in opium-producing countries an investment of$250 now buys one ounce of 90 percent pure heroin; when cut withforty dollars' worth of quinine, thereby converting the originalounce of heroin into one kilo of 21/2 percent purity (an averagelevel for American heroin), the value becomes $15 per gram, or atotal of $15,000 for the original investment of $290. 57 Theseeconomics keep the international heroin market flourishing andmake significant and lasting eradication extremely difficult toaccomplish. Mexican heroin-noted for its brown color, a result of therefining process which has no effect on the quality of theheroin-quickly filled the vacuum created by the Turkish poppyban. In fact, heroin is a great economic boon to regions innorthern Mexico; that mountainous and largely inaccessible regionproduces some twenty tons of heroin a year. As noted in onereport on the Mexican heroin trade, Assuming, however, that only the 10 tons of heroin (from thetri-state area) reached the border where it would sell in 1975 at$45,000 a kilo (border value), the value of that crop alone wouldbe $450 million. The heroin crop alone is thus Mexico's mostvaluable commodity. Sugar, shrimp, coffee and cotton, the nextfour most valuable commodities, do not total $450 milliontogether. '8 In response to this new influx of heroin, the United Statesand Mexico agreed in 1973 to attempt another type of eradicationstrategy. Essentially, the United States agreed to providetechnical assistance and equipment for a herbicide-sprayingprogram to eradicate illicit Mexican drug producing crops.Although marijuana was included, the opium poppy was the primarytarget of the eradication program from the American point ofview. This program remains the United States' most ambitiouseradication effort. 59 During the early phases of the program less than ten thousandopium poppy fields per year were destroyed manually. These tenthousand fields represented approximately three to four thousandacres. In November 1975 aerial spraying began, and by 1976 thetotal number of fields reportedly destroyed had risen to twentythousand. In 1977, some forty seven thousand poppy fields,representing an estimated fourteen thousand acres, weredestroyed. This increase was primarily due to the change frommanual to aerial herbicide spraying.60 The spraying program is conducted year-round and affectslarge sections of Mexico, including nearly half of the westerncoast. At the present time the herbicide paraquat is used toeradicate marijuana-a major goal of the Mexican government-andthe chemical "2,4-D," is used on opium poppies. Theprogram is assisted by the U.S. government in a number of ways. AState Department official recently described the Mexicaneradication effort to a congressional committee thus: The principal forms of State Department-administered supportto the Mexican drug effort have included the furnishing ofaircraft and telecommunications equipment, together with therequisite training to enable the Mexicans to use them in modernapplications to drug detection, poppy eradication, andenforcement work. Our technical assistance together with certaincommodities, is also helping them to establish and administer anetwork of forward bases in the important eradication areas andto improve intelligence collection, retrieval, and analysis.Training and salary supplements are provided to aid. the Mexican]Federal judicial Police to develop and hold a cadre of qualifiednarcotics agents."' The United States provided Mexico with approximately $50million in assistance funds for marijuana and opium poppy controlfrom 1973 to 1977. Proposed assistance for 1978 was estimated tobe about $13.3 million. Most of these funds are used to purchaseaircraft and support services for the aerial eradication program.Aircraft supplied by the United States includes more than fortyhelicopters and thirty-five fixed-wing aircraft. In addition,some twenty to twenty-five DEA agents are assigned full time withthe Mexican eradication effort to provide technical assistance.112 As an enforcement strategy, eradication at the source mayhave some advantages over other reduction and control strategies.First, there is less potential for domestic police corruption.Second, as compared to interdiction and undercover efforts it isa relatively inexpensive way of preventing illicit drugs fromentering the United States. However, the criteria for determining the success of such anoperation are uncertain. For instance, it is not known whatquantity of illicit drugs were smuggled into this country fromMexico either before the program or now. However, the StateDepartment and the Drug Enforcement Administration report thatMexican brown heroin, which formerly accounted for 80 to 85percent of the heroin available in this country, has dropped to60 to 65 percent of the total. Also, the retail and wholesaleprices of heroin have reportedly increased as much as 50 to 75percent along the U.S.-Mexican border, and increases of as muchas 150 percent have been noted. 113 However, a rise in heroinprices is not in itself a totally accurate indication of theeffects of a control strategy on heroin use. In fact, higherheroin prices may be, at best, a mixed blessing. Eradication policies, when they successfully interruptillicit drug production, as the Mexican opium poppy program hasapparently done, may reduce the American heroin supply for atime, perhaps two or three years. In 1977, heroin-related deathsdropped approximately 40 percent in this country, a possibleindication that the eradication program was having a beneficialeffect.114 It was also reported by enforcement officials thatAmerican heroin supplies in 1978 were at their lowest level inseveral years; however, they admit they have little hard evidenceon which to base that estimate. Moreover, as will be discussedlater, reducing the heroin supply may lead to other socialproblems. There are a number of possible side-effects to such aneradication program which must also be considered. For example,Mexican marijuana sprayed with paraquat has reached the UnitedStates; samples seized near the border after the eradicationprogram began showed that 21 percent were contaminated withsignificant levels of paraquat.115 It has been indicated thatparaquat may pose a significant health danger to those who ingestit. The Secretary of the Department of Health, Education, andWelfare announced a National Institute on Drug Abuse study inMarch 1978. The report's preliminary findings suggest that if anindividual smokes three to five heavily contaminated marihuanacigarettes each day for several months, irreversible lung damagewill result. The report cautions, however, that there could be arisk of lung damage for individuals who use marihuana less oftenor in smaller amounts. Although these results are preliminary,the report concludes that Paraquat contamination may pose aserious risk to marihuana smokers. 66 Although one might argue that anyone who uses an illegalsubstance like marijuana must bear the consequences and therisks, the fact remains that as many as forty-five millionAmericans have tried marijuana and approximately eleven millionare regular users. The preponderance of medical evidence to dateshows that marijuana is a relatively harmless intoxicant whenused moderately. Therefore, it seems ironic that an officialprogram may itself produce a serious health risk for theindividual smoker, when the ostensible reason for prohibition inthe first place was to protect users from harming themselves. The eradication strategy has another shortcoming as well:Experience has shown that as one opium supply system isdiminished, another develops to take its place, at even moreattractive profits due to the rise in heroin prices caused by thetemporary shortage. Shortly after the Mexican eradication programbegan, for example, white heroin from the "GoldenTriangle" in Southeast Asia began to enter the country. Drugenforcement officials suspect that many Turkish nationals areinvolved in this Southeast Asian traffic, which suggests that theTurkish opium ban may have been more effective with the crop thanwith the traffickers. There is a larger problem, however, which holds the greatestpotential danger. If the country designated for crop eradicationefforts-in this case Mexico-is not part of a vigorous ongoingprogram, then its illicit opium production will probably berevived after the eradication efforts slow or stop. And it mayrevive at a time when other areas of the world are also producinglarge amounts of illicit heroin for the U.S. market. Then, ratherthan facing illicit heroin smuggling from only one major area,this country could be faced with two or more major supplysources. This possibility remains a strong one, because theeradication program depends upon the internal policies andpolitics of foreign governments, any one of which for any reasoncould end existing agreements and permit the former state ofaffairs to reappear. Drugs and Crime The persistent belief that illicit drug use is inextricablylinked to crime has traditionally been advanced as a reason forlaws and policies against particular drugs. A 1972 survey by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse found that 58percent of adults believed that marijuana users often commitcrimes they would not have committed had they not used marijuana.In that same survey, more than 90 percent of those interviewedbelieved that, in the commission's words, "Heroin usersoften commit crimes to get the money to buy more heroin. -117 Crimes that relate to illicit drugs can generally be placedinto four categories."" Two of these are not germane tothis discussion; these are crimes among individuals involved inthe illicit-drug distribution system-e.g., drug or money theftsby one drug dealer from another-and the crimes of simply using,possessing, or selling the drug itself, activities which arecriminal by definition, since they are illegal. Generally, the perceived drug and crime relationship whichmost concerns the public falls into two basic categories. Thefirst category involves the pharmacological effect of a drug onthe user. Historically, the presumed pharmacological connectionbetween illicit drug use and assaultive crime has been theimpetus behind antidrug laws. However, the evidence to date showsthat alcohol and secobarbital-both legally produced psychoactivesubstances-are the drugs most likely to be involved withsubsequent assaultive behavior. There is no substantial evidenceto link the use of any other drug, licit or illicit, withassaultive crime. Some stimulant drugs, such as the amphetamines,have reportedly led to aggressive behavior in some individuals,but there is insufficient evidence to show a causal link betweentheir use and assaultive crime. The second category consists of revenue-producing crimes likeburglary, shoplifting, and larceny. More recently, the use ofheroin has been linked to crimes of this sort. The assumption isthat the use of heroin invariably results in addiction; thatheroin addicts require ever-increasing amounts of the drug; andthat, due to the high cost of the drug on the American market,they must commit various crimes to support their use. As pointedout by the press and electronic media, the stereotypic portraitof the heroin user is of a dishevelled, trembling individualwithout motivation or legitimate source of income. However, whilethere is evidence to suggest that many heroin users may commitproperty crimes to support use, 70 nobody really knows how muchcrime is actually committed to obtain money to support heroinhabits. Police and court records do not contain this information,and estimates-which are not particularly reliable-vary, callingit anywhere from 10 to 50 percent of all revenue-producingcrimes, depending upon the type of offense and the location .71 A survey by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration often thousand inmates of correctional facilities concluded that 13percent of the inmates had used heroin at the time of theirarrest. The same survey estimated between 13 and 60 percent ofincarcerated criminals to have been heroin users ' 12 Althoughthis kind of data suggests links between heroin use and crime,nothing was established in that survey to demonstrate that theseindividuals began to commit crimes because of their heroin use,nor does the study indicate whether the correctional populationsurveyed was typical of all those arrested, or of all committingcrimes. It may indicate a tendency to jail heroin users indisproportionate numbers. The studies which indicate that after the onset of opiateaddiction individuals generally increase their criminal activitycome closest to demonstrating a causal link between drug use andcrime .73 These studies suggest that although an individual mayhave been a criminal before he used heroin, his heavy use led toan increase in criminal activity to meet the new income need. Onits face, this implies a connection between heroin use and crime.However, there is an across-the-board increase in crime among menbetween ages eighteen and twenty-five, irrespective of drug use.74 Thus, any data suggesting increased crime because of heroinuse would have to correct for the general increase in crime forthis age bracket. The evidence relating to a heroin-crime link could best bedescribed as showing that regular, heavy opiate use in the UnitedStates probably means a higher rate of revenue-producing crime bythe addict. Because of its broad political appeal, however, thisconnection has been repeatedly overstated and even misrepresentedto support tough enforcement policies. For example, GovernorRockefeller of New York told the legislature, by way ofintroducing a "get tough" drug law, that addicts were"robbing, mugging, murdering day in and day out for theirmoney to fix their habit. "75 The state estimated that drugaddicts committed a total of $6.5 billion per year in crime. ffthat were in fact the case, it would have meant that theseaddicts were committing on the order of 44 million robberies,muggings, and murders each year in New York to support theirhabit, 400 times more than all of the reported crimes in NewYork, well beyond any conceivable total of reported andunreported.crimes in that state .711 Other data indicate that such figures had little factualbasis. The Federal Bureau of Investigation's 1971 Uniform CrimeIndex reported a total of $1.3 billion in theft in 1970 for theentire nation. Thus, New York State's claim of $6.5 billion incrime losses for New York alone exceeded the national figure byfive times .77 Another study, an economic analysis by the HudsonInstitute of New York of the extent of heroin use nationwide,estimated that in 1970 there were 250,000 addicts who wereresponsible for a maximum cf $1.7 billion in crime .78 The New York figures disseminated by Governor Rockefeller'soffice were misleading in another important respect. In New YorkCity, which is generally acknowledged to have more illicit druguse than any other American city, only a small percentage of the110,000 reported crimes in 1973 (the year of the"tougher" New York drug law's passage) were attributedby police to heroin users. The New York Police Departmentestimated only 4.4 percent of those arrested for felonies againsta person-which would include robbery, muggings, and murder-couldbe classified as heroin users, and only a small percentage ofthose users could be classified as addicts .79 In a 1974 study by the Crime Analysis Unit of the New YorkCity Police Department it was found that among arrested criminalheroin users and nonusers, the 'rates of property crime wereabout the same, suggesting that there is little difference inpatterns of property crime between them. However, the percentageof nonusers who committed serious crimes against a person wassubstantially higher than for heroin users.80 A Hudson Institutestudy reported even lower figures for assaultive property crimesamong heroin users in New York City. It reported that less than 2percent supported their heroin use by either robbery ormuggings.81 These studies call into question the more dramatic statementsabout the extent of crime committed by those who use illicitdrugs, particularly heroin. It does seem that property crimesare. committed by some unknown proportion of regular heavy heroinusers not as a result of the drug itself but of the high cost ofobtaining it in America's black market. Little hard statisticalevidence exists to show a cause-and-effect relationship betweenthe use of any drug and criminal behavior. The Impact of Demand and Price. One goal of drug enforcementis to cut back the supply of heroin and thereby raise the streetprice, which in theory will drive heroin addicts into treatment.This concept has proved to be more unpredictable and complex thansimple cause-and-effect scenarios generally concede. There arestudies which demonstrate that such law enforcement policies maybe a double-edged sword, at least in the short run. A study of heroin prices in Detroit indicates that as heroinprices rise because of diminished supply there is a consequentincrease in property crime. The study, performed by the PublicResearch Institute of the Center for Naval Analyses noted, The relationship between drug addiction and criminality iscomplex and, because of the lack of data, hard to supply. Thisstudy has shown that the level of property crime in Detroit is inpart affected by the price of heroin. When the price rises, crimerises. When the price falls, crime falls. This finding supportsthe general hypothesis that criminal heroin users as a class tryto maintain their level of consumption in the face of priceincreases, and that they rely partly on property crime for theadditional funds. The level of personal crime is little affectedby the price of heroin. 82 The Detroit study also found that the areas hardest hit bythe crime increases were the poor neighborhoods. It said,"We have preliminary evidence that poor people arevictimized by addict criminals; thus, law enforcement policiesthat tend to raise the price of heroin hurt this income class."83 The impact of many national policy shifts is often feltmost acutely in neighborhoods with the least political power;this phenomenon is particularly profound with drug policies. The reason why diminished heroin availability may lead tomore crime relates to the economics of the illicit heroin market,which lies at the raw edge of laissez-faire capitalism. It restson the fundamental economic principle of supply and demand: Whenthe supply is less, the price is more. It should be kept in mind,however, that supply is but one factor governing the price ofheroin; the purity of the drug and experience of the dealer, aswell as other factors, also affect its price. Supply of the drugremains, however, one of the strongest single influences onprice. A 1971 East Coast dock strike, for example, is believedresponsible for a temporary heroin shortage and a consequent risein street-level prices. After settlement of the strike, suppliesincreased and prices dropped, from a high in New York ofsixty-two dollars per gram (for a two-gram purchase at 10 percentpurity) to fifty dollars, all over a period of three months. 84 The predicted crime increase is of course based on the ideathat if it costs more for a heroin user to support his use and hehas no other income sources than crime, he will need to commitmore crimes to support use at the same level. Also, because manyusers support themselves by selling small quantities of drugsthere is the possibility that they could turn to other forms ofcrime besides dealing. The American experience in Vietnam in attempting to eradicateuse of a drug without fully considering the possible consequencesis also instructive. When the army clamped down on marijuana usethe demand for a drug among soldiers who had used it did notdecrease; when they could not get marijuana, they turned in largenumbers to another easily purchased and more easily concealeddrug-heroin. It was a classic example of attempting to controlsupply without addressing demand.,"* *The Vietnam drug experience also underscores other importantpoints about illicit drug use, i.e., the setting and theavailability. The setting in Vietnam, at once boring and verydangerous, created a situation which encouraged many individualsto use drugs there. Also, the fact that drug supplies were soplentiful contributed to their widespread use. Despite these occurrences the notion persists that use ofillicit drugs can be brought under control with enforcementpolicies, and that bringing it under control will in greatmeasure solve the crime problem. In part, this notion persistsbecause of the common stereotype of the heroin user as anunscrupulous individual willing to commit any crime for his nextfix. Like all stereotypes, it does not encompass the diversity ofthe individuals who use drugs compulsively. Many illicit drugusers and opiate addicts hold steady, legitimate jobs. Not allheroin users are, as previously assumed, heroin"addicts." Some, perhaps many, enjoy the euphoriceffects of heroin but do not have a compulsive need forit."' Many, perhaps most, of these would not considerstealing in order to buy their drugs. These occasional heroinusers, sometimes called "chippers," may, ifmathematical projections are correct, outnumber compulsive heroinusers by as much as six to one. 117 The very notion that they canexist is frequently met with skepticism because it is contrary tothe well-entrenched belief that to use heroin is to be addictedto it. Because heroin users are a diverse group with no uniformpatterns of drug use and widely different ways of earning money,one cannot simply multiply estimated users by a single monetaryfigure to arrive at an accurate estimate of the amount of crimethey commit. It is interesting, however, to speculate on whatmight happen to the crime rate if no heroin were available inthis country. The Nixon administration, which like otheradministrations before it adopted the conventional assumption ofa direct link between heroin and crime in many of its publicutterances, did not find such a link in a private study itcommissioned. While stating publicly that American drug-relatedcrime amounted to $18 billion a year, a 1971 White House DomesticCouncil decision paper circulated within the Executive Officenoted, "Even if all drug abuse were eradicated, there mightnot be a dramatic drop in crime statistics on a national level,since much crime is not related to drug abuse. -811 The difficulty of threading through all of the data on drugsand crime and arriving at any certainties will persist, as willthe unpredictability of the effects of various enforcementpolicies. Despite these uncertainties, however, the drug-crimeissue often invokes emotional responses having little to do withthe facts. It is therefore likely that the presumed drug-crimelink will continue to inspire "get tough" approaches todrug law enforcement in the future. The New York Drug Law During the early 1970s, a period when the country was greatlyconcerned about illicit drugs, New York State embarked on thestrictest "get tough" enforcement approach to illicitdrugs in the country. It is difficult to discern with precisionhow much of the zeal for the new law came from an angry andfrustrated citizenry and how much came from the state's leaders,or how much they coincided. In any case, the new law receivedwide national publicity and was passed amid bold promises that itwould squarely address the drug problem in that state. There was general agreement that the practice of the 1960s ofdiverting low-level drug users into treatment and meting outharsher penalties for higher-level traffickers had largelyfailed. New York had heavily committed its resources to"civil commitment" during the 1960s, a prograindescribed -at the time as a model for other states to adopt.However, 1972 overdose deaths in New York were six times greaterthan they had been in 1960; the tougher new laws were regarded bymany as a solution. The new legislation, which went into effect on September 1,1973, had two principal objectives. First, it sought to frightenillicit drug users out of using and drug dealers out oftrafficking. Second, it aimed to reduce crimes commonlyassociated with drug addiction, i.e., burglaries, robberies, andtheft; it was believed that potential illicit drug users would befrightened off by the law and that hardened criminals would begiven long prison sentences, thus reducing the crime rate.119 The new law was aimed primarily at heroin trafficking, inparticular at the lower-level "street" dealers. The lawdivided-heroin dealers into three groups, placed them in thehighest felony category in the state, and required minimumperiods of imprisonment plus mandatory lifetime parolesupervision for each group. The groups were: I. The highest level dealers. Those who sell one ounce ormore, or possess more than two ounces. These dealers weresubjected to the most severe penalty: a prison sentence ofindefinite length, but with a minimum of between fifteen andtwenty-five years and a lifetime maximum. II The middle level dealers. Those who sell one-eighth of anounce or more, or possess one or two ounces. These offenders weresubjected to prison sentences of indefinite length, with aminimum term of between six and eight-and-one-third years, and alifetime maximum. III. Street level dealers, also referred to as"sharer-pushers." Those who sell less than one-eighthof an ounce or possess up to an ounce with the intent to sell.These dealers were made liable to prison sentences of indefinitelength, with a minimum term of between one year and eight-andone-third years, and a lifetime maximum.110 The mandatory minimum prison sentences were made a majorprovision of the New York law, even though such sentences hadpreviously been abandoned in federal and state drug laws.Restrictions on plea bargaining were another controversial aspectof this law; a person indicted on a low-level felony charge wasnot permitted to plead guilty to a misdemeanor, a provision whicheventually led to court congestion and a slowdown of the judicialprocess as well as precluding any cooperation of suspects withpolice seeking information on higher-level dealers and suppliers. New York State became in effect a laboratory in which theeffectiveness of a "get tough" drug law could beexamined. By comparing the drug-related statistics for New Yorkbefore and after the new law went into effect, and by examiningsimilar statistics from neighboring states whose laws had notchanged, comparisons could be drawn and evidence could beweighed. A study commissioned by the Association of the Bar ofthe City of New York to find out the effects of the law concludedthat neither heroin use nor the crime commonly associated with itdeclined in New York State as a result of the tough newlegislation. With respect to heroin use, the study found thefollowing: Heroin use [in New York City] was as widespread in mid-1976as it had been when the 1973 revision took effect, and amplesupplies of the drug were available. The pattern of stable heroin use in New York City between1973 and mid-1976 was not appreciably different from the averagepattern in other East Coast cities. The new law may have temporarily deterred heroin use [in NewYork City and other New York State jurisdictions]- There is no evidence of a sustained reduction in heroin useafter 1973 [in New York State as a whole or in upstate New York]. Most evidence suggests that the illegal use of drugs otherthan narcotics in New York City was more widespread in 1976 thanin 1973, and that in this respect New York was not unique amongEast Coast cities." With respect to crime, the study found: Serious property crime of the kind often associated withheroin users increased sharply [in New York State] between 1973and 1975. The rise in New York State was similar to increases innearby states. There was a sharp rise in non-drug felony crimes between 1973and 1975 [in New York City]. However, the rise was apparentlyunconnected with illegal narcotics use: non-drug felony crimesknown to have been committed by narcotics users remained stableduring that period. The available evidence suggests that the recidivistsentencing [predicate felony] provisions of the 1973 law did notsignificantly deter prior felony offenders from committingadditional crimes [in New York City].92 In addition, the study found little enthusiasm for the 1973law within the criminal justice system. Many judges and prosecutors felt that the mandatory minimumsentencing provisions reduced the of individual treatment ofoffenders and, therefore, the quality of justice. Some were troubled because the penalties level drugtraffickers were more severe than those applicable to crimes thatmost citizens consider heinous.... New York City prosecutorstended to believe that the 1973 law was forcing them to scattertheir limited resources on what they considered relatively minoroffenses. (Note: The Class III (lowest level) felony accountedfor 41% of all drug indictments in New York City and 61% of thetrial workload.) ... As for the police, the New York City PoliceDepartment believed that a policy of all-out street levelenforcement would be only marginally productive and wouldhopelessly inundate the courts. 93 Because of the large volume of street-level drug activity inNew York City, the New York City Police Department had theopportunity to make large numbers of street-level arrests underthe new drug law. It did not elect to do so, for the reason thatpast efforts had been perceived as ineffective. As the studyrecorded, In 1969, the Department had implemented a policy similar tothe one implied by the new law. Large numbers of low-level drugarrests had been encouraged, and the number of felony drugarrests had risen from 7,199 in 1967 to 26,379 in 1970. In 1971,however, Police Commissioner Patrick Murphy abandoned this policybecause (a) only a small percentage of the arrests were resultingin prison or jail sentences and (b) the mass arrest policy didnot appear to be having a significant impact on the drug traffic.In the Department's view, the mass arrest policy was alsocreating serious workload problems for the courts. Immediatelyafter the change in policy, arrests fell sharply; in 1973, therewere only a little more than one-third as many as two yearsearlier.... According to Donald Cawley, New York City PoliceCommissioner when the 1973 law became effective, the Departmentdecided not to change its enforcement policies in response to the1973 legislation. The Department continued to focus itsenforcement activities on the middle and upper levels of drugdistribution rather than upon street-level drug activity." The study concluded, "The key lesson to be drawn fromthe experience with the 1973 drug law is that passing a new lawis not enough. What criminal statutes say matters a great deal,but the efficiency, morale, and capacity of the criminal justicesystem is even more of a factor in determining whether the law iseffectively implemented."95 In addition, the study notedthat implementation of the new law, which included the hiring ofnew narcotics case judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, andsupport staff, cost the state of New York $32 million. What the study of the New York law indicates is that thereare serious limits to what any law can control. It is apparentnow that the rhetoric which helped create a climate for the newlaw-i.e., statements which attributed exaggerated amounts ofcrime to drug addicts-was also in part responsible for thefailure of the law to live up to expectations. This is not tosuggest that law enforcement approaches to illicit drug useshould be abandoned because they fail in what they attempt to do.Rather, it means that our expectations should be realistic,because our ability to deal with these complex problems islimited. In New York, administrative problems, court congestion,the doubts which many judges and prosecutors had about the newlaw, and the difficulties of policing illicit drugs under anycircumstances all joined together to reduce the law'seffectiveness. The conclusion is that this law changed verylittle in New York. The Impact of Drug Law Enforcement on Drug Using Behavior An interesting contrast to the New York "get tough"law is the Oregon law of 1973 which "decriminalized"the possession of a small quantity of marijuana. The state tookthis action following the recommendations of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. The new Oregon law-andthose in other states which subsequently enacted similarlegislation-eliminated the possibility of imprisonment for simplepossession of an ounce or less of marijuana. A civil fine,similar to a traffic citation, was substituted for the formercriminal penalties. There were to be no criminal arrests for suchoffenses nor would there be court arraignment. Critics of the new law predicted an explosion of bothexperimental and regular marijuana use in Oregon. This predictionwas rooted in the persistent belief that it is primarily the lawthat restrains people from using illicit drugs-the same viewwhich in part prompted the tough New York law. However, annual surveys conducted in Oregon during the fouryears following enactment of the new law have shown little changeat all in marijuana use patterns."" Marijuana usershave increased gradually in number, but this is true across thenation. Regular users have remained relatively constant, apattern that is also typical of other state and national trends. Since Oregon passed its law, only ten other states haveadopted the reduced penalty for possession of small amounts ofmarijuana, despite the preponderance of available evidence thatmarijuana is not a major health hazard when used moderately andthat criminal laws apparently do not deter millions from usingit. The New York law was aimed primarily at heroin, and didlittle, if anything, to change use patterns there. The Oregon lawwas aimed at marijuana, and it too did little, if anything, tochange use patterns. What both these experiences suggest is justhow little the criminal law influences an individual's decisionto use a particular drug, illegal or not. Similarly, theprohibition of alcohol in the early part of this century didlittle to prevent millions of Americans from consuming it. These recent legislative developments underscore anotherpoint. Generally, the public and its policymakers have focusednarrowly on eliminating the consumption of one or two drugs inparticular, without giving much thought as to the effect of thisrestricted concentration. These policies seem to be based uponthe theory that once marijuana or heroin or cocaine is eliminatedthen the problems of drug abuse in the United States will besolved. In 1971 the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA), anorganization established by the joint Chiefs of Staff to developindependent information and analysis, examined aspects of illicitdrug use in this country. The IDA study concluded that heroinaddicts are probably willing to switch to amphetamines,barbiturates, and other drugs should heroin become prohibitivelyexpensive or unavailable .97 Through studies of the urinalysisscreening program of inmates of the Washington, D.C. jails, theInstitute found that before the East Coast dock strike of 1971nearly 20 percent of the inmates tested positive for opiates.During the strike, however, this percentage dropped to zero whilethat for barbiturate and amphetamine use rose from its former 3or 4 percent level to nearly 20 percent.,,,, While it is notconclusive, the study did underscore the fact that we have verylittle hard data on the habits, preferences, alternatives, andattitudes of heroin users. Models, analyses, and otherinformation offer a limited glimpse of these factors, and thenfor only a limited time frame. This study and other more recent ones"" havesuggested that the usage patterns for heroin may be more flexiblethan is generally believed, and therefore less vulnerable tostrategies that focus on the elimination of supply. Althoughbetter domestic enforcement, border control, and foreigneradication efforts might tighten the heroin market to someextent, any long-range improvement as regards drug-relatedproblems remains uncertain. Despite this, and the limited abilityof the criminal justice system to alter human behavior, when lawsfail to discourage an activity' that the majority in a societydeems undesirable the natural impulse is to toughen them toattain the desired effect. Concluding Thoughts Since federal antinarcotics laws have been in force in thiscountry for more than sixty years-and local ordinances for morethan a century-it seems appropriate to ask what such laws can orhave accomplished. if we were expecting our drug laws toeradicate illicit drug use, then the local, state, and federalantidrug effort must be judged an abject failure. Tough laws havenot been a solution to the drug abuse crisis. If, however, onewas hoping for a containment policy, then enforcement effortsmight be judged a partial success, because only a relativelysmall number of people use heroin, the drug with which we seemmost concerned today. This conclusion, of course, is impossibleto prove. Moreover, mere containment of heroin use was never thestated goal of our drug control efforts. The best way to judge the value of our present drug controlpolicies is to weigh their benefits and costs. This may give ussome clues with which to better analyze our current policies andreach a clearer understanding of their worth. In making thisassessment, it is natural that drug law enforcement be examinedmore critically than other approaches, such as treatment oreducation. Drug enforcement has received the majority of theavailable time, money, technology, and hope and faith for thepast seven decades. It is not unreasonable to say that lawenforcement efforts have been given the greatest possibleopportunity to respond to illicit drugs, and that those effortsought to be evaluated in light of their performance. What then are the costs of drug law enforcement? Several canbe identified: money outlays for enforcement; such side effectsas the stigma of arrest, the risk of impure drugs and associatedhealth hazards, the creation of a black market, a potential risein non-drug crime rates, and the risk of police corruption; thealienation of many segments of society; selective enforcementpatterns; diversion of scarce resources; erosion of the rule oflaw; invasion of privacy; reduction of personal freedom;hostility between police and the community; and potential policeperjury and official deception. These are some costs generallyascribed to the current prohibitionist policy approach toparticular drugs. The benefits are less specific and less provable. We canpoint to the arrest of individuals who traffic in illicit drugsas a benefit, at least in the small percentage of cases wherearrest is followed by conviction and punishment But we cannotpoint to drug enforcement generally and argue that it has had adramatically successful impact in prohibiting these activities.One benefit often cited is the channeling into treatment by meansof criminal justice diversion of illicit drug users who mightotherwise not have entered; however, this process may have anegative impact in deterring voluntary applicants from seekinghelp (see Staff Paper 3, "Heroin Treatment", below).Law enforcement efforts may also have had an impact in containingthe spread of illicit drug use during years when strong penaltieshave been on the books and substantial efforts were made toenforce those laws. While drug law enforcement effortsundoubtedly do harass some low-level operatives in the illicitdrug market and make them afraid to deal openly on the street,this may be a marginal benefit, in that it makes it likely thatusers will only become more cautious and harder to detect. Whileease of availability does appear to have some influence on thenumbers who will use a particular drug, making availabilityharder does not eliminate the demand for a particular drug orpsychoactive substances generally. The key question remains: Is the current system of drugcontrol worthwhile? An abundance of data has been collected-someof it presented in this chapter-but it is consistentlycontradictory, imprecise, of questionable reliability, and ladenwith the values we impute to it. Nevertheless, we would concludethat the costs are greater than the benefits derived. Part of thedifficulty with criminal law as a control measure lies in thefact that it has been consistently oversold as a cure for illicitdrug use. A serious consequence of this is that drug lawenforcement has rarely been viewed dispassionately; rather, ithas been the object of either heated attack or staunch defense,and rarely the object of thoughtful analysis. Our current drug control policies exact a heavy toll insocial costs, while data showing a solid return on the investmentare difficult to find. This imbalance has been known for sometime, but the knowledge of it has not materially changed our drugcontrol policies and laws. The basic policy established a centuryago continues today, and there are no immediate prospects of thegovernment, federal or state, seriously reconsidering its heavyreliance on the criminal justice system to deal with illicitdrugs. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-16IA031-000652-B046-44http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nylawyer/nylawyer.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131737 text/html 5924HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:17:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 07:35:30 GMTContent-length: 5709 A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Report of The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June 14, 1994 Introduction The Costs of Prohibition Distortion of the Judicial System New York State Other States Federal Courts The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System Efforts to Handle Court Congestion The Prison State Erosion of the Rule of Law and Civil Liberties Perception of Ineffectiveness Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System Police Corruption Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" Selective Prosecution Erosion of Constitutional Rights Forfeiture's Heavy Hand Erosion of Privacy Rights Prohibition-Induced Violence Prohibition's Failure to Limit Drug Use Prohibition Threatens Public Health Spread of Disease Sharing Needles Trading Sex for Drugs Neglect of Health Avoidance of the Health-Care System Lack of Information and Quality Control Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of Unknown Potency Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "Soft Drugs" Injuries Due to Violence Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem Treatment Works Self-Help Groups Therapeutic Communities Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on Substance Use Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse Education Works Life Skills Training Program Students Taught Awareness and Resistance Project Healthy Choices Student Assistance Program Smart Moves Seattle Social Development Project Programs for Children of Addicts Toward a New Drug Policy Conclusion WT01-B32-17IA031-000652-B046-69http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/CANNABIS.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122131751 text/html 3356HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:17:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:01 GMTContent-length: 3139 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Commonwealth of Australia 1994 Monograph No. 26 CONTENTS Executive Summary Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Policy goals Chapter 3: Cannabis in context: history, laws and international treaties Chapter 4: Five legislative options for cannabis in Australia Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsory treatment Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislative approaches to cannabis Chapter 7: Conclusion Appendix 1. The medicinal use of cannabis Appendix 2. Industrial and horticultural uses of cannabis Appendix 3. The authors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT01-B32-18IA031-000652-B046-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_exe.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131801 text/html 35700HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:17:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:11 GMTContent-length: 35482 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia:Executive summary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative Options for Cannabis Use in Australia Executive summary Chapter 1: Introduction This paper is concerned with the legislative options availablefor cannabis, and the impact of those options on the community atlarge and on the law enforcement sector. It has been prepared bythe Australian Institute of Criminology at the request of theNational Task Force on Cannabis; the Task Force plans to use thispaper in developing its recommendations to the National DrugStrategy Committee. This paper, along with other commissionedTask Force papers, may in future be used to inform thedevelopment of a national policy on cannabis. Chapter 2: Policy goals Given the importance which is assigned to setting clear goalsfor any major social policy, it is surprising how infrequentlydiscussion of drug policy is preceded by a precise specificationof what the policy is intended to achieve. Too often, goals areeither global (e.g. to reduce drug use) or unattainable (e.g. toeliminate drug use), and as such they allow for manyinterpretations. Similarly, goals are often stated in such a waythat they could be achieved through a number of quitecontradictory strategies and at vastly differing costs. This report starts from the proposition that it is importantto know what are the requirements for rational drug policy ingeneral, and what are the objectives of cannabis policyspecifically. In this context, it is important to address theissue of drug policy, as well as drug legislation. The linkbetween policy, legislation and implementation is important andmust be factored into these considerations. The development ofpolicy and legislation relating to cannabis should take intoaccount the following issues: Arguments that apply to the most appropriate control regime for one drug need not " and often do not" apply to others. Drug policy should be crafted to take account of the different patterns and types of harms caused by specific drugs. The details of control regimes are crucial determinants of their outcomes. Such details should not be left undefined. Any analysis of control regimes should attempt to estimate their effects on both consumption levels and patterns of use. Control regimes should not be considered in isolation from the problems of implementation and enforcement. Arguments about the consequences of drug use should be separated from arguments about morals. Options should be evaluated on the basis of evidence of damage. Any policy should recognise the changing nature of the drug problem and be able to change with it. Additionally, all policies should be reviewed periodically to ensure that they are still relevant to current circumstances. Policy should be made in the light of the costs of control as well as the benefits. The goals of drug policy should be realistic. Discussion of policy options should include a specification of which harms they are intended to reduce. Discussion of cannabis policy (and drug policy generally) should recognise the existence of multiple and sometimes contradictory goals. Policies to discourage cannabis use should be shown to be effective or be changed. The harms caused by the control regimes themselves should not outweigh the harms prevented by them. The application of these principles in a given situationshould lead to the development of explicit policy goals relatingto cannabis. It is likely that priorities will need to beassigned between the available goals, as they are frequentlyinconsistent. Nevertheless, the explicit specification of thegoals which policy and legislation are intended to achieve isessential if they are to be properly articulated and evaluated. 3. Cannabis in context: history, lawsand international treaties Cannabis has been used for many thousands of years. It hasbeen used for the production of material products such asclothing and rope; for its medicinal properties; and for itspsychoactive properties. Cannabis was used medicinally inAustralia until the mid-1960s and is currently used in many partsof the world, in the form of hemp, for the production of cordage,clothing, etc. Australian drug laws, like those of many other countries,closely followed the development of international drug treaties.The influence of the United States of America in the conceptionand development of treaties and related international instrumentshas been enormous. The 1925 Geneva Convention on Opium and OtherDrugs was the first such convention to cover cannabis. TheConvention required the parties to limit the availability ofcannabis to medical and scientific purposes only. This remainsthe status of cannabis in the international community. Numerous enquires into drug use and trafficking have beenconducted both in Australia and overseas. Australian committeeshave generally been very cautious about recommending changes tothe legal status of drugs. Nevertheless, a number of high levelAustralian committees of inquiry have recommended theliberalisation of legislation relating to cannabis, or at leastthat such liberalisation be carefully considered. The most recentof these at the national level was the Parliamentary JointCommittee on the National Crime Authority which reported in 1989,and at the State/Territory level, the Australian CapitalTerritory Legislative Assembly's Select Committee on HIV, IllegalDrugs and Prostitution, which reported in 1991. In the main, cannabis was little known or used in Australiauntil the 1960s. Nevertheless, the drugs legislation which wasintroduced in most of the States and Territories towards the endof the 1800s and early 1900s (primarily concerned with thesmoking of opium by Chinese people) provided a framework for theprohibition of cannabis. The first Australian controls oncannabis use were introduced in Victoria in 1928 legislationwhich penalised the unauthorised use of Indian hemp and resin.This was followed by corresponding legislation in the otherjurisdictions as the years passed. From the 1960s, however, theCommonwealth has become increasingly involved in legislationrelating to cannabis (particularly with regard to itsimportation). The penalties relating to cannabis cultivation,possession and use were generally quite severe during the 1960sand 1970s but have tended to lessen since then in mostjurisdictions, at least with regard to the minor offences of useand possession of small quantities. Perhaps the most significant recent legislative changes havebeen the introduction in 1987 in South Australia and in 1992 inthe Australian Capital Territory of expiation notice schemes.Under these schemes, a person found committing a minor offencerelating to cannabis is given what amounts to an"on-the-spot" notice. If the prescribed penalty is paidwithin the prescribed time then no court appearance is requiredand no conviction is entered. If the person receiving theexpiation notice fails to respond to it, however, normal courtprocesses follow. People considering the legal status of drugs and thepossibility of legislative change need to be cognisant ofAustralia's international treaty obligations. Although somedifference of opinion exists with regard to the range oflegislative options for cannabis which are available to Australiawithin the scope of the international treaties, it is clear thatthe policy of total prohibition currently followed by most Statesand Territories is only one of a number of options which areavailable. Chapter 4: Five legislative options forcannabis in Australia Many legislative options are available for cannabis, and muchconfusion exists in the terminology used to describe them. In ourview, the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-MedicalUse of Drugs (the Sackville Commission) which reported in 1978provided the most useful categorisation of these options. Thelanguage used avoids the terms 'decriminalisation' and'legalisation' as these expressions have quite different meaningsfor different authorities. The five options discussed belowcapture all the approaches which people have in mind when theyrefer to 'decriminalisation' and 'legalisation', as well as otheroptions which these two words may or may not encompass. Theoptions are total prohibition (with and without an administrativeexpediency principle), prohibition with civil penalties for minoroffences, partial prohibition, regulation and free availability. Under the system of total prohibition the use, possession,cultivation, importation, sale and distribution of any amount ofcannabis are treated as criminal offences. Total prohibition cantake a number of forms. In the United States, for example, theeradication of all illicit drug use is a central aim of drugpolicy and it is thought that total prohibition is the mosteffective means of reaching this goal. Cannabis use is seen aspart of a larger drug problem and is dealt with as such. Thetotal prohibition policy, as implemented in the United States,many other countries and most of the Australian States andTerritories, has clearly not achieved its intended goal ofsubstantially reducing cannabis consumption. This is despite anincreasing amount of resources directed towards achieving thisgoal. Both the financial and social costs of law enforcementunder an active policy of total prohibition are high. The policyfails to meet a number of the crucial criteria for good drugspolicy, enunciated above. Cannabis policy has not been separatedfrom that of other drugs; arguments about the consequences ofdrug use have not been separated from arguments about morals; thegoals of the 'war on drugs' are unrealistic; it appears that theharms caused by the control regimes outweigh the harms caused bythe drug itself. The Netherlands provides an example of a quite differentapplication of the total prohibition policy from that observed inthe United States and elsewhere. In The Netherlands, legislationmakes a clear distinction between 'drugs presenting unacceptablerisks', on the one hand, and 'cannabis products', on the other.In addition, a clause in The Netherlands Code of CriminalProcedure, known as the 'Expediency Principle', states that theProsecution Office may decide whether or not to enforce certainlaws, to prosecute or to initiate criminal investigation on thebasis of whether or not such action would be 'in the publicinterest'. Using this clause, the Minister of Justice issuedguidelines in 1976 for the enforcement of drug laws and theinvestigation and prosecution of breaches of drug laws.Essentially it is these guidelines, rather than the totalprohibition legislation, that determines drug policy in TheNetherlands. According to the guidelines, dealing, possessing orproducing small amounts of cannabis do not require policeinvestigation, arrest or prosecution. A low priority is also given to the investigation andprosecution of retail dealing in cannabis, and police are onlyrequired to confront cannabis dealers when they advertisepublicly or conduct their business in a provocative manner. Thisis part of a broader government policy of 'normalisation', underwhich efforts are made not to marginalise drug users, but toensure that the harm related to their drug use is minimised andthat they are able to avail themselves of community services tothe optimum extent. Evaluative studies have shown that cannabisuse has not increased in The Netherlands since the liberalisationof its policy relating to cannabis. Indeed, levels of cannabisconsumption are far lower than those of the United States, wherethe total prohibition policy is rigorously enforced. The policyof the separation of the drug markets (i.e. separating cannabisfrom other drugs which can have more serious consequences) hasapparently been successful. In a number of ways The Netherlands'drug policy meets many of the criteria for good drug policydiscussed above. The second policy option is that of prohibition with civilpenalties. Under this option, the penalties for the possessionand cultivation of small amounts of cannabis for personal use aredealt with by civil sanctions such as paying a monetary penalty,rather than by criminal sanctions such as fines or imprisonment.Criminal sanctions still apply to the possession, cultivation anddistribution of large quantities of cannabis. The SouthAustralian Cannabis Expiation Notice Scheme, introduced in 1987,and the similar scheme introduced in the Australian CapitalTerritory in 1992 are examples of this option in practice. As mentioned above, under the South Australian and ACTsystems, minor cannabis offences such as the possession of smallquantities, cannabis consumption, or the cultivation of a smallnumber of plants are expiable offences, i.e. if the prescribedpenalty is paid within the specified period, the offender doesnot have to appear in court and avoids a criminal conviction. Ifthe penalty is not paid then the normal court appearance andpossibility of conviction ensues. The evaluations conducted to date indicate that the cannabisexpiation notice schemes go a long way towards achieving theirgoals and meeting the criteria for effective drugs policydiscussed above. This option takes account of the differentpatterns of use and harms relating to cannabis, compared withother drugs. The policy and legislative development has beenaccompanied by attention to the details of implementation, ratherthan being expressed in general terms only. It reflects anunderstanding of the patterns of harm associated with cannabis,recognising that much of the harm relates to the patterns ofenforcement of cannabis legislation, rather than to the use ofthe drug itself. The approach is realistic and the goalsattainable, focusing on minimising the negative impact on usersof cannabis-related involvement in the criminal justice system,along with producing society-wide benefits in terms of lesseningthe financial costs to the criminal justice system. The major concern associated with this approach (at least inSouth Australia where most experience has been gained) is thatthere could be a social class differential in terms of theapplication of the policy. In other words, people from lowersocioeconomic classes could be disproportionately representedamong those who fail to expiate the offence and, consequently,obtain criminal records. This concern is balanced by theobservation that, at a society-wide level, it appears that thepatterns of cannabis consumption are similar in South Australiaand the ACT to those found in the other jurisdictions whichoperate policies of total prohibition. The third legislative option is partial prohibition. This isan option which seeks to maintain controls on the production anddistribution of cannabis while at the same time avoiding thecosts of criminalising the use of the drug. Under partialprohibition, it would remain an offence to grow or deal incannabis in commercial quantities. It would not be an offence touse cannabis or to possess or grow it in quantities judgedappropriate for personal use. A number of variations are possiblewithin this broad outline. A small number of countries, forexample Spain, have followed this model. Other countries, such asItaly, have made possession and use unlawful, but not criminallypunishable. In none of these cases does it seem that an increasein cannabis use has resulted from the establishment of thislegislative approach. The partial prohibition model attempts to use legalrestrictions to discourage cannabis use by concentrating on theprohibition of the commercial cultivation and supply and on theadvertising of the availability of the product. At the same time,the model attempts to minimise the personal and social costs ofthe total prohibition policy by allowing the use and personalpossession of cannabis. It assumes, therefore, that the harmsassociated with cannabis are sufficiently serious to justify somelevel of restriction on its availability and that criminalsanctions remain an appropriate instrument to achieve thisrestriction. Since this model has not been fully implemented and evaluatedin any country, no empirically based information is available asto the likely outcomes of this model. Nevertheless, it is likelythat the main outcome would be to reduce the financial and socialcosts of having personal possession and use a criminal offence.The possibility of an increased level of use of cannabis, underthis model, has been suggested as a potential limitation on itseffectiveness. It appears, however, that this fear is unfoundedowing to such factors: as the limited role of deterrents in asituation where only a low probability of detection occurs;evidence that fear of arrest is not a significant factor inpeople's decision not to use cannabis; and evidence that reducingor eliminating penalties does not generally lead to any increasein cannabis consumption. This option meets the criteria ofeffective drugs policy to a greater extent than some of the otheroptions considered here. It separates cannabis from other(potentially more harmful) drugs. It seeks to minimise thenegative impacts of enforcement regimes. It acknowledges thecontradiction between the goals of limiting cannabis use whileminimising the negative aspects of enforcement. Finally, itsgoals are realistic and attainable. The fourth legislative option is regulation. In this approach,the production, distribution and the sale of cannabis would becontrolled to a greater or lesser extent by government agencies.Trafficking outside the regulated system would continue to be acriminal offence and attract penalties. Activities associatedwith personal use, however, would not be penalised. While no fullworking model of this option is available, cannabis control inThe Netherlands exhibits some elements of the regulatory option.While the Dutch Government does not license production,distribution or sale of cannabis, youth centres and coffee shopsselling hemp products operate openly under certain clearlydefined conditions. Examples of regulatory systems for drugsother than cannabis exist within Australia. For instance, opiumpoppies are cultivated under government licence in Tasmania. Aregulatory regime applies to the drugs tobacco, alcohol and manypharmaceutical products. The two major regulatory models for currently illicit drugsare regulated commercial sale and government monopoly. The optionexists, within this broad approach, for a range of initiatives tolimit the attractiveness of cannabis, including setting highprices through taxation and limiting the availability of theproduct. The primary rationale for the regulatory option is therecognition that the eradication of all cannabis use is anunrealistic goal and that, since cannabis use will occur, itshould occur in the safest possible environment. It recognisesthat the gateway theory of drug use (that cannabis users have anincreased likelihood of progression to more dangerous drugs as adirect result of using cannabis) is not supported by empiricalevidence. The outcomes of a regulatory policy would depend very much onthe regulatory framework established. To achieve its goals, theregime would need to be structured in such a way as to remove theincentives for the operation of a black market in cannabis. Whileconsiderable financial and social costs could be avoided by theoperation of this policy, it could entail a complex system oflicensing and monitoring which could involve high administrativecosts. These implementation details would need to be clearlyworked out to attain a satisfactory balance. A number of policy goals might be satisfied by a well-designedregulatory system. These include the separation of drug markets,a separation of arguments about the consequences of drug use fromarguments about morals, the adoption of a realistic approach todrug use and a reduction in harm. Two important factors must,however, be kept in mind. The first is the need to mould anypolicy of regulation to fit the particular drug  in this casecannabis. Secondly, regulatory policy must take into account notonly legislative frameworks but also appropriate measures ofsocial control, such as appropriate drug education andprohibitions on advertising, so that the goals of reduction ofharm can continue to be pursued. The final option discussed here is the free availability ofcannabis. Like the total prohibition option, this is an extremelegislative option. Free availability would mean the absence ofany legislative or regulatory restrictions on the substance'scultivation, importation, sale, supply by other means, possessionor use. This legislative option is not practised in any countriesat the moment but was the approach used in Australia until the1920s. It must be noted, however, that very little cannabis useoccurred up to this time. Although a strong lobby exists for the liberalisation ofcannabis legislation in Australia, few lobbyists advocate totallyfree availability. Perhaps for pragmatic reasons, at least someform of regulation is generally deemed acceptable. This reflectsconcerns about the quality of cannabis (e.g. the presence ofhealth-impairing pesticide residues), driving or operatingmachinery while intoxicated by the drug, its use by children,etc. Those who advocate totally free availability do so on thebasis of an extreme libertarian position. It is difficult to imagine the free availability option everbeing fully implemented, particularly in Australia. To do sowould require governments to abrogate all responsibility in thearea of consumer protection, to forego taxation revenue and totake no action to protect particularly vulnerable groups. Considering the position of other drugs in Australian society,it is difficult to maintain an argument for the free availabilitylegislative option. This is because governments have both theright and the responsibility to act to mitigate sources of harmto society. The culture shift in most Western nations to minimisethe harm caused by currently licit drugs, especially tobacco andalcohol, means that the free availability of cannabis is not aviable contemporary option. Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsorytreatment The terms of reference for this study include a review ofdiversion and compulsory treatment as they relate to cannabisusers. Diversion of cannabis users can take a number of forms,including pre-arrest diversion, pre-court diversion, pre-sentencediversion or post-conviction diversion. Compulsory treatment mayor may not be a feature of diversionary process, that is,compulsory treatment is sometimes mandated as a condition of thediversion of an offender or an alleged offender from the criminaljustice system, but sometimes operates independently of thatsystem. Pre-arrest diversion is essentially the discretion exercisedby police at the point of contact with an alleged offender. Inaddition to this form of diversion, a variety of more or lessformal diversionary programs are in place in Australia andoverseas. As indicated above, they operate at a range of pointsin the processing of alleged and convicted offenders and take awide variety of forms. In the Australian Capital Territory, forexample, legislation provides, as a sentencing option, thatanyone found guilty of an offence may being sent for assessmentas to whether the person is drug dependent and suitable forreferral to treatment. In these instances, an offender may bereferred to a treatment assessment panel consisting of a legalpractitioner and two others with extensive knowledge of alcoholand other drug treatment. In conjunction with the offender andrelevant treatment agency, the panel makes a recommendation tothe court which will determine the length of time the personshould spend at the treatment centre and the pattern of periodicreviews. If the person consistently fails to appear for review orfails to undertake the treatment program, a summons may be issuedand the person dealt with by the court in the normal way.Diversionary programs mandated by legislation also exist in SouthAustralia, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia. Themethod of operation of the diversionary programs differs fromcase-to-case. Diversionary systems in other countries illustratea further variety of options. Although only a tiny minority of cannabis users reportproblems with the drug serious enough to require treatment, it iswidely accepted that a prison sentence is an unsatisfactoryoption for many offenders with drug problems, and diversion forthe purpose of treatment is a widely used alternative, onewelcomed by judges and magistrates. Criminal justice systeminvolvement is seen as providing an opportunity to intervene indrug users' lives in order to confront them with their drugproblems and to bring them into contact with treatment agencies.In some cases, merely attending for assessment is sufficient tobring about a change in a person's attitude. While some disputeexists about the value of coercion, the fact that involuntaryclients tend to spend longer in treatment programs than dovoluntary clients frequently contributes to their exhibiting moresuccessful treatment outcomes. It should be noted, however, thatfew cannabis users need treatment for dependence on cannabis assuch. Rather, their needs are more likely to centre around theirlifestyles and psychological needs generally. A number of countries, and within Australia the State ofVictoria, have legislative provisions relating to civilcommitment for the compulsory treatment of drug users, generallypeople deemed to be drug dependent. In Victoria, for example, aperson who is dependent on alcohol and/or other drugs and who isconsidered suitable for treatment may be committed for treatmentfor a period of seven days, and at the discretion of the medicalofficer in charge of the assessment centre, for a second sevendays. Civil commitment is widely used for drug users in theUnited States. It is generally applied to people who come to theattention of the criminal justice or the health systems, and whorefuse to enter treatment voluntarily. The individual is referredfor medical examination and, on the basis of that examination,may be committed to compulsory treatment. Naturally, this raisesserious issues regarding the civil rights of the individualsinvolved, as decisions are made about their liberty withoutreferral to a court. The relevance of such programs tolegislative options for cannabis in Australia are limited, owingto the fact that very few cannabis users have problems withdependence on the drug, and there is little evidence thattreatment, as it is generally understood, has much to offercannabis users. Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislativeapproaches to cannabis The principle of evaluating new policy and legislation iswidely accepted but is less frequently observed in practice. InAustralia and most other Western nations, insufficient has beendone, especially by government agencies, to monitor and evaluatetheir national drug policies. This is the case in instances wheredrugs legislation has been developed incrementally, and alsowhere new approaches have been implemented following detailedpolicy reviews. Too often evaluation is considered relevant onlyafter a policy has been in place for some time and changes arebeing considered. To be of most value, new initiatives should bedesigned and implemented with an explicit and adequatelyresourced monitoring and evaluation component built into theinitiative from the outset. Policy evaluation is a differentprocess from program evaluation, having different goals andresearch techniques. Australia's National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97 provides theframework within which we base our recommendations relating tomonitoring and evaluation. The plan points out that 'the overallmission of the National Drug Strategy is to minimise the harmfuleffects of drugs and drug use in Australian society'. Policiesand programs in specific areas, including cannabis, should beevaluated in a manner consistent with this national goal. Decision-making relating to legislative options for cannabisin Australia can be conducted in an ad hoc manner, but clearlythe application of more systematic policy choice models ispreferable. Two groups of such decision-making models areavailable to governments, the 'rational' and the 'incremental'approaches. A rational decision-making model is one which goesthrough logical steps to clarify the context of the legislativeinitiative, its goals, the rationales for the goals and thelikely impacts on key stakeholders. It includes a carefulanalysis of the data available to evaluate the proposed approach.The process would end in making judgments regarding theappropriateness of the goal or goals, how achievable the goalsare and, if the goals are judged to be achievable, how effective,efficient and appropriate are the implementation optionsavailable. This systematic, rational approach to policyevaluation is not often enough seen in the development of drugspolicy. Nevertheless, the National Drug Strategic Plan provides aclear framework for engaging in this type of analysis. Theinformation presented in this report, along with the researchreports prepared by other groups for the National Task Force onCannabis, provides a firm base for the making of rational policychoices. Chapter 7: Conclusion Australia's National Drug Strategy provides a policy frameworkwithin which new legislative approaches may be developed. Bothexisting and newer approaches have the possibility of bothenhancing and detracting from the achievement of the mission ofthe National Drug Strategy, that of minimising the harmfuleffects of drugs and drug use in Australian society. No best single option for cannabis legislation exists. What ismost appropriate will depend upon what goals both policy makersand the community are seeking to achieve. Our review suggeststhat two of the five legislative options discussed above areinappropriate in contemporary Australian circumstances. They arethe options which we have characterised as total prohibition andfree availability. Australia experiences more harm, we conclude,from maintaining the cannabis prohibition policy than itexperiences from the use of the drug. We also reject thelegislative option of the free availability of cannabis. Oursociety is one that accepts that governments and others have boththe right and the responsibility to intervene in diverse ways toprotect people from harm and to advance the common good. It wouldbe unreasonable, therefore, to argue that cannabis should beavailable in an uncontrolled manner. We conclude that cannabis law reform is required in thiscountry. Many options for policy, legislation and implementationprocesses exist within the broad categories of prohibition withan administrative decision that it is inexpedient to prosecutepeople for minor cannabis offences, prohibition with civilpenalties, partial prohibition and regulated availability. Webelieve, on the available evidence, that widely accepted socialgoals, well attuned to the needs of contemporary Australiansociety, will be attained through the adoption and implementationof policies which lie within these options. Appendixes Appendix 1 Appendix 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT01-B32-19IA031-000652-B046-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131809 text/html 5560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:18:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:47 GMTContent-length: 5343 Australian Report on Cannabis - Chapter 1 Introduction Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION Australia's National Drug Strategy is widely acclaimed, bothin this country and internationally, as a world leader. Itfeatures a balance between action addressing the demand for andsupply of drugs. It involves a partnership between the governmentand non-government sectors. It addresses all drugs, bothcurrently licit and illicit. Above all, its overarching goal isto minimise the harmful effects of drugs and drug use inAustralian society (MCDS 1993). It does not have theimpossible-to-achieve goal of eliminating drug use nor thesimplistic approach of addressing just one class of drugs (thecurrently illicit ones), the approaches taken by some othernations. The project to which this paper contributes is part ofAustralia's National Drug Strategy. Under the auspices of the[1]Commonwealth/State Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy, aNational Task Force on Cannabis was formed, to prepare a papersummarising current knowledge about cannabis use; the paper willbe used by the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy to assist itin developing a national statement on cannabis. As part of thisprocess, the Australian Institute of Criminology has beencommissioned by the National Task Force on Cannabis to preparethis paper addressing the legislative options available forcannabis in Australia. We have approached the project with an interdisciplinaryorientation, drawing on legal, criminal justice and socialscience perspectives. Much of the material presented is factualinformation that we believe will assist policy makers and thecommunity at large to think systematically about cannabis policyand legislation in Australia; where we have expressed ouropinions on legislative options, this has been made clear. Thepaper is structured as follows. After these introductory remarks, in [2]Chapter 2 we discussthe issue of policy goals regarding cannabis, arguing thatlegislation should not be seen independently from the policies itimplements. We seek to clarify the key issues which underpincannabis policy, focusing on the goals of those policies, sincemuch of the confusion about cannabis policy options and theireffects reflects confusion concerning the policy goals. [3] Chapter 3 places cannabis in context. A brief overview of thehistory of cannabis in Australia and elsewhere is presented. Wethen describe the legislative context of Australia's cannabispolicies: domestic legislation and international treatyobligations are discussed. [4] Chapter 4 addresses the range of legislative optionsavailable. It describes the options, discusses their rationales,presents information on the impacts of those options and reviewsthem in terms of the goals which they seek to achieve. Fivedistinct options are dealt with. At the specific request of theNational Task Force on Cannabis we include, as [5] Chapter 5, a discussion of the diversion, from the criminaljustice system, of cannabis offenders, and the related topic ofthe compulsory treatment of cannabis users. This chapter, likethe previous ones, draws upon both Australian and overseasexperience in these areas. The focus of [6] Chapter 6 is the process for evaluating legislative optionsfor cannabis. We discuss both policy evaluation and programevaluation, as they are usefully dealt with separately. [7] Chapter 7 concludes the main part of the paper. There werevisit the central issues of the preceding chapters and makerecommendations regarding the legislative options for cannabiswhich we consider most appropriate for contemporary Australia.Consistent with our consultancy brief, we do not make detailedrecommendations along these lines. Rather, being researchers andnot policy makers, the approach that we have taken is to indicatethose legislative options that we consider to be inappropriate,and to indicate the dimensions of the policy making task fordealing with the remaining options. Three appendixes (touching upon the medical andhorticultural/industrial uses of cannabis, and information aboutthe authors) are included, along with a listing of sourcematerial that the authors found particularly useful. We are conscious of the fact that this paper is one of fourbeing prepared for the National Task Force on Cannabis. Theothers address the health impacts of cannabis use, consumptionpatterns in Australia and public opinion concerning cannabis. Thefindings of the other research teams in their respective areasshould be considered concurrently with the information set out inthe following chapters. Reference Ministerial Council on DrugStrategy 1993, National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97, AGPS,Canberra. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-20IA031-000652-B046-139http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131827 text/html 26067HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:18:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:43 GMTContent-length: 25849 Australian Report on Cannabis - Chapter 2 Chapter 2. POLICY GOALS Given the importance which is assigned to setting clear goalsfor any major social policy, it is surprising how infrequentlydiscussion of drug policy is preceded by a precise specificationof what the policy is intended to achieve. Too often, goals areeither global (to reduce drug use) or unattainable (to eliminatedrug use) and allow many interpretations. Similarly, goals areoften stated in such a way that they could be achieved through anumber of quite contradictory strategies and at vastly differentcosts (economic, social, and personal). Only infrequently doesthe discussion address the issue of the costs we are willing totolerate in order to achieve stated goals. Rarely is detailedconsideration given to how we might go about measuring the costs,both of drug use itself and of attempts to control it. In examining the range of potential regimes for the controlof cannabis use, it is important to have a clear idea of thecriteria against which we might evaluate their effects. Yetunambiguous and meaningful statements of the objectives ofcannabis policies are difficult to find anywhere. Most officialstatements about drug policy generally, and most discussionsabout drug control strategies, suffer from one or more of anumber of limitations. They may fail to proffer specific goals.They may state goals which are known to be unattainable. They mayfail to recognise the existence of multiple goals or, if they do,they may fail to acknowledge contradictions between them or toprovide a means for assigning priorities when the goals clash. All of these failings contribute to a policy debate whichlacks precision and intellectual rigour, and whose outcomesdepend more on rhetoric and emotion than on logical argument andempirical data. This report starts from the proposition that itis important to know what are the requirements for rational drugpolicy in general and what are the objectives of cannabis policyspecifically. Only when these issues are articulated clearly andcan be subjected to full public scrutiny can it be said that thecannabis policy debate has become a comprehensive and rationalone. The issues discussed in this chapter can be applied, withsuitable modifications as to specifics, to any area of drugpolicy. In this chapter we do not take any position on particularpolicy options. Our intention is to provide a comprehensiveframework within which any option can be evaluated. We intend in this chapter, too, to address the issue of drugpolicy, rather than drug legislation. As our discussion oflegislative options will show, similar-looking laws may havequite different implications for cost and effectiveness dependingon the way in which they are administered. In other words, thepolicy context may be more important than the legislation inunderstanding the impact of a particular approach to cannabiscontrol. For example, in both the United States and TheNetherlands it is illegal to possess and sell personal-usequantities of cannabis. The way in which the legislation isinterpreted and enforced, however, puts these two countries atdifferent ends of the cannabis policy spectrum (Wardlaw 1992). In its turn, the policy framework adopted in any particularcountry can only be understood fully if the observer is aware ofthe social and political context within which social problems areviewed, and with a knowledge of the nature and dimensions of thedrug problem in that country. Some conceptual clarificationsKleiman and Saiger (1992) suggest that discussion of options fordrug control policy should be preceded by agreement on some basicconceptual clarifications. These clarifications are intended todefine the nature of a satisfactory debate about drug controloptions. The following list is a modification and extension of Kleimanand Saiger's suggestions. Arguments that apply to the most appropriate control regime for one drug need not - and often do not apply to others. There has been considerable resistance to the idea that use of different drugs may best be controlled by different strategies. Certainly, a dominant theme in the drug control policies of many countries is that it is necessary to have consistent policies towards illicit drug use. It is argued that treating different illicit drugs differently, especially when 'differently' implies that one drug will attract less law enforcement attention or less social disapproval than another, will undermine the general authority and credibility of anti-drug messages. This approach overlooks at least one important consideration. That is that there are a number of approaches to the notion of consistency. Consistency does not necessarily imply that we have to have a monolithic approach to drug problems. We can, for example, have the goal of reducing the harm caused by illicit drug use, but can achieve that goal by a number of avenues. There is no logical reason why these avenues have to be the same for all drugs, as long as we can justify why we are treating different drugs differently, and as long as we can articulate these reasons to the public. The belief that we must maintain a rigid adherence to one set of strategies for all illicit drugs ignores the reality that we already quite successfully accept inconsistencies and contradictions in drug policy across the board. The most obvious example is the fact that we allow a number of drugs, foremost amongst which are tobacco and alcohol, to be used legally despite their causing the same types of damage against which we try to protect individuals and society by banning the use of other drugs. There is general agreement that it is the goal of policy on licit drugs to reduce the harm caused by their use. We seek to achieve this by attempting to persuade people not to take up drug use, to decrease their consumption of these drugs, or to alter their manner or pattern of use. Although the simplest way to reduce harm would be to reduce the number of people using the drugs (assuming for the argument here that remaining users continued their existing consumption levels and patterns), we do not see attempts to get others to move to less dangerous patterns of use (rather than giving up use) as undermining the message that use of drugs is not socially desirable. Rather, we recognise that the overall goal of reducing harm can be achieved by persuading some people not to take up drugs, others to discontinue their use, and yet others to moderate their use or to change to less dangerous drugs or methods of administration. Strategies aimed at moderation are not seen as undermining strategies aimed at abstinence. We simply accept that different strategies are appropriate for different groups in the community and that they can all contribute to the overall goal of harm minimisation. There is no logical reason why we cannot adopt the same approach with illicit drugs. Drug policies should be crafted to take account of the different patterns and types of harms caused by specific drugs. Attempting to impose across-the-board strategies for illicit drug control in the name of consistency (ignoring for the moment the glaring inconsistency in not treating licit drug use similarly) seems to assume that all drug problems are, in fact, equally susceptible to the same measures. We know, however, that this is not the case. Each drug has its own consumption patterns; each drug harms users and others in different ways and to different degrees; and each has its own demand patterns, supply systems and market characteristics (Kleiman & Saiger 1992). Not only do drugs differ in these ways, but the same drug may exhibit different characteristics in different geographical, socioeconomic or cultural contexts (Haaga & Reuter 1990). Accordingly, it is not logical to expect that there will be uniform solutions to drug problems. 'Consistency for the sake of it should not be able to stifle the ability of local areas, states or nations to deal with drug problems in a manner which is appropriate for their circumstances, cultural context, dimensions of the problem and so forth' (Wardlaw 1992, p154). It follows that decisions about how best to deal with problems in relation to a specific drug should be made on the basis of the circumstances surrounding use of that drug and the practical possibilities for intervening in them. The details of control regimes are crucial determinants of their outcomes. Such details should not be left undefined. Much of the confusion over what is the most appropriate regime for the control of cannabis use stems from poor definition of terms such as 'decriminalisation' and 'legalisation', and lack of specification of the details of alternative control regimes being debated. As the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs ([1]South Australia 1978) commented, people use these terms in a variety of senses and are often unaware of the significant differences that exist between various methods of control that have been proposed under them. We agree with the Commission that these terms are not very helpful. The word 'decriminalisation' sounds as though it refers to the removal of cannabis control from the criminal law. In practice, however, it usually refers to changes to the law which either allow possession of specified amounts of cannabis for personal consumption or reduce the penalties for such possession to minor fines or administrative sanctions involving no criminal record. As such, decriminalisation refers to reducing penalties, rather than removing them altogether ([2]Single 1989). Under most so-called decriminalisation proposals, dealing in cannabis would remain a serious criminal offence. The term 'legalisation' presents similar difficulties. It covers proposals which would literally remove the drug from the criminal law, to those which would limit availability to adults (much as alcohol and tobacco are now regulated), to more specific proposals which would allow access through clinics or other health services only to those with established habits. Discussing 'decriminalisation' or 'legalisation' without specifying the details of the particular model being proposed is not likely to be very productive (Kleiman & Saiger 1990). No sensible discussion of any of the options can take place without specification of such details as to whom proposed changes would apply and under what circumstances, rules about advertising, place and time of consumption, whether or not the changes would apply to all preparations and forms of cannabis (or, for example, be restricted to those falling below a certain potency), and the type of regulatory arrangements which would replace the current law enforcement ones, together with details of their methods of operation and costs. 'Such details should not be dismissed as easily determined or postponed as a problem requiring future thought' (Kleiman & Saiger 1992, p225). This report will discuss policy options under the broad headings suggested by the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, i.e. the total prohibition model; the prohibition/'civil penalty' model; the partial prohibition model; the regulatory model; and the free availability model ([3]South Australia 1978). Any analysis of control regimes should attempt to estimate their effects on both consumption levels and patterns of use. A major concern about any lessening of the current controls on cannabis is that it might lead to increases in consumption. While this is a serious concern, it is not the only dimension which needs to be monitored. It is also important to estimate how patterns of consumption might change under different control options. For example, if numbers of users rose slightly, but consumption per person fell, or less dangerous forms of the drug were used, or less harmful methods of use were employed, the overall amount of harm occasioned might be reduced and the policy might be judged more successful than the status quo. Similarly, if under one option, it seemed that numbers of users might fall, but that heavier use patterns would emerge, or more potent forms of the drug would become more popular, the option might be judged less desirable, even though a decrease in numbers of users had been achieved. Control regimes should not be considered in isolation from the problems of implementation and enforcement. In attempting to predict the outcomes for users of various alternatives to the current methods of cannabis control, it is important to specify the costs and problems of regulation that would accompany them. In all options which have any political reality there remains the need to licence, to tax or to regulate to ensure that restrictions are observed on such things as sale to minors, use in conjunction with the operation of vehicles or machinery, potency levels, amounts purchased etc. The costs and practical problems of implementation should be included in any debate about control options. Arguments about consequences of drug use should be separated from arguments about morals. Much confusion has been engendered in the drug policy debate because of a failure to separate the negative consequences of drug use from moral considerations. It is quite legitimate for a community to invoke moral arguments in determining the proper course of drug policy (Wilson 1990). But it must be clear that the arguments are moral ones, not morality disguised as concern over consequences. If opposition to cannabis use is based on the view that it is illegitimate to use a drug to alter one's perception, to seek pleasure or to become intoxicated (a moral argument), then it should be clearly stated as such so that the proposition can be debated in those terms. It confuses the issue and injects unproductive emotion into the argument if that concern is disguised by reference to the harms caused by cannabis use. These need also to be debated separately. We need to know whether there would still be opposition to cannabis use on moral grounds even if we could eliminate the health costs. Options should be evaluated on the basis of evidence of damage. We should require that policies that seek to impose expensive control regimes on any drug be based on evidence of harm occasioned by use of the drug. The cost and restrictiveness of the control regime should be clearly related to the damage caused by use of the drug, and there should be empirical evidence of the type and extent of the damage. Any policy should recognise the changing nature of the drug problem and be able to change with it. Additionally, all policies should be reviewed periodically to ensure that they are still relevant to current circumstances. A major drawback to current approaches to drug policy is that they are generally poor at adapting to changes in the nature of the drug problem or to changes in our levels of knowledge and understanding of drug use processes and patterns and their interactions with different control strategies. All policies should have in-built capacity for evaluation to enable them to be adjusted in a timely manner to emerging patterns of use or changes in our understanding of the problem. Policy should be made in the light of the costs of control as well as the benefits. Discussion of any policy option should clearly identify any costs associated with it. An attempt should be made to inventory all of the direct and indirect costs associated with the option, including social costs. It is particularly important to include any unintended consequences predicted or discovered. For example, what are the substitution effects of a particular policy (does enforcement success, for example, result in fewer users or do the users turn to other, more dangerous drugs)? The goals of drug policy should be realistic. Enunciating unrealistic goals for drug policy can have a number of negative consequences. Foremost amongst these are the undermining of the credibility of the policy and the justification of extreme methods in their pursuit (Wardlaw 1992). Discussion of policy options should include a specification of which harms they are intended to reduce. Specifying the harms intended to be reduced by the overall policy and the options within it clarifies thinking about goals and provides a necessary basis for evaluation. If possible, effects should also be discussed according to the dimensions of time (short-, medium-, and long-term effects), duration (temporary or permanent), and scale (minor, moderate, or major). Discussion of cannabis policy (and drug policy generally) should recognise the existence of multiple and sometimes contradictory goals. It may be necessary to choose explicitly between goals, to assign them to a hierarchy, or to accept that different goals (and, therefore, different strategies and programs) may be appropriate for different sub-populations or areas. Examples include accepting that it is appropriate to teach established users safer methods of use while trying to discourage other groups from starting use, or police not arresting cannabis users because it is considered to impose an unwarranted burden on the court and corrections systems. Policies to discourage cannabis use should be shown to be effective or be changed. Sound social policy should be robust enough to withstand critical scrutiny. The costs of current approaches to cannabis control are considerable and their continuation should be guaranteed only if data can be provided which demonstrate their effectiveness. The same criterion should be applied to any alternative approach. The harms caused by the control regimes themselves should not outweigh the harms prevented by them. It is very difficult to measure accurately the costs both of cannabis use and of efforts to prevent it. Nevertheless, it is not good enough merely to assert that a policy is the correct one, or to fail to investigate alternatives when there is evidence of ineffectiveness (the large number of users) and cost (the cost of law enforcement, the intrusions on civil liberties, violence and corruption caused by forcing sales onto a black market, and so on). Any social policy should be reviewed when there is reason to believe that the costs of administering it outweigh the harms reduced. The goals of cannabis policy In deciding upon the appropriate model to adopt to control cannabis use, it is necessary to specify the goals of the policy, as they will constitute the criteria against which selection will be made (and against which eventual evaluation of performance will be made). The following list comprises possible goals which have been mentioned in the literature on cannabis policy. It is intended as illustrative of the range of goals which might be considered and is not a set of goals proposed by this report: to reduce the total amount of cannabis consumed; to reduce use among young people; to reduce the supply of cannabis to the market; to increase the cost of cannabis to the buyer; to increase the probability of arrest for a cannabis offence; to promote safer methods of consumption of cannabis; to limit use of cannabis to smaller amounts; to limit sales of cannabis to specialist sellers (and not to have it sold by dealers in other, more dangerous, drugs, for example); to limit progression from cannabis use to use of other drugs; to serve as a symbol of community disapproval of drug use; to limit the amount of violence in the cannabis distribution system; and to limit the substitution of other (more damaging) drugs for cannabis. This list is not intended to be comprehensive. It is merelyindicative of the range and detail which needs to be consideredwhen deciding on policy directions and on the resultinglegislation and implementation strategies. Examination of such alist makes a number of things apparent. One of these is that tomake sense of it requires the assignment of priorities.Priorities may be of two types. The first is simply to assign aranking in order of importance as judged by some definedcriteria. This is useful when attempting to assign resources todifferent parts of a total strategy. A consideration which mayalso play a part here is the impact that a particular strategy isestimated to be capable of having. The second involves decidingbetween two or more conflicting goals. Considerations here arelikely to include harms caused or prevented, as well asconsiderations such as cost and effectiveness. Laying out goalsin this fashion also alerts us to the need for high quality datafor decision-making, and to the need for sound evaluationmethodologies to be able to measure the impact of our policiesand their resulting implementation strategies. Examination of thelist above makes it immediately apparent that extensive empiricaldata are required to be able to assign priorities and measureimpacts. The list also provides a practical example of the sortsof considerations which policy makers should include in theirdeliberations as they attempt to apply the conceptual toolsdiscussed earlier in this chapter. References Haaga, J. & Reuter, P. 1990, 'The limits of the Czar'sukase: drug policy at the local level', Yale Law and PolicyReview, vol. 8, no. 1, pp36-74. Kleiman, M. & Saiger, A. 1992, 'Taxes, regulations andprohibitions: Reformulating the legalization debate', in DrugPolicy in the Americas, ed. P. Smith, Westview Press, Boulder. Kleiman, M. & Saiger, A. 1990, 'Drug legalization: theimportance of asking the right question', Hofstra Law Review,vol. 18, pp527-565. Single, E. 1989, 'The impact of marijuana decriminalization:an update', Journal of Public Health Policy, vol. 10, no. 4,pp456-466. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1978, Cannabis: A Discussion Paper, South AustralianGovernment, Adelaide. Wardlaw, G. 1992, 'Discussion', in M. Bull, D. McDowell, J.Norberry, H. Strang & G. Wardlaw, Comparative Analysis ofDrug Strategy, NCADA Monograph Series No. 18, AGPS, Canberra. Wilson, J.Q. 1990, 'Drugs and crime', in Drugs and Crime:Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 13, eds M. Tonry& J.Q. Wilson, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-21IA031-000652-B046-170http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131855 text/html 89274HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:18:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:34 GMTContent-length: 89056 Australian Cannabis report - Chapter 3 Chapter 3. CANNABIS IN CONTEXT: HISTORY, LAWS AND INTERNATIONAL TREATIES Definitions In 1978 the South Australian Royal Commission into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs issued a comprehensive discussion paperon cannabis ([1]South Australia 1978). It proposed a general anda specific definition of cannabis along the following lines.Cannabis generally refers to 'the cannabis plant and anypreparations made from the plant, including the dried leaves andflowering tops, resinous material separated from the plant andrefined oil' ([2]South Australia 1978, p.i). Like the word 'marijuana', 'cannabis' is also used to referspecifically to the 'dried preparations of the plant itself'([3]South Australia 1978, p.i). The words 'cannabis resin' and'hashish' are used when referring to the resin of the cannabisflower. Cannabis is a Latin word meaning hemp. The expressions'hemp' or 'Indian hemp' are particularly used in older documentscited in this chapter and refer to the whole of the cannabisplant. Cannabis in history From its earliest recorded uses, cannabis has been importantin commerce and warfare. Its fibrous stems have been used to maketextiles, paper, ropes and bowstrings. Cannabis has been employedas a medicine and as a psychoactive drug for social and religiouspurposes. Cannabis seeds have been used as an ingredient in themanufacture of soap, lamp oil, paint and varnish ([4]Abel 1980,p.x) and as bird seed. According to[5] Abel (1980), the earliest recorded use ofcannabis occurred in Taiwan, approximately 10,000 years ago. Italso appears to have been used in China as early as the secondcentury BC for clothing, shoes, bowstrings and for itsanaesthetic properties. In India, it is known to have beenutilised for its psychoactive properties in religious ceremoniesand was an ingredient in three preparations - bhang, ganja andcharas. Its use has been documented in Asia Minor - in Turkey -as early as 1,000 BC. Both the Greeks and Romans recorded itsefficacy as a medicine - especially for treating earache. Oneparticular example of its use in the Middle East must be detailedbecause of its influence on misconceptions about the propertiesof the drug. Between the 11th and 13th centuries AD, a sect knownas the Assassins, followers of Hasan-ibn-Sabah, dominated theMiddle East through a reign of terror. Marco Polo reported thatthe Assassins used a drug. He did not identify hashish as thisdrug and it appears, in any case, that the drug used by theAssassins was not used to rouse them to bloody deeds. However, inthe 19th century a number of European writers claimed that theword 'Assassin' was a derivation of the word 'hashish'. A linkwas thus forged and popularised associating cannabis andviolence; an association that was repeated in the 20th century inthe anti-cannabis writings of Harry Anslinger, chief of theUnited States Federal Bureau of Narcotics [6](Abel 1980). In the Middle Ages cannabis was used for its psychoactiveeffects as well as commercially. Its use as a mind-altering drugwas widespread in Egypt and seems to date from around the 13thcentury. In medieval Europe cannabis appears to have beenemployed as a folk medicine, particularly for the treatment oftoothache and rheumatism, and in childbirth. Its role inwitchcraft resulted in a Papal fiat in the 15th century whichcondemned witchcraft and the use of hemp in the satanic mass[7](Abel 1980). Its major use in Europe during the Middle Agesand into the time of the colonial expansion of the Europeanpowers was to produce ropes and cordage - especially for ships'rigging and anchor ropes. In Italy, hemp was a major crop,particularly important in establishing states such as Venice asseafaring powers. The Venetians operated a state-run hemp factoryas a way of achieving quality assurance. The historical importance of hemp is evidenced by a decreeissued by Henry VIII in 1533 that 'for every sixty acres ofarable land a farmer owned, a quarter acre was to be sown withhemp. The penalty for not doing so was to be three shillings andfour pence' [8](Abel 1980, pp72-3). Hemp cultivation was clearlya vital ingredient in enabling aspiring maritime powers toexploit the riches of the New World. However, despite the threatof penalties, the British had little success in stimulating theproduction of cannabis domestically. They were more successful intheir American colonies: 'During the 17th century Indian hemp was the basis of theAmerican Colonialists' trade and commerce, and so great was theneed to equip the British Navy that James I issued a Royal Decreeto instruct colonialists to increase their hemp production'[9](Hindmarch 1972, p254). It appears that more widespread use ofcannabis in Europe for its psychoactive effects dates from theperiod of colonial expansion. Interest in cannabis and other drugs was stimulated by thediaries and journals of travellers who described the use ofcannabis and other drugs in Africa, India and Asia Minor, and byreports from soldiers in colonial armies who experimented withcannabis while serving overseas. One of the first Westernpublications on drugs was Garcia Da Orta's Colloquies on theSimples and Drugs of India published in 1563, which described theeffects of bhang (a concoction containing cannabis). Thispublication was followed by several other books by Europeanadventurers published in the latter part of the sixteenthcentury. These works were not only important in spreadingknowledge of cannabis' psychoactive properties, but inpopularising misconceptions about the drug. For example, a widespread belief that the effects ofconsuming opium and bhang (which contained both opium andcannabis) were identical can be dated from this period. Itappears both in the works of the Dutchman John Huyghen vanLinschoten and the Portuguese Fray Sebastien. The linkage betweencannabis and violent and dangerous behaviour also dates fromaround this time - in particular, from the writings of theOrientalist Silvestre de Sacy. Colonial expansion and colonialwars also brought with them new understandings in Europe of themedical uses of cannabis. [10]Abel (1980) claims that by the 17thcentury 'the medicinal properties of the plant were fairly wellknown to the medical profession' (p116) and by 1682, cannabisseeds were listed in the New London Dispensatory as a remedy forcoughs and jaundice. In addition to increasing interest in cannabis being shown byscientists and doctors, hashish (and other drugs such as opium)became known to European students, writers and artists. InEngland, Egyptian hashish sweets such as Turkish Delight wereeaten by university students. In the 19th century, hashish wasused by the French Hashish Club which numbered among its membersTheophile Gautier, Alexandre Dumas, Victor Hugo and EugeneDelacroix. While not so popular among English writers andartists, it was used around the turn of the century by theDecadents including WB Yeats and Ernest Dawson. For French andEnglish writers, hashish, like other drugs, was taken to givethem new experiences to write about, as a plot device, and it wasemployed to enhance creativity. Another important aspect of the colonial experience in thespread of cannabis to Western Europe is seen in the work of W.B.O'Shaughnessy, an Irish doctor posted to India who is creditedwith introducing cannabis to Western medicine [11](Abel 1980).While in India he experimented with cannabis in the treatment ofa wide range of diseases including rheumatism, cholera, tetanusand epilepsy, and was enthusiastic enough about its usefulness tocommission its conversion to a form suitable for medicinal use.This extract was widely prescribed for childbirth, migraine,insomnia, coughs and the treatment of opium withdrawal [12](Abel1980). However, Western use of cannabis for medicinal purposes didnot extend much beyond the first few decades of the 20th century.The medical profession turned its attention to other drugs andother methods of administration. The science of organic chemistryenabled drugs like morphine and cocaine to be isolated, andchemical synthesis of drugs such as heroin to occur [13](Musto1991). The hypodermic syringe was invented in 1845 and enabledmore efficient administration of drugs. Morphine was isolated in1803 and unlike cannabis was water soluble and thus injectable[14](Abel 1980). Further, the growth of the pharmaceutical industry enabledthe new drugs to be mass produced, advertised and distributed[15](Musto 1991). In addition, the strength of commerciallyavailable cannabis varied considerably, and administration of thesame amounts of the drug appeared to elicit different responsesin different patients. There were reports of adverse effects inpatients [16](Manderson 1993). In contrast, drugs like morphine and later heroin wereenthusiastically embraced by doctors because they werefast-acting, and provided reliable and very effective painrelief. Some use of cannabis for medical purposes did remain.Until the late 1930s 'Parke Davis, Eli Lilly and Squibb ...marketed preparations of cannabis extract and promoted them forthe treatment of asthma, tension and pain' [17](South Australia1978, p98). Cannabis appeared as 'extractum cannabis' in theUnited States Pharmacopoeia until 1942 (Australia 1977). InAustralia, tincture of cannabis was used until the mid-1960s[18](Caswell 1992). Medical and scientific interest in cannabis has largely beendormant until recently. In the United States renewed attention isbeing given to its possible therapeutic properties, particularlyas an anti-emetic for cancer chemotherapy patients and as anagent for reducing intra-ocular pressure in glaucoma sufferers([19]Trebach & Zeese 1990). Some scientific debate is alsooccurring in Australia [20](Caswell 1992; see also [21]Appendix1). If non-medical consumption of cannabis in the 19th and early20th centuries was regarded as a problem at all, it was inrespect of its use by colonised peoples and minority groups.However, in relation to colonised peoples, the attitudes of theWestern powers were far from consistent. For example, cannabiswas widely used in India and Egypt - both subject to Britishrule. In Egypt, local officials and foreign rulers, including theTurks, attempted to suppress its use in the 19th century. TheBritish, who received no revenues from Egyptian cannabisproduction, supported these attempts. The situation was more complex in India. The Britishgovernment initially appears to have had little interest incannabis use among Indians. British complacency was no doubtlargely due to the fact that, since 1798, the government hadlicensed the manufacture and sale of hemp drugs in India andreceived considerable revenues as a result. However, pressurefrom local Indian administrators and later from their Britishcounterparts - concerned that cannabis use was contributing tocrime, illness and social unrest - finally resulted in theestablishment of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1893. TheCommission reported in 1894. Loss of revenue if cannabis were tobe banned was a factor in the Hemp Commission's conclusion thatprohibition would not be justified. Other importantconsiderations for the Commission were lack of evidence about theill effects of cannabis, the difficulties of enforcingprohibition and the important place of the drug in the religiousand social life of the sub-continent. The use of cannabis by Black Africans was largely ignored bythe colonial powers. However, South Africa had concerns aboutcannabis use among Indians brought to work in the colony. In 1870a law was passed forbidding the smoking, use or possession ofhemp by Indians. In the United States, anxiety about cannabis use wasassociated with its possession by poor ethnic groups. It appearsto have been used first by Mexican refugees fleeing into thesouth-western states from the 1910 Revolution. The earliest USlaws proscribing the use of cannabis can be found in thosestates. Cannabis use later spread to the Black population. By1937 there were prohibitions on cannabis across the country. Development of international treaties Australian drug laws, like those of many other countries,closely follow the development of international drug laws, so inthis section the growth of international drug treaties will bedescribed. These treaties are designed to control theinternational traffic in certain drugs and to encourage domesticrestrictions on their supply and use. The influence of the United States in the conception anddevelopment of these instruments has been enormous. JusticeMichael Kirby has characterised the degree of internationalcooperation brought about by the fear of drugs as 'exceptional'(1992, p312). However, fear was not the only ingredient in earlycrusading by the United States for international action. Acomplex array of factors was at work. The first international meeting on drugs was concerned withopium and, in particular, with Britain's opium trade with China.It was attended by 13 nations and held in Shanghai in 1909. Atthe Shanghai Conference the United States argued for a totalprohibition on opium, and was opposed by the United Kingdom.According to [22]Abel (1980) the background to the meeting was asfollows. In 1882 the United States Congress passed the ChineseExclusion Act. In retaliation, China prohibited the importationof American manufactured goods: Faced with the loss of thelucrative Chinese market, and aware of China's efforts toeradicate its own domestic opium problem, President TheodoreRoosevelt convened an international conference in 1909 inShanghai to help China eradicate the problem of opium addictionamong its inhabitants. By trying to impress China with itsgoodwill and concern about her drug crisis, the United Stateshoped to change China's attitude towards American goods'[23](Abel, p193). While economic factors were undoubtedly important inprecipitating US action, they were not the only considerations.Fear of social unrest, racist attitudes and moral crusading allplayed a part. In addition: Missionaries from the United Statesin China had long been publicising the source and the perniciouseffects of opium smoking among the Chinese. Given the role ofEngland in that trade, the [Indian Hemp Commission] report seemedlike a whitewash for British commercial purposes and fannedAmerican progressive opinion even further against the Europeanimperialists in Asia [24](South Australia 1979, p42). The 1909 conference did not produce an international treaty.Another international drugs conference was held in 1912. At the1912 Hague Conference some 46 nations discussed morphine,cocaine, cannabis and heroin, as well as opium. The outcome ofthe conference was the Hague Convention for the Suppression ofOpium and Other Drugs. It required the parties to 'confine tomedical and legitimate purposes the manufacture, sale and use ofopium, heroin, morphine and cocaine' [25](quoted in Manderson1993, p63) Both the United States and Italy wanted cannabisincluded in the Convention, but they were unsuccessful. The 1925 Geneva Convention on Opium and Other Drugs was amore significant document. As a result of lobbying by Egypt,Turkey and South Africa, who were supported by the United States,cannabis was included in the Convention. The Convention alsocreated an international scheme for the monitoring and control oftraffic in narcotic drugs, together with an administrative agency- the Permanent Central Opium Board. Import and export quotaswere established, as well as statistical reporting requirements.The Convention required the parties to 'enact effective laws tolimit exclusively to medical and scientific purposes themanufacture, import, sale, distribution, export and use ofcannabis in the form used for medical purposes at the time'[26](South Australia 1978, p34). Significantly, the word'legitimate' which appeared in the 1912 Hague Convention wasremoved from the 1925 Geneva Convention. Finally, the Narcotics Limitation Convention of 1931 targetedthe manufacture of narcotics and required the parties to limit itto scientific and medical purposes. Controls on licit manufacturewere seen as important, because apart from illicit imports fromabroad, leakage from the licit market was a source of illicit usein Western nations. . Inquiries into drug use and trafficking The number of inquiries into drug use and trafficking havebeen legion - both in Australia and overseas. Three commonfeatures are seen in many of them. First, many question thealleged ill effects of cannabis use. Second, some makerecommendations for law reform. Third, most inquiries have hadlittle impact on public policy or legislative change in relationto cannabis use. In Australia, for example, governments have generallypreferred to rely on law enforcement, treatment and education intheir quest to reduce drug use [27](Hartland et al. 1992). Theyhave been far less ready to embrace a philosophical shift inpolicy towards minimising the harm resulting from drug use or totackle politically sensitive issues such as cannabis law reform.As mentioned earlier, the first inquiry relating to cannabisdates from 1893 when the British administration in Indiaestablished the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. The Commissionheard nearly 1,200 submissions, both oral and written. It had awide mandate, including the effects of cannabis use on 'the moraland social life of the people of India' [28](Abel 1980, p127).While the Commission found that excessive use of cannabis couldlead to mental disorders, immorality and susceptibility todisease, it concluded that the evidence demonstrated 'mostclearly how little injury society has hitherto sustained fromhemp drugs' [29](quoted in Abel 1980, p131). In particular, theCommission reported that moderate use had no appreciable physicalor mental effects, did not induce immoral behaviour and hadlittle connection with crime. Other major overseas inquiries that failed to discover anydependence-producing properties in cannabis, harm as aconsequence of moderate use, a strong link with crime or aprogressive effect leading inexorably to use of drugs such asheroin, cocaine or morphine were: the Panama Canal Zone Military Investigations (1916-1929); the La Guardia Committee Report 1944 - United States; the Report of the Hallucinogens Sub-Committee of the United Kingdom Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence 1968 (Wootton Report); the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs 1972 (Le Dain Commission) - Canada; and the report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1972 (Shafer Commission) - United States. In addition, both the Le Dain and Shafer reports containedproposals for law reform. The Shafer report recommendeddecriminalisation of: possession of marijuana for personal use in private; and casual distribution in private of small amounts of marijuana for no or insignificant remuneration ([30]United States 1972, pp152-4). It also recommended that possession in public of an ounce or less of marijuana should not be an offence but should be subject to seizure [31](United States 1972, pp152-4). The Le Dain Commission recommended that simple possession offences be repealed. Other overseas investigations which failed to uncoverunequivocal evidence about the harmful effects of cannabis were astudy of the United States Institute of Mental Health entitledGanja in Jamaica (1975), and a United States government study onCosta Rica (1975). It should not be surmised, however, thatoverseas investigations have all concluded that cannabis usepresented no risks to drug users. United Nations reportspublished between 1973 and 1974 found that cannabis use waslikely to lead to dependence, and resulted in public health andsocial problems. A 1974 US Senate report on Marihuana-HashishEpidemic and its Impact on US Security reported that cannabis useresulted in brain damage, amotivational syndrome, and genetic andreproductive defects. In Australia, there have been a large number of Parliamentaryinquiries and Royal Commissions into drug use and drugtrafficking. In 1971 the Senate Select Committee on DrugTrafficking and Drug Abuse (the Marriott Committee) wasestablished. Its brief included investigation into the incidence,distribution and causes of drug use, and the adequacy oflegislation and educational programs. It concluded that penaltiesfor drug use should be commensurate with the different degrees ofharm presented by different drugs, that young, first offendersshould be treated leniently and that penalties for traffickingshould be severe. However, its recommendations were cautious:that, pending further sociological and medical research, 'presentrestrictions on the use of cannabis drugs should be retained inAustralia' (Australia 1971, p91). The Marriott Committee report was followed in 1977 by one ofthe most significant Australian inquiries into drugs. In thatyear, the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare (the BaumeCommittee) produced its report Drug Problems in Australia - anIntoxicated Society? which looked at the use of licit and illicitdrugs in Australia. Like other reports, before and since, itrecognised differing harms produced by different drugs andconcluded that drug use was more a social/medical problem than alegal one. It also considered the social and personal harmsflowing from the illegal status of some drugs and recommendedthat: 'legal controls [should] not [be] of such a nature as to inhibit rehabilitation of the user or to cause more social damage than use of the drug causes' (Australia 1977, p164); cannabis legislation should be enacted that 'recognises the significant differences between opiate narcotics and cannabis in their health effects and in the criminal impact on users and the community' (Australia 1977, p164); possession of marijuana for personal use should no longer be a criminal offence and should attract only a fine; penalties for possession of hashish, hashish oil and purified THC should remain at their present levels because of the potency of these drugs. Commonwealth Government response to the Baume Committeereport was both tardy and hostile. [32]Hartland (1991) quotesSenator Baume's view of that response: The Prime Minister of the day, rather than come and say I wasa fink, did something cleverer. He appointed a learnedconservative Judge to head up a Royal Commission into Drugs withterms of reference which virtually made it inevitable that thelearned Judge would bring out a report which said we need moresocial control, heavier penalties, more enforcement authorities,and don't change the laws (p63). In 1978 the New South Wales Joint Parliamentary Committeeupon Drugs handed down its Report into Drug Abuses. Its mandatewas to examine the effects, use and supply of drugs of dependencetogether with policy issues. Alcohol and tobacco were notincluded in the Committee's terms of reference. The Committeeexpressed concern about 'the growing social stress that must bearising from the fact that a great many young adults, byindulging in a drug which they see as less damaging than alcohol,run the risk not only of involvement with the criminal law, butalso have the prospect of ruined careers' [33](New South Wales1978, p76). The report and the Committee's earlier Memorandum tothe New South Wales Parliament recommended that: personal use of cannabis no longer be a criminal offence; first offenders be given bonds and probation and on successful completion of these, all records be expunged; and penalties for trafficking in cannabis be severe. The next major inquiry was the Australian Royal Commission ofInquiry into Drugs (Williams Royal Commission). Its multi-volumereport was released in 1979. Rather than considering the degreeof harm produced by different drugs, the Williams RoyalCommission took the view that cannabis was not a harmless drugbecause it produced an intoxicating effect. It concluded thatremoval of prohibitions against cannabis would depart from theintention and spirit of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,have a 'domino effect' in that it would stimulate calls for therelaxation of prohibitions on other drugs, and send a signal tothe community that drug use was acceptable. The Williams Royal Commission recommended that considerationof relaxation of prohibitions on cannabis not occur for 10 years,during which time information about the drug and its use would becollected by National and State Drug Information Centres.Although the Commonwealth government set up a National DrugInformation Centre, the State and Territory centres were notestablished - making the review recommended by Williamsimpossible. Like the Baume Committee report that preceded it, the reportof the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Useof Drugs (the Sackville Royal Commission) prompted littlegovernment response to its recommendations. In relation tocannabis, the Commission dismissed the progression theory andremarked that where cannabis users also consumed other illicitdrugs, this was due to the illegal status of cannabis itself. The Committee made wide-ranging recommendations, includingthe repeal of the offence of use or administration of drugs, andthe establishment of drug assessment and aid panels. Some of itsmost radical proposals related to cannabis and cannabis resin. Itrecommended that 'cultivation [of cannabis] for personal use, usein private and small-scale gratuitous distribution in private toadults ...[should] not be a criminal offence ... No distinction... [should] be made between cannabis and cannabis resin, butcannabis oil ... [should] remain subject to a policy of totalprohibition' ([34]South Australia 1979, p375). The Commission found no evidence to 'support the view thatcannabis [was] associated with a tendency towards aggression andviolent crime' ([35]South Australia 1979, p51). In addition, theCommission questioned some of the psychological and physiologicalill effects attributed to cannabis, such as amotivationalsyndrome and psychosis (though it concluded that there was somesmall risk of brain damage). In general, it did not dramatise thepossible adverse effects of cannabis use, recognising theexistence of equivocal research findings and insufficient data. The next major Australian inquiry which touched on cannabiswas the investigation by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on theNational Crime Authority which reported in 1989. Its terms ofreference included the scope and nature of the trade in illegaldrugs, the efficacy of law enforcement, and the costs andefficacy of prohibition. It concluded that: 'If the aim of thepolicy [of prohibition] was to reduce the use of prohibitedsubstances, or even to minimise access to them, it has clearlyfailed' (Australia 1989, p92), And it concluded that 'should thelatest initiatives fail to make any significant inroads on themarket then it would be appropriate to consider some relaxationof the present prohibitionism as an alternative policy' (p123).Before concluding this section, a number of recent inquiries intodrugs should be mentioned. In 1991 the ACT Legislative Assembly Select Committee on HIV,Illegal Drugs and Prostitution tabled its report on Marijuana andOther Illegal Drugs. The focus of the report was on the'effectiveness of the current legal and social controls on drugtaking, with particular reference to marijuana' [36](AustralianCapital Territory 1991, p1). Proceeding from a belief in harmminimisation and the view that drug use can never be completelyeliminated, the Committee recommended that: possession of up to 25g of cannabis no longer be an offence; possession of more than 25g of cannabis and less than 100g of cannabis attract a fine of $150; possession of more than 100g of cannabis should incur a penalty of $5,000 or two years imprisonment, or both; cultivation of five cannabis plants should no longer be an offence; and there should be no offence of self-administration in respect to cannabis. Another recent inquiry into illicit drugs was undertaken bythe New South Wales Legislative Council's Standing Committee onSocial Issues. However, at the date of writing, the Committee'sreport had not been completed and there have been suggestionsthat it will not be (Symonds 1992). In South Australia, aLegislative Council Select Committee on the Control and IllegalUse of Drugs of Dependence has been established. Among otherthings it has been charged with reporting on the effectiveness ofcurrent drug laws in controlling drug trafficking, the costs ofenforcing anti-trafficking laws and the social impacts ofcriminal activity flowing from illicit drug use and trafficking.In Queensland, an Advisory Committee on Illicit drugs wasestablished in the aftermath of the Fitzgerald Committee ofInquiry into Possible Illegal Activities and Associated PoliceMisconduct. The Committee made cannabis the subject of its firstdiscussion paper for a number of reasons. Among these were thefact that cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug and theillicit drug having the greatest impact on the criminal justicesystem. The Committee is now seeking submissions on 'preferredlegislative, enforcement and social responses to the issues ofcannabis use and production' [37](Queensland 1993, p3). Australian laws Before embarking on a description of the development andpresent content of Australian drug laws, it should be stated thatthe Australian Constitution contains no general power tolegislate on crime. While many Commonwealth criminal laws havebeen enacted incidental to the heads of power enumerated in theConstitution, criminal laws have largely been the province of theStates. For this reason, the focus of this section is on Stateand Territory legislation. As[38] Manderson (1993) has remarked, consumption of drugs inthe 19th century was largely a matter of personal choice. Drugs -including the opiates - were available from a wide variety ofsources including medical practitioners, pharmacists,homoeopaths, sellers of patent medicines and grocers. Unlike theopiates, however, cannabis was little known or used in theAustralia until the 1960s. There were some exceptions. Forexample, medicinal use of cannabis occurred in the 19th centuryand to a minor extent, in the 20th century. Cigares de Joy(cannabis cigarettes) were sold over the counter in Australiainto the 20th century [39](Manderson, 1993). However, according to [40]Manderson (1993) 'As late as 1938Smith's Weekly reported "the first appearance inAustralia" of "a Mexican drug that drives men and womento the wildest excesses ... distorts moral values and leads todegrading sexual extravagances"' (p72). This drug was, ofcourse, cannabis. A number of forces coalesced in the development of drug lawsin Australia. The first laws - poisons acts - specified certaindrugs required to be sold by medical practitioners or chemistsand stipulated labelling requirements [41](Carney 1981). However,these labelling requirements did not apply to drugs sold undermedical prescription, to patent medicines or to homoeopathicpreparations [42](Manderson 1993, p9). According to the Joint Parliamentary Committee (Australia1989) these early controls were instituted in response to the useof arsenic in suicides, poisonings and homicides. In 1862, SouthAustralia enacted the first Australian statute regulating thesale and use of poisons [43](Carney 1981). In 1876 New SouthWales and Victoria followed with Sale and Use of Poisons Acts.Most importantly, these early laws generally did not stipulatewho could use drugs or for what purposes [44](Fox & Mathews1992). The first laws conceptualising drugs as a problem wereenacted in the 19th century and were the product of racism andthe temperance movement [45](Carney 1981). This phase oflegislative controls on the supply and use of prohibited drugshas been characterised as involving 'the application of criminalpenalties to certain activities related to drugs, particularlythe supply of opium, which had not previously attracted legalsanctions' [46](South Australia 1978, p33). Early laws singledout opium smoking - a practice of Chinese immigrants who had cometo Australia in the mid-19th century during the Gold Rush. Therewere two targets - the Chinese themselves and the Aboriginalpeople believed to be financially and sexually exploited by theChinese who provided them with opium. In 1891 Queensland passed the Sale and Use of Poisons Actwhich proscribed the supply of opium to Aboriginal people, exceptfor medicinal purposes. Later other States enacted laws directedat opium smoking - South Australia passed the Opium Act 1895, andVictoria passed the Opium Smoking Prohibition Act 1905 and thePolice Offences (Amendment) Act 1908. The Commonwealth, by a 1905Proclamation, banned the importation of opium suitable forsmoking. While racism was a very significant force in the developmentof early Australian drug laws, other influences were also atwork. The late 19th century witnessed a movement away fromlaissez-faire attitudes towards greater interventionism and abelief in the efficacy of law in promoting social and moral goals[47](Manderson 1993). It witnessed a struggle for supremacybetween the medical professional, other health professionals andthe sellers of patent medicines. It also saw the growth of theprohibitionist movement. Prohibitionist movements were notconfined to the United States nor to alcohol - patent medicinesand tobacco were also prohibitionist targets (Manderson 1993). The second phase in the history of Australian drug lawsinvolved domestic implementation of international agreements[48](South Australia 1978). The growth of internationalconventions led an inexorable, although very gradual expansion ofAustralian drug laws to cover cannabis. Australia was not aloneas a nation in feeling the pressure to conform to theseinternational instruments. However, it was subject to additionalpressures from the British government. The United Kingdomrepresented its colonies and dominions at international meetingsand insisted that they comply with international controls.Following the 1925 Geneva Convention, the Commonwealth was thefirst government to succumb to the exhortations of the UnitedKingdom. It proscribed the import of cannabis in 1926 through theCustoms (Prohibited Imports) Proclamation and at the same timebanned the export of cannabis. Efforts to bring the States intoline were less successful. Cannabis use in Australia was not aproblem and there appears to have been little domestic agitationin support of proscription. However, while the response of theStates was slow, it was nevertheless inevitable: It was enoughthat international organisations had called for controls and thatthe calls had been heeded by the United Kingdom Parliament, whoseattitudes in this as in other matters were of paramountimportance to Commonwealth and State legislators (South Australia1978, p6). The first State controls on cannabis use were introduced inVictoria in the Poisons Act 1928, which penalised theunauthorised use of Indian hemp and resin. This was followed bythe Dangerous Drugs Act 1934 (SA), the Police Offences Amendment(Drugs) Act 1935 (NSW), the Health Act 1937 (Qld), a 1950Proclamation under the Police Offences (Drugs) Act 1928 (WA) andthe Dangerous Drugs Act 1959 (Tas). Australia's attitude to drugsand drug laws became entrenched at an early stage. Manderson(1993) has described it very clearly - lack of a domestic problem(and this particularly applied to cannabis) meant thatlegislation was accepted uncritically; no pressure groups existedto stimulate debate or mount opposition, and the absence of adrug problem meant that it was impossible to evaluate the costsand benefits of the prohibitionist model - it was simply assumedthat the model worked effectively: As the structure of modern drug laws ... took shape, eachbrick depending on those beneath it for support and validity, fewremembered or even thought to question why they had ever beenlaid. So effective had the gradual process of entrenchment beenthat alternative approaches soon became unthinkable. What countedwas the preservation of the laws already in place. If they werefailing, the answer was simple - more of the same' [49](Manderson1993, p75). The impact of drug use in the 1960s has been well-documentedand was an international phenomenon. But until this time, druguse was not viewed as a widespread social problem in Australia -rather as contained and containable. The consumption of drugssuch as morphine, pethidine, opium and heroin by dependent userswas chiefly confined in Australia to those with a dependence thatwas therapeutic in its origins or to minority groups - forexample, very old Chinese members of the community. In 1960 Australia reported to the Commission on NarcoticDrugs that some Indian hemp use was occurring in the 'theatricalworld' (quoted in Manderson 1993, p144). But during the 1960s,the nature and extent of illicit drug use - including the use ofcannabis - changed dramatically. It became more widespread, itbecame matter of choice (rather than 'necessity' throughtherapeutic dependence), it was embraced by students and youth,and it was associated with changing moral values and practices,alienation, and challenges to societal values and the politicalorder. It brought increasing numbers of otherwise law-abidingAustralians into contact with the criminal law, criminalpenalties and associated stigmatisation. The use of drugs such ascannabis and heroin came to be regarded both as a symptom ofsocial malaise and a cause of it. The third phase in the history of Australian drug lawscommenced during the 1960s. From that time 'the States beganoverhauling their drug laws and the Commonwealth became much moreactively involved in the field, both by ratifying new conventionsand by revising the provisions of the Customs Act' ([50]SouthAustralia 1978, pp35-6). In addition, in response to treatyobligations, the Commonwealth introduced new federal laws ondrugs - the Narcotic Drugs Act 1967 was the first of these. Atstate level, control of recreational drugs was gradually removedfrom poisons statutes, whose original purpose was to 'regulateand control the supply and distribution of pharmaceuticals andpoisons on public health grounds' ([51]Kirby 1992, p315), andplaced into special legislation. Drug laws and drug policies fromthis time onwards can be characterised as follows. First, a law enforcement approach became firmly entrenched atCommonwealth level with the important role played by Customs,which had no interest in any medical or public health model ofdrug use or supply. Second, penalties were increased. Third, there were changes to basic principles of criminal law- such as reversal of the onus of proof - in order to makeconvictions easier ([52]Manderson 1993). Last, there was a shift in legislative emphasis away fromdrug users to drug traffickers. Both Commonwealth and some Statelaws distinguished between traffickable quantities of drugs(including cannabis) and amounts deemed as being less thantraffickable quantities. For the most part, penalties forcultivation, production and manufacture, possession and use ofcannabis, and possession of drug paraphernalia were substantialduring the 1960s and 1970s. For example, in South Australia thepenalty was $4,000 and/or 10 years imprisonment for knowinglycultivating cannabis (s5(2)(b)) and $2,000 and/or two yearsimprisonment for knowingly being in possession, using oradministering (s5(1)). Debate about cannabis, research that showed the widespreadnature of cannabis use, alarming law enforcement statistics, thework of the early Parliamentary and other inquiries, anddifficulties in administering some drug laws, led to the firstlegislative changes in the middle to late 1970s. Thesedistinguished between simple possession of cannabis and otherdrugs. The first jurisdiction to change law enforcement practicesand then legislation was the Australian Capital Territory. Anon-enforcement policy in relation to simple cannabis possessionoffences was instituted following a number of court cases inwhich the police failed to secure convictions because the PublicHealth (Prohibited Drugs) Ordinance did not contain a definitionof cannabis. In 1975, the Ordinance was amended to include a definition ofcannabis. At the same time the maximum penalty for possession ofless than 25g of cannabis was reduced to $100. Some reforms alsooccurred in the Northern Territory. Under the Prohibited DrugsOrdinance 1977 (NT), a first offender was liable to a fine of$500; while second or third offences of possession were moreheavily penalised, imprisonment was not provided as a sanction.Further legislative change occurred in the 1980s. The Drugs,Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981 (Vic) containedslightly less severe penalties for cannabis trafficking than fortrafficking in other illicit drugs. The Drugs, Poisons andControlled Substances (Amendment) Act 1983 set the maximumpenalty for possession of less than 50g of cannabis at $500. Inaddition, s76 of the Act empowered magistrates to award anadjourned bond in certain circumstances in the case of an offenceof possession of up to 50g of cannabis. No conviction could berecorded in the case of a first offender. Section 76 applies onlyto cannabis, not to other drugs, and it does not apply totrafficking offences in respect of any drug. In South Australia, the Controlled Substances Act was passedin 1984. As originally formulated, the Act distinguished betweenoffences involving cannabis or cannabis resin and offencesinvolving other illicit drugs. The Act proscribed (and stillproscribes) the possession, smoking, consumption, administrationor self-administration, manufacture, sale or supply of drugs ofdependence or prohibited drugs, and the possession of drugparaphernalia. Under the 1984 Act, the penalty for possession,smoking or consumption of small quantities of cannabis orcannabis resin was a maximum of $500. For any other drug ofdependence or prohibited drug the maximum penalty was $2,000and/or two years imprisonment. Similarly, some distinctions weremade between cannabis and other drugs in respect of traffickingoffences. More significant reforms came in 1986 with theControlled Substances Act Amendment Act which provided for anexpiation notice scheme. The expiation notice scheme commencedoperation on 30 April 1987. Section 45a(2) of the Act enablesexpiation notices to be issued to adults in certain cases - forexample, when less than 100g of cannabis or less than 20g ofcannabis resin is involved. Notices can be issued in respect ofcultivation that is not for commercial purposes, for smoking orconsumption of cannabis or cannabis resin except in a public orprescribed place, and for possession of equipment used for thesmoking or consumption of cannabis or the preparation of cannabisresin. Payment of the expiation fee before the expiration of 60days from the date of the notice means that no conviction isrecorded against the alleged offender. The fees are $50 forpossession of less than 25g of cannabis and $150 for less than100g of cannabis. In the case of cannabis resin the expiationfees are $50 for possession of less than 5g and $150 for amountsranging between 5g and less than 20g of resin. Cultivation of 10plants or less incurs a fine of $150. It should be noted that atthe same time that the cannabis expiation notice system wasintroduced, amendments to the Act also substantially increasedpenalties for trafficking offences. In addition, amendments tothe Controlled Substances Act in 1990 provide severe penaltiesfor offences such as sale, supply and administration ofprohibited drugs and drugs of dependence, including cannabis, toa child. Although some jurisdictions reformed the law relating topersonal consumption of cannabis, heavier penalties wereintroduced for trafficking offences and a scale of traffickingoffences was commonly provided - for example, traffickable,indictable and commercial quantities. Manderson (1993) puts itthis way: The emphasis on Mr Big as an evil in his own right allowed aless severe approach to drug users by removing them from thecentrality of drug laws. The harsh penalties imposed on marijuanasmokers and other users of drugs could be softened withoutundermining 'the war on drugs' (p185). The focus on the Mr Bigs of the drug world has also enabledlegislatures to enact drug laws which give extensive powers ofsearch and seizure to the police, and which give considerablepowers in relation to the use of listening devices and telephonetaps. While some reforms were put in place in the 1970s and1980s, the picture that emerges nationally is an uneven one. The Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985 (NSW), for example,distinguishes only between cannabis and other drugs in the caseof commercial trafficking. In the case of cannabis the maximumpenalty that can be imposed is $500,000 or 20 years imprisonment,or both. For commercial trafficking in any other drugs, a lifesentence can be imposed. In New South Wales, possession,administration and self-administration of prohibited drugs,including cannabis, are proscribed, as is the possession ofequipment for the administration of prohibited drugs. Personalconsumption offences (involving less than five plants or lessthan 25g of cannabis) make an offender liable to a penalty of$2,000 and/or two years imprisonment. Cultivation, manufactureand production, and supply are prosecuted on indictment. TheDrugs Misuse Act 1986 (Qld) assigns dangerous drugs to Schedulesunder the Act. Drugs like heroin and cocaine appear in the FirstSchedule and cannabis sativa is listed in the Second Schedule.Offences relate to trafficking (s5), supply (s6), production ofdangerous drugs (s8), possession (s9), and possession of drugparaphernalia (s10). In addition, penalties vary in the case of aggravated supplywhich is defined in s6(2) of the Act as including supply to aminor, an intellectually handicapped person, and supply in aneducational or correctional institution. While there aredifferences in the statutory penalties applicable to First andSecond Schedule drugs, they are minor. Under the Drugs Misuse Act Amendment Act 1990, the penaltyfor unlawful trafficking in cannabis carries a penalty of 20years imprisonment, while for First Schedule drugs the penalty is25 years (s5). Possession of cannabis carries a penalty of 15years imprisonment, or 20 years imprisonment if the quantityequals or exceeds 500g or 100 plants (s9). The penalty forpossession of drug paraphernalia is imprisonment for two years.Offenders may be fined in addition to or instead of beingimprisoned (s54) and may be prosecuted summarily for minoroffences (s13). In 1989 the Australian Capital Territory remodelled its drugcontrol legislation, and the Drugs of Dependence Ordinance wasintroduced with the idea of it being used as a model for allother jurisdictions. The Act establishes two classes of drug: prohibited drugs which are subject to special treatment. (According to the Act's Explanatory Statement, prohibited drugs have no medical use and are harmful for recreational purposes); and drugs of dependence, which are distinguished from prohibited drugs in the Explanatory Statement, in that they are said to have a medical use. The Act defines cannabis, cannabis fibre, cannabis oil,cannabis plants and cannabis resin. Schedule 2 to the Act listscannabis, cannabis oil and cannabis resin as prohibited drugs anddefines commercial and traffickable quantities of the drug. Inaddition, cannabis is listed in Schedule 5 as a prohibitedplant.1 The Act makes clear distinctions between personal useactivities and trafficking. It reserves extremely harsh penaltiesfor the latter and contains deeming provisions. It also makesdistinctions in penalties between cannabis and other prohibiteddrugs. Cultivation of prohibited plants, including cannabis, isan offence (s162(2)), as is cultivation for the purposes of saleor supply (s162(3)), sale or supply, or possession for sale orsupply (s165(1)). Possession, self-administration andadministration of cannabis are offences under s171. The harshest penalties are reserved for sale or supply ofcommercial quantities of cannabis - life imprisonment (s165), andcultivation of more than 1,000 plants - life imprisonment(s162(3)). In the Northern Territory, the Misuse of Drugs Act 1990prescribes a penalty of $2,000 or two years imprisonment foradministering cannabis. Possession of less than a traffickablequantity 'attracts penalties ranging from a $10,000 fine toimprisonment for 14 years; possession of a commercial quantityattracts penalties ranging from 14 to 25 years imprisonment. Thepenalties for cultivation offences also depend on the quantitycultivated; commercial quantities carry a 25-year prison term;traffickable quantities carry a seven-year prison term; and othercases attract a penalty of a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment fortwo years' (Australian Capital Territory 1991, p35). Like Queensland, Northern Territory legislation createsseparate offences and penalties in respect of supplying illicitdrugs to children. In the Northern Territory, the penalty is 25years or imprisonment for life (s5). Offences and penaltiesrelating to illicit drugs are covered by the Poisons Act 1971 andthe Criminal Code in Tasmania, and in Western Australia by theMisuse of Drugs Act 1981. In the Australian Capital Territory, changes to the law oncannabis were introduced by the Drugs of Dependence (Amendment)Act 1992. These amendments were by no means as far-reaching asthose envisaged by the Legislative Assembly's Select Committee onHIV, Illegal Drugs and Prostitution (outlined earlier) whichrecommended the removal of personal possession offences involvingsmall amounts of cannabis. However, the amendments do introducean expiation notice scheme that applies to both adults andjuveniles (s171A). Under the amendments, a simple cannabisoffence is defined as: * an offence under s162(2) of cultivatingor participating in the cultivation of not more than fivecannabis plants; * an offence under s171(1) of possessing notmore than 25g of cannabis. A police officer is empowered to servean offence notice on a person believed to have committed a simplecannabis offence. If the prescribed penalty of $100 is paidwithin 60 days, then the offence is discharged and no convictionis recorded. The prescribed penalty of $100 is the same as thatpreviously applying under the Act for possession of small amountsof cannabis. Drug law reform is still an active issue for someAustralians. In 1993, interest in drug laws and social policyresulted in the establishment of an Australian ParliamentaryGroup on Drug Law Reform - a group whose membership includescurrent and former politicians from different political partiesand a range of jurisdictions, medical practitioners, researchersand members of the legal profession. Among the short-term goalsbeing considered by the Committee are the rejection of criminalsanctions for personal use of drugs and the nationwide adoptionof an expiation scheme model for personal use of cannabis([53]Van Raay 1993). Overseas legislation In many European countries, no distinction exists in lawbetween the so-called 'hard' and 'soft' drugs. In a recent studyof 12 EC nations, only the following nations distinguishedcannabis from other drugs: Spain distinguishes between 'substances which can cause serious damage to health and cannabis and its derivatives' ([54]Leroy 1991, p58); Ireland distinguishes between 'cannabis and other narcotic products' ([55]Leroy 1991, p58); The Netherlands distinguishes between 'substances presenting an unacceptable risk' ([56]Leroy 1991, p58) and cannabis; Italian law distinguishes between 'highly addictive drugs (Schedules I and III) and drugs with lesser addictive properties AND cannabis (Schedules II and IV)' ([57]Leroy 1991, p58); and the United Kingdom Misuse of Drugs Act contains three Schedules in which drugs are placed according to their level of risk. Cannabis, some opiates, barbiturates and some amphetamines are classified as Schedule B drugs. Drug use (involving both 'hard' and 'soft' drugs) is notproscribed in Spain, Ireland, Italy or The Netherlands.Possession for personal use is prohibited in Spain, Ireland,Italy and The Netherlands, but lesser penalties are provided whenpossession involves cannabis. In the case of traffickingoffences, laws in Spain, Ireland, Italy and The Netherlandsimpose less severe penalties when trafficking involves cannabis. In the United States, the federal Controlled Substances Actlists cannabis in Schedule 1 - where drugs with a high dependencypotential and no accepted medical use are located. Possession ofa controlled drug attracts a lighter penalty than doestrafficking. Even so, penalties for possession are substantial -a first offender being liable to up to one year's imprisonmentand a fine of between $1,000 and $5,000. During the 1970s, at State level, 11 States adopted a civilpenalty model for possession of small amounts of cannabis forpersonal use. Oregon was the first State to introduce civilpenalty laws in 1973. In general, the maximum penalty forpossession of small quantities of cannabis for personal use inthe 'decriminalised' states is $100. Exceptions are Mississippi($250) and Nebraska ($200). Efforts to recriminalise these activities have been describedas 'concerted' ([58]Reuter 1992), with William Bennett, theNational Drug Control Director, personally appearing before anumber of state legislatures to argue for recriminalisation. In1990, Alaska reintroduced criminal penalties for possession ofsmall amounts of cannabis. In Canada, the federal Narcotic Control Act 1961 has remainedlargely unaltered to this day. There are six basic offences underthe Act. These are: simple possession, trafficking, possessionfor trafficking, cultivation of opium or cannabis, import orexport of scheduled drugs, and prescription shopping ([59]Solomon1988). According to Solomon, apart from the offence ofcultivation, the Act does not differentiate between scheduleddrugs. Cannabis possession can be tried summarily or onindictment. In the case of simple possession offences, summaryconviction of a first offence renders the offender liable to afine of $1,000 and six months imprisonment. In the case of asubsequent offence, summarily prosecuted, the penalty is $2,000and one year's jail. On indictment, an offender is liable toseven year's imprisonment. The Canadian Government did not respond positively to the LeDain Commission recommendation that possession of cannabis nolonger be a criminal offence. However, in 1972 the Criminal LawAmendment Act gave judges a discretion to direct that an offenderbe discharged absolutely or on probation. It appears that lawenforcement officers rarely proceed on indictment in the case ofpossession offences, and that 'judges rarely impose the maximumsentence or anything close to it in cannabis cases' ([60]Solomon1988, p126). In this section, particular attention is devoted to the lawsand enforcement practices of The Netherlands and the UnitedKingdom. Illicit drug laws in both countries have been influencedby existence of international conventions. Initially bothcountries enacted drug laws in the absence of a domestic drugproblem. In The Netherlands illicit drug laws were first introduced inthe Opium Act 1919. Apart from amending legislation in 1928, druglaws remained unchanged until the present Opium Act was passed in1976. Current Dutch attitudes towards illicit drug use -manifested in the Prosecution Guidelines that govern theenforcement of the Act - are said to arise from a number offactors peculiar to Dutch society and history. First, realism andpragmatism. Second, a belief in social pluralism. Third, anideology of normalisation in which 'illicit drugs are seen as alimited and manageable social problem rather than an alien threatforced on an otherwise innocent society' ([61]Leuw 1991, p2).Fourth, is the context of the criminal law itself. Dutch writersstress that the criminal law is not perceived as enforcing socialmorality but rather as 'an instrument of social control, whoseresults must be assessed from case to case' ([62]Ruter 1988, p6). They further report that the criminal law has a minor role inThe Netherlands. Until the introduction of the Opium Act 1976,drug offences in The Netherlands appear to have been activelyprosecuted and severely sanctioned. According to [63]van deWijngaart (1991), cannabis appeared in The Netherlands in the1950s; harsh sentences were handed down, for example - 12 monthsimprisonment for minor cannabis offences; and media coverage wassensationalist. However, despite sentencing practices, an increase incannabis use was reported, especially among Dutch youth. Duringthe 1960s pressure for law reform increased and culminated in1976 with new opium legislation. The present Opium Actdistinguishes between drugs posing unacceptable risks such asheroin, cocaine, LSD and cannabis oil, and hemp products -marijuana and cannabis resin.2 It also decreased penalties forpossession of drugs for personal use, but increased penalties fortrafficking in hard drugs. Overlying the offences and penaltiesin the Opium Act are police and prosecution guidelines which haveproduced a situation that some commentators have described as defacto decriminalisation. These guidelines relate to the'intensity of police custody and preventive detention,prosecutorial alternatives (dismissal, fine, or prosecution) andpenalties involving violations of the Opium Act, and wereestablished by the Procurators-General in 1976' (Marshall et al.1990, p395). The guidelines are made possible by the ExpediencyPrinciple set out in Articles 167 and 242 of the Code of CriminalProcedure. This principle operates where the public good isserved by refraining from prosecution. It can operate for bothindividual offenders and categories of offence. In the case ofthe Opium Act, a number of activities are designated as 'not forprosecution, detection or arrest'. These include: the sale of less than 30g of hemp products; and dealing in, possessing or cultivating up to 30g of cannabis. High priority is given under the guidelines to the detectionand prosecution of traffickers. In Britain, like Australia andThe Netherlands, drug laws were in existence long before theexistence of a widespread domestic drug problem. During World WarI concerns about drug taking by soldiers led to the issuing ofArmy Council orders forbidding the supply of cocaine, heroin,Indian hemp, morphine, and other substances to soldiers except bymedical practitioners. The existence of international conventions resulted in theenactment of the Dangerous Drugs Act 1920 - as a signatory of theTreaty of Versailles, Britain undertook to incorporate the 1912Hague Convention into domestic law. Even at this early stagepenalties were severe. Illegal possession of listed drugs couldresult in a 200 fine or six months imprisonment, or both.Penalties were higher for repeat offenders. The Dangerous DrugsAmendment Act 1923 raised these penalties. However, '... at mostthe total annual convictions and known addicts numbered only afew hundred until the second half of the twentieth century'([64]Howitt 1990-91, p357). The present Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 creates differentclasses of drugs according to their potential for harm andpenalises activities such as possession and cultivation. Cannabisand cannabis resin are Class B drugs and, while subject to lesserpenalties than Class A drugs, still carry substantial penalties.For example, summary prosecution for an offence of possession ofa Class B drug can result in three months imprisonment and/or a500 fine. If the offender is convicted on indictment themaximum penalty is five years jail or a fine, or both.Cultivation of a Class A, B or C drug exposes the offender to apenalty of six months incarceration and/or a 2000 fine onsummary conviction, and up to 14 years imprisonment or a fine, orboth, if convicted on indictment ([65]Fortson 1992). Like TheNetherlands and Australia, the most substantial penalties areavailable for drug trafficking. While imprisonment is availableas a sanction for cannabis possession in Great Britain, itappears that custodial sentences are not imposed for possessionof cannabis for personal use. In addition, enforcement of theMisuse of Drugs Act may vary considerably throughout the nation,especially where cannabis is involved: In an urban area if apoliceman finds a young person in possession of a few grammes ofcannabis he may deal with the matter informally or offer acaution, and no official record will be made. In a country townpossession of exactly the same quantity of the drug might lead toprosecution, a fine, and headlines in the local newspaper'([66]Royal College of Psychiatrists 1987, p125). As in Australia, drug law reform continues to be an issue inEurope. Some reforms to European drug laws have beenforeshadowed. [67]Wodak (1993) reports that: the lead has comefrom municipal authorities. Thirteen cities in Europe have signeda document known as the Frankfort [sic] Declaration which commitsthese municipal authorities to a programme of drug policy reform.Thirty-three other cities have signed an expression of interestand are considering their position. In November, this Declarationwill be signed by the Mayor of Baltimore in the United States(p7). In Italy, voters were asked in a referendum held on 18 April1993 whether drug users should be imprisoned. The referendum wasthe result of changes to drug laws in 1990 which enabled courtsto imprison drug users found guilty of possession of more thanthe 'average daily dose' of a drug (dose media giornaliera)(UNICRI, pers comm). As a consequence of the referendum, suchdrug users are now liable only to administrative sanctions suchas a fine or the confiscation of their driver's licence. Drugtraffickers are still liable to imprisonment. Current international treaties The international treaties relating to cannabis are theSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961 as amended by the 1972Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances 1971 and the1988 UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances (Vienna Convention). The Convention onPsychotropic Substances includes THC, the psychoactiveconstituent of cannabis. As THC is rarely extracted for illicitdrug use ([68]Fox & Mathews 1992), no further attention willbe devoted to it. The Single Convention consolidated a number of previousConventions on narcotic drugs and amalgamated a number ofmonitoring organisations to create the International NarcoticsControl Board. Australia ratified the Single Convention on 1December 1967. Cannabis is not a narcotic drug, but is classifiedas such for the purposes of the Single Convention. This classification has been important in shaping public andpolitical perceptions - that cannabis is dangerous to personalhealth and community safety. Narcotic drugs are listed inSchedules to the Convention. Schedule I contains the majoropioids, as well as cocaine and cannabis. Schedules II and IIIcontain less powerful drugs such as codeine. Schedule IV containsdrugs regarded as having particularly dangerous properties.Cannabis, as well as drugs like heroin, is part of Schedule IV.Articles 36, 4 and 2(5) of the Single Convention are ofparticular importance for the purposes of this report. Article36(1) of the Convention provides that, 'subject to itsconstitutional limitations', each Party shall adopt measures toensure that activities such as manufacture, possession,distribution, sale, transport, importation and exportation ofdrugs 'contrary to the provisions of this Convention ... shall bepunishable offences when committed intentionally ....'. In addition, Article 4 provides that: (c) Subject to theprovisions of this Convention, [Parties are] to limit exclusivelyto medical and scientific purposes the production, manufacture,export, import, distribution of, trade in, use and possession ofdrugs. Cannabis is also located in Schedule IV of the Convention.Article 2(5) requires that: (a) A Party shall adopt any specialmeasures of control which in its opinion are necessary havingregard to the particularly dangerous properties of a drug soincluded; and (b) A Party shall, if in its opinion the prevailingconditions in its country render it the most appropriate means ofprotecting the public health and welfare, prohibit theproduction, manufacture, export and import of, trade in,possession or use of any such drug except for amounts which maybe necessary for medical and scientific research only, includingclinical trials herewith to be conducted under or subject to thedirect supervision of the Party. It must be emphasised, however, that Article 2(5) is notmandatory. Rather, special measures of control can be imposed if,in the opinion of the Party, they are 'necessary' or'appropriate'. Under the Single Convention Parties are requiredto criminalise activities relating to trafficking, subject totheir constitutional limitations. In the past, however, questionshave also arisen about the need for Parties to criminaliseactivities associated with personal use and possession. TheWilliams Royal Commission concluded that to remove prohibitionsagainst cannabis would depart from the spirit and intention ofthe Convention. In Canada, the Le Dain Commission regardedpossession for personal use as falling within the ambit of theConvention. Woltring (1990) also takes this view on the groundsthat 'possession could relate to both possession for traffickingor possession for personal consumption' (p20). However, there is authority (e.g. [69]United States 1972,[70]Noll 1977, [71]South Australia 1978) that 'the Conventiondoes not require signatories to make either use or possession forpersonal use punishable offences, although the creation orretention of such offences would be consistent with the treaty.This is because "use" is not specifically covered byArticle 26 and the term "possession" in that Articleand elsewhere can be read as confined to possession for thepurpose of dealing' ([72]South Australia 1978, p46). Further, the requirement that Parties limit the use of drugsto medical and scientific purposes does not require them to'attain that goal by providing penal sanctions for unauthorized"use" or "personal consumption" of drugs'([73]Noll 1977, p44). In the view of the Shafer Commission,measures such as 'an educational program and similar approachesdesigned to discourage use' could be employed (1972, p167). Whilethe International Narcotics Control Board appears to be equivocalabout this interpretation of the Convention in respect ofpersonal possession, it does not appear to condemn it, merelyremarking in relation to the Single Convention, that Parties: maytake the view that they are not required to establish suchactivities as criminal offences under law. The basis for thisview appears to be that, since obligations relating to penalprovisions appear among articles relating to illicit traffic, theobligations only apply to cultivation, purchase or possession forthe purpose of illicit trafficking (1992, p6). The 1972 Protocolprovides for measures to treat and rehabilitate drug users inaddition, or as an alternative to, punishment. It also contains provisions relating to the InternationalNarcotics Control Board, and international narcotics trafficking.Australia ratified the Protocol on 22 November 1972. Australia'sinternational treaty obligations must now be read taking the 1988Vienna Convention into account. Australia ratified the Conventionwithout reservations on 16 November 1992. While the SingleConvention attempts to contain the supply of illicit drugs bylimiting the use of scheduled drugs to medical and scientificpurposes, the Vienna Convention is directed particularly at drugtrafficking and is designed to provide a system of internationalcooperation to counter trafficking activities. It must be readsubject to the Single Convention. The Vienna Convention was madeagainst a background of international horse-trading, and wasratified domestically in the face of a measure of opposition. An International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficin Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances was convened in1987. At the Conference there was debate between the consumer,producer and transit states about the content of the treaty.Consumer nations felt that the Convention should target themovement of illicit drugs between states, while producercountries argued that the Convention needed to address drugconsumption - in other words, create obligations for drug-usingnations. As a result, provisions relating to domestic drugconsumption are included in the Convention. Nevertheless, the major thrust of the Convention is towardstrafficking and international cooperation in matters such asextradition, mutual legal assistance, and transfer ofproceedings. Paragraph 1 of Article 3 relating to traffickingoffences states that 'Each Party shall adopt such measures as maybe necessary to establish [them] as criminal offences under itsdomestic law, when committed intentionally'. Paragraph 2 ofArticle 3 deals with cultivation, possession or purchase forpersonal use. In relation to the establishment of criminal offences itswording is different to and more qualified than that in paragraph1. It states: Subject to its constitutional principles and the basicconcepts of its legal system, each Party shall adopt suchmeasures as may be necessary to establish as a criminal offenceunder its domestic law, when committed intentionally, thepossession, purchase or cultivation of narcotic drugs orpsychotropic substances for personal consumption contrary to theprovisions of the 1961 Convention, the 1961 Convention as amendedor the 1971 Convention. In addition, paragraph 4(d) of Article 3 provides that: TheParties may provide, either as an alternative to conviction orpunishment, or in addition to conviction or punishment of anoffence established in accordance with paragraph 2 of thisarticle, measures for the treatment, education, aftercare,rehabilitation or social reintegration of the offender. Notsurprisingly, there are a number of different interpretationsthat can be placed on the provisions of the Vienna Convention asthey relate to personal consumption activities. The International Narcotics Control Board states that the1988 Vienna Convention requires criminal offences to beestablished in relation to possession, purchase or cultivationfor personal use. However, it adds: None of the conventionsrequires a party to convict or punish drug abusers who commitsuch offences even when they have been established as punishableoffences. The party may choose to deal with drug abusers throughalternative non-penal measures involving treatment, education,after-care, rehabilitation or social reintegration([74]International Narcotics Control Board 1992, p4). Other commentators take the view that the Vienna Conventionis a trafficking convention and that, with respect to personaluse activities, a Party may choose not to retain or introducecriminal offences for those activities if such an approach doesnot accord with matters such as 'the basic concepts of its legalsystem'. What then are the implications of the Single Convention,the 1972 Protocol and the 1988 Vienna Convention for publicpolicy options relating to cannabis? Total Prohibition Total prohibition is the policy pursued by many of theParties to the Conventions - including the Australianjurisdictions of Queensland, Northern Territory, Victoria,Western Australia and Tasmania. Some writers describe the Single Convention as prohibitionistin nature ([75]Fox & Mathews 1992); others as 'regulatory asopposed to merely prohibitionist' ([76]Woltring 1990, p19).Whatever the case, extremely stringent measures can be employedby the Parties. In both the Single Convention and the ViennaConvention provisions exist that enable the Parties to 'adoptmore strict or severe measures than those provided for by theconvention if, in [their] opinion, such measures are desirable ornecessary to prevent or suppress illicit trafficking'([77]International Narcotics Control Board 1992, p4). Civilpenalty option. As described earlier, this policy option removescriminal penalties for personal use activities such as possessionand instead imposes civil penalties - most commonly fines.Australia ratified the Vienna Convention after consultations withthe States to ensure that legislation in all jurisdictionsconformed with treaty obligations. While some commentators ([78]Fox & Mathews 1992) arguethat civil penalties such as those provided in the SouthAustralian legislation represent a minor breach of internationaltreaty obligations, this does not appear to be the view of theCommonwealth or of other commentators. There appear to be nointernational law impediments to the civil penalty approach. Partial prohibition. As described by the [79]Sackville Royal Commission (SouthAustralia 1978), partial prohibition distinguishes betweentrafficking in cannabis and activities associated with personaluse such as possession. Partial prohibition would remove allpenalties, both civil and criminal, in respect of personal useand possession activities. These activities would no longer becriminal offences. The removal of offences and penalties forpersonal use and possession activities can be seen asinconsistent with the conventions. Such a conclusion might bereached on an interpretation of the Single Convention along thelines suggested by [80]Woltring (1990), and of the ViennaConvention. It can also be argued that partial prohibition can beaccommodated under the Conventions. The Sackville RoyalCommission (1979, p311) took this view in regard to the SingleConvention - on the basis that the Convention did not encompasspersonal use and possession activities. Partial prohibition couldbe reconciled with the Vienna Convention on the basis of twointerpretations. For those who take the view that the ViennaConvention is a trafficking convention and that there is norequirement that personal use and possession activities becriminalised, there is no obstacle to partial prohibition. Itcould also be argued that partial prohibition could encompass anoption where a criminal offence existed for personal use andpossession activities, but no criminal or civil penalties wereprovided. The existence of a criminal offence would be a signalof society's disapproval of cannabis use. Treatment, education,rehabilitation or social reintegration could be provided insteadof criminal or civil penalties, it being up to State Parties todetermine whether these measures are provided administratively orby statute. Regulatory option Regulatory options might include regulated commercial sale ora government monopoly. In 1979 the Sackville Royal Commissiontook the view that regulation could not be accommodated under theSingle Convention (p311). The advent of the AIDS epidemic andconcern about injecting drug use and disease transmission mayhave contributed to recent interpretations of treaty obligationsthat differ from this view. [81]Woltring (1990) states that it isopen to Parties, within the context of 'medical or scientificpurpose', to: provide for the cultivation of cannabis by a government agency; provide for the manufacture of cannabis by a government agency or private concern under government licence; trade in and distribute cannabis through a government agency or private enterprise under government licence; 'supply or dispense drugs to drug abusers or AIDS/Hepatitis B risk users under appropriate programs' (p20). He goes on to remark that 'While any Party could adopt suchoptions on the basis that they serve the medical or therapeuticobjective of treating drug addiction or abuse, the options couldnot be adopted if their ultimate purpose was to enablerecreational use as distinct from medical or therapeutic use'(p20). Under [82]Woltring's model, regulation could co-exist withtreaty obligations, but only to a limited extent - within amedical model. Supply or dispensation of drugs to drug users formedical purposes is considerably easier to reconcile with treatyobligations in the context of injecting drug use than in relationto cannabis. It might be argued that high THC content of illicitcannabis represented a health risk to users 3, that could beovercome through regulated supply, or that separation of drugmarkets would make it less likely that cannabis users would beexposed to and thus move on to more dangerous drug use involvinginjecting drugs. However, these propositions would be unlikely toconvince most governments or commentators. Free availability. This policy option could not be accommodated under theConventions and would place Australia in breach of its treatyobligations. This discussion of international instrumentssuggests that Australia has some flexibility in considering andimplementing policy options in the context of treaty obligations.However, for some options it might be thought necessary to seekamendments to the Conventions or, indeed, denounce them.4 An important question to be answered is whether Australiandrug laws, so long dominated and directed by influences beyondour shores, and so little attuned to Australia's owncircumstances, should continue to be determined externally. Ascautious an inquiry as the Williams Royal Commission commented,in relation to the Single Convention, that the spirit andintention of the treaty was 'a secondary matter in the sense thatAustralia must first decide what is the correct domestic policyand then shape its international course accordingly' (1980,pC263). References Abel, E.L. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, London & New York. Australia. Parliamentary Joint Committee on the NationalCrime Authority 1989, Drugs, Crime and Society, AGPS, Canberra.Australia. Senate Select Committee on Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse1971, Report, Commonwealth Government Printing Office, Canberra.Australia. Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare 1977, DrugProblems in Australia - An Intoxicated Society?, AGPS, Canberra.Australian Capital Territory. Legislative Assembly Select Committee on HIV, Illegal Drugsand Prostitution 1991, Marijuana and Other Illegal Drugs,Canberra. Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs 1980Report, Book C, AGPS, Canberra. Canada. Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1972, Cannabis, Information Canada, Ottawa. Carney, T. 1981, 'The history of Australian drug laws:Commercialism to confusion?', Monash University Law Review, vol.7, June, pp165-204. Caswell, A. 1992, 'Marijuana as medicine', Medical Journal ofAustralia, vol. 156, April 6, pp497-498. Fortson, R. 1992, The Law on the Misuse of Drugs and DrugTrafficking Offences, 2nd edn, Sweet & Maxwell, London. Fox, R. & Mathews, I. 1992, Drug Policy. Fact, Fictionand the Future, Federation Press, Sydney. Hartland, N. 1991, 'The political context', in FeasibilityResearch into the Controlled Availability of Opioids, NCEPH,Canberra. Hartland, N., McDonald, D., Dance, P. & Bammer, G. 1992,'Australian reports into drug use and the possibility of heroinmaintenance', Drug and Alcohol Review, vol. 11, pp175-182. Hindmarch, I. 1972, 'A social history of the use of cannabissativa', Contemporary Review, vol. 22, no. 1276, pp252-257. Howitt, D 1990-1991, 'Britain's "Substance AbusePolicy": Realities and regulation in the United Kingdom',International Journal of the Addictions, vol. 25, no. 3A,pp353-376. International Narcotics Control Board 1992, Report of theInternational Narcotics Control Board for 1992, United Nations,New York. Kirby, M. 1992, 'Drugs - An international prohibition',Commonwealth Law Bulletin, vol. 18, no. 1, January, pp312-320. Leroy, B. 1991, The Community of Twelve and the Drug Demand:Comparative Study of Legislations and Judicial Practice,Luxembourg. Leuw, E. 1991, Drugs and Drug Policy in The Netherlands: ANon-Belligerent Approach, unpublished. Manderson, D., 1993, From Mr Sin to Mr Big: A History ofAustralian Drug Laws, Oxford University Press, Melbourne. Marshall, I.H., Anjewierden O. & van Atteveld H. 1990,'Towards an "Americanization" of Dutch drug policy?',Justice Quarterly, vol. 7, no. 2, June, pp395-421. Noll, A. 1977 'Drug abuse and penal provisions of theinternational drug control treaties, UN Bulletin on Narcotics,vol. 29, no. 4, pp41-57. Musto, D.F. 1991, 'Opium, cocaine and marijuana in Americanhistory', Scientific American, July, pp20-27. New South Wales. Joint Parliamentary Committee upon Drugs 1978, Report intoDrug Abuses, Sydney. Queensland. Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs 1993, Cannabis and theLaw in Queensland: A Discussion Paper, July, Brisbane. Reuter, P. 1992, 'Hawks ascendant: the punitive trend ofAmerican drug policy', Daedalus, vol. 121, no. 3, pp15-51. Royal College of Psychiatrists 1987, Drug Scenes, RoyalCollege of Psychiatrists. Ruter, F. 1988, The Pragmatic Dutch Approach to Drug Control:Does it Work?, unpublished. Single, E 1989, 'The impact of marijuana decriminalisation:an update', Journal of Public Health Policy, Winter, pp456-465. Solomon, R.R. 1988, 'Canada's federal drug legislation', inIllicit Drugs in Canada: A Risky Business, eds J.C. Blackwell& P.G. Erickson, Nelson, Scarborough, Ontario. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1978, Cannabis: A Discussion Paper, Adelaide. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1979, A Social History of Drug Control, Research Paper 8,South Australian Government, Adelaide. Sproule, D.W. & St-Denis, P. 1989, 'The UN drugtrafficking convention: An ambitious step', Canadian Yearbook ofInternational Law, pp263-293. Stewart, D.P. 1990, 'Internationalizing the war on drugs: theUN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances', Denver Journal of International Law andPolicy, vol. 18, no. 3, Spring, pp387-404. Symonds, A. 1992, Marihuana Law in NSW - A New Direction,unpublished. Trebach, A.S. & Zeese, K.B. (eds) 1990, Drug Prohibitionand the Conscience of Nations, Drug Policy Foundation,Washington. United States. National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1972,Marihuana. A Signal of Misunderstanding, Washington. van de Wijngaart, G.F. 1991, Competing Perspectives on DrugUse: The Dutch Experience, Swets & Zeitlinger, Amsterdam. Van Raay, T. 1993, 'The National Charter for Drug LawReform', paper presented to the Australian Institute ofCriminology Law, Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, 6-8July, Surfers Paradise. Wodak, A. 1993, 'Prohibition has failed, what next?', paperpresented to the Australian Institute of Criminology Law,Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, 6-8 July, SurfersParadise. Woltring, H. 1990, 'Examining existing drug policies: The1988 UN Convention. Help or Hindrance?', Criminology Australia,April/May, pp19-20. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-22IA031-000652-B046-198http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131909 text/html 43724HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:18:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:15 GMTContent-length: 43506 FIVE LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS for cannabis / marijuana Chapter 4. FIVE LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS Introduction Many legislative options are available for cannabis and, asindicated in [1]Chapter 2, much confusion exists in theterminology used to describe them. In this chapter, we outlinethe five broad options available to Australian decision-makers,namely: total prohibition; prohibition with civil penalties for minor offences; partial prohibition; regulation; and free availability. Some readers will be aware that this is the classificationused by the South Australian Royal Commission into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs (the Sackville Commission) whichreported in 1978. We have adopted their approach as it is, in ourview, both precise and comprehensive. It avoids the semanticproblems that often cause much confusion in debates about drugpolicies. In particular, it avoids the terms 'decriminalisation'and 'legalisation', terms which have different meanings fordifferent authorities. The five options listed capture all the approaches whichpeople have in mind when they refer to 'decriminalisation' and'legalisation', as well as other options which these two wordsmay or may not encompass. The five legislative options arediscussed in turn. We follow a consistent format to facilitatecomparisons between them. First we describe the option; anexample of it in operation follows (or, if there is no suchexample, we describe what it would look like if the option wereimplemented); we then outline the rationales which are given orare imputable (both philosophical and pragmatic rationales arecovered); discuss the outcomes and impacts (observed or likely)flowing from its implementation; and in conclusion we evaluatethe appropriateness of the option. Option 1: Total prohibition Under the system of total prohibition the use, possession,cultivation, importation, sale and distribution of any amount ofcannabis are treated as criminal offences. People importing ordealing in cannabis may be liable to severe sanctions, and thoseusing or found in possession of the drug are subject to arrestand prosecution. If convicted, they acquire a criminal record andmay be subject to a variety of sanctions including imprisonment. 'Total prohibition' can take a number of forms. For example,although both The Netherlands and the United States havelegislation that can be described as total prohibition, thedifferences in the strategies used to enforce, or not enforce,the legislation mean that the drug policies in these two nationsare dramatically different. This section will outline thebackground and rationale of American and Dutch drug policies, andwill evaluate them in light of the goals outlined in [2]Chapter2. PART A: THE UNITED STATES: Total legislative and administrative prohibition: Drug lawand policy in the United States This examination of drug policy will focus on the US FederalGovernment's strategy of total prohibition.5 The Federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA) groups drugs intofive categories. These categories are said to be based on thedrugs' perceived potential for abuse, accepted medical use andpropensity to create physiological and psychological dependency,for users (Inciardi 1990). The US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA)is responsible for classifying drugs and for periodicallyupdating classifications. Cannabis is listed in Schedule 1 of theclassification scheme. Schedule 1 drugs are seen to have a highpotential for abuse, no currently accepted medical use in theUnited States and no acceptable safe level of use under medicalsupervision. Violations of the CSA are separated into two offencecategories: first, the possession of controlled substances; and,secondly, the manufacture, delivery or sale of controlledsubstances. All first possession offences carry a penalty of upto one year's incarceration and a fine of $1,000 to $5,000.Second offences are punishable by more severe sanctions. Thebasic penalty for the manufacture, delivery or sale of less than50kg of marijuana, 100 or more marijuana plants, less than 10kgof cannabis resin (hashish) or less than one kilogram of cannabisoil is punishment by up to five years incarceration and/or a$250,000 fine. Second or subsequent offences are punishable by upto 10 years incarceration and/or a $500,000 fine. The penalty forthe manufacture, sale or delivery of between 50kg and 100kg ofmarijuana is a sentence of up to 20 years imprisonment and/or afine of up to $1 million. Second or subsequent violations ofmanufacture/delivery/sale provisions are punishable by up to 30years imprisonment and/or up to $2 million in fines forindividuals and $30 million for others. The CSA also provides for other sanctions against people whoprofit from drug dealing. An offender can be required to forfeitto the state all controlled substances, raw materials orequipment used to manufacture, import or export controlledsubstances, all conveyances used to transport controlledsubstances, all money and property gained through contraveningthe CSA, and all property used to facilitate violations of theCSA. The proceeds of forfeiture are used to fund drug lawenforcement. Drug policy in the US has, in part, been conceptualised inthe economic terms of supply and demand. Primarily the focus hasbeen on reducing the supply of illegal drugs, including cannabis,through such measures as destroying crops at the source orinterdicting supplies as they enter the US. Cannabis crops, forexample, may be spotted from the air by helicopter, sprayed withherbicide or eradicated by ground teams. Destroying cannabiscrops in other countries, particularly South American, andencouraging other governments to participate in law enforcementefforts, have formed an important part of the American drugstrategy of reducing the supply of drugs. Central to the US Government's policy on reducing demand isthe idea of creating a climate of intolerance towards all druguse through concepts such as 'user accountability' and 'zerotolerance'. 'User accountability' is the idea that individualusers should be made to recognise that their drug use, no matterhow minor it may appear to be, is part of a drug problem thateventually results in the death of some users ([3]Wardlaw 1992).The notion of 'zero tolerance' holds that no drug offence shouldbe allowed any degree of tolerance and makes little distinctionin terms of culpability between the different scales of drugoffences ([4]US Bureau of Justice Statistics 1992). Rationales Pragmatic rationales The eradication of all illicit drug use is the central aim ofUS drug policy and it is thought that prohibition is the mosteffective means of reaching this goal. Cannabis use is seen as apart of a larger drug problem. Prohibition is thought to decreasecannabis usage in the following ways: prohibition discourages people from experimenting with drugs and deters people convicted of drug offences from re-offending; and prohibition causes the price of illicit drugs to increase, making them more difficult to obtain. Philosophical rationales Drug policy in the US is based on a deeply held belief thatall illicit drug use is extremely harmful, both in terms of thedangers that it poses to users and in terms of the dangers thatit poses to the social fabric of American society. There is verylittle distinction made between cannabis and other drugs. In1971, President Richard Nixon declared that drug abuse was'public enemy number one' ([5]Wijingaart 1991, p95) and, morerecently, one commentator has claimed that: Drug use in Americatoday is a major threat to our health, productivity, and qualityof life (Du Pont 1984: xvi, [6]cited in Wijingaart 1991, p101). Section 801 of the Federal Controlled Substances Act statesthat: The illegal importation, manufacture, distribution, andpossession and improper use of controlled substances have asubstantial and detrimental effect on the health and generalwelfare of the American people. In the US, official analysis of the social problemsassociated with drug use has been narrow, and American policymakers have tended to see drugs themselves as the central sourceof all the ills associated with drug use in that country.Analyses of the social context of drug taking or of therelationship between drug taking and poverty have apparently hadlittle impact on the development of drug policy. Central to the official American idea of 'harm' caused bydrugs is that all drugs are 'addictive', and that anyexperimentation with drugs will inevitably result in dependency.Associated with the fear of dependence is the fear, in many casesunrealistic, of the effect that drug use has on individuals.Although not accepting this characterisation, James Inciardi hasdescribed the stereotype of the American drug user in thefollowing terms: 'Dope fiends', as they were called, weresex-crazed maniacs, degenerate criminals, and members of the'living dead'. 'Narcotics', including marijuana and cocaine ...destroyed morality, addicts were sexually violent and criminallyaggressive, they were weak and ineffective members of society;addiction was contagious since users had a mania for perpetuatingthe social anathema of drug taking; and finally, once addicted,the user entered into a lifetime of slavery to drugs ([7]Inciardi1986, p100). It has been claimed that those debating drugs policy in theUS have blurred the distinction between the effects of drug useand the effects of the prohibition of drug use ([8]Wardlaw 1992).Drug use is therefore thought to be inextricably linked toviolent crime, users are conceptualised as criminals, and policytowards any level of drug use is punitive and coercive. Thisphilosophy of drug use is evident in the rhetorical language ofUS policy makers who talk about 'zero tolerance' and who havecalled their drug strategy a 'war on drugs'. Outcomes Although the price of cannabis has increased with thepolicies of prohibition, the increase has not had the intendedeffect of significantly reducing cannabis consumption. Despitehalf a century of total prohibition, cannabis is still the mostwidely used of illicit drugs in the US. Household surveys of druguse conducted by the National Institute on Drug Abuse have foundthat almost 68 million people in the US reported that they hadused cannabis, including 9.7 million who reported that they hadused it in the past month. In other words, some 33 per cent ofthe household population aged 12 years or older reported they hadused marijuana in their lifetimes and 5 per cent reported havingused the drug in the past month. (NIDA, National Household Surveyon Drug Abuse: Population estimates 1991; cited in [9]US Bureauof Justice Statistics 1992, p26). It could be concluded that the prohibition of cannabis hasnot been successful in eradicating or even significantlydecreasing cannabis use in the United States. On the other hand,it could be argued that the policy has prevented an even higherlevel of use occurring. From 1981 to 1987, 5.3 million kilogramsof marijuana were seized, however Customs, Coast Guard and theDEA believe that they seized only 10 per cent of the marijuanaentering the country ([10]Inciardi & McBride 1990, p284).Despite the fluctuations in price that law enforcement effortsmay cause to cannabis markets from time to time, demand forcannabis has, it is claimed, remained relatively unchanged.Nadelmann has argued that 'the greatest beneficiaries of the druglaws are organised and unorganised drug traffickers. Thecriminalisation of the drug market effectively imposes a 'valueadded tax' ([11]Nadelmann 1991). The law enforcement program associated with prohibition hasalso been costly, both in financial and social terms. In 1986 theFederal expenditure on cannabis enforcement was estimated to bearound $800 million, and it is thought to have significantlyincreased since then (Kleiman 1986). This figure does not includestate and local expenditures on law enforcement and criminaljustice. Every year there are 350,000 arrests for cannabispossession alone, making this the third most common cause ofarrest in the US ([12]Kleiman 1992, pp267-8). The social costs of the law enforcement program are alsohigh. [13]Kleiman (1992) claims that the majority of people whoare arrested for buying and using cannabis rarely do anythingelse that might bring them to the attention of the criminaljustice system and that, for many users, being subject to arrestand criminal justice processing is the most substantial risk ofusing cannabis. The consequence of this is that large numbers ofpeople acquire criminal records and are stigmatised for what manywould see as relatively minor offences. Kleiman also argues that the prohibition of cannabisundermines the symbolic value of the criminal law. Since arrestis the most immediate and frequent part of the punishment processfor all crimes, it is important that arrest should retain itssocial meaning both as involving some substantial risk of furtherpunishment (to maintain its deterrent value) and as resultingfrom the doing of some substantial harm (to maintain its moralforce). The fact that simple possession of marijuana is the thirdmost common cause of arrest puts strain on both of these symboliclinks. This contribution to the devaluation of arrest as asanction ought to be counted as a sizeable cost of currentmarijuana laws ([14]Kleiman 1992, p268). It has also been claimed by some opponents of the 'war ondrugs' that one by product of prohibition is the abuse of civilliberties (e.g. [15]Boaz 1990). In the United States, propertycan be seized if a police officer alleges that a small amount ofa controlled substance, including cannabis, is found in theproperty. Forfeiture can occur without indictment or convictionof the owner of the property, a practice that Boaz claims is aviolation of civil rights. The prohibition of cannabis has also had a number ofunintended consequences. It is argued that the patterns ofcannabis use have become more dangerous and the amount ofviolence associated with the cannabis market has increased.First, it is argued that the successful interdiction of cannabisentering the US from overseas has resulted in increasedcultivation and production of cannabis within the country.Nadelmann has claimed that the US has emerged as one of theworld's leading producers of cannabis ([16]Nadelmann 1991, p787).He also argues that international drug traffickers haveredirected their attention from cannabis to cocaine, resulting ina 'glut of increasingly potent cocaine being available and ashortage of comparatively benign marijuana' ([17]Nadelmann 1991,p787). It is also argued that prohibition has caused an increase inthe crime and violence associated with cannabis markets and anincrease in the content of THC (the major psychoactiveingredient) of cannabis. When the majority of cannabis used wasimported from other countries, the distribution system forcannabis was much smaller. The production of cannabis within theUS, it is argued, leads to more small and medium producers with awider, more competitive and possibly more violent distributionsystem (Kleiman 1986; [18]Wardlaw 1992). Domestic enforcementhas, it is argued, resulted in more technology-intensive methodsof cultivation and an increase in the potency of cannabis([19]Reuter 1987). The fact that the sale of water pipes forsmoking cannabis is illegal means that users more often consumecannabis in cigarette papers, which is the form of consumptionmost damaging to their lungs (Reuter 1987). Given the costs of this form of prohibition, and its relativelack of success, it is perhaps surprising that the US drugstrategy enjoys widespread support from the American people. InGallup surveys conducted from 1969 to 1985, people were asked:'do you think the use of marijuana should be made legal or not?'.In 1985, 23 per cent of respondents were in favour, 73 per centopposed and 4 per cent expressed no opinion ([20]Inciardi &McBride 1990, p295). In October 1989 a Time/CNN poll found that79 per cent of the population would be willing to pay highertaxes if the money were used for fighting the 'war on drugs'(Inciardi & McBride 1990, p295). The 'war on drugs' issupported by liberal and conservative politicians alike, publicdebate on drug strategy is rare, and discussion of theappropriateness of drug strategy has been described as 'a parloursport for intellectuals' rather than a subject of general publicconcern. As noted above, during the 1970s a number of US statesremoved the penal penalties for possession of small amounts ofcannabis for personal use (a process referred to in the USA as'decriminalisation'), but this move towards a more liberalapproach was subsequently abandoned. Little information isavailable on the basis of the policy reversal, referred to as'recriminalisation'. Apparently the decisions were made not onthe basis of factual research into the impact ofdecriminalisation, but rather on ideological grounds.Opportunities were available for research comparing theexperiences of the various states, but apparently such researchwas not undertaken, leaving policy to be made without a firminformation base.6 CONCLUSION - THE USA APPROACH The US drug policy does not seem to have met many of thepolicy goals identified in the early part of this report. First, cannabis policy has not been separated from that ofother drugs. Policy makers see only the larger 'drug problem' andhave not recognised the need to have different policies fordifferent drugs. Secondly, in the USA the arguments for the total prohibitionof all drugs are highly emotive; arguments about the consequencesof drug use have not been separated from arguments about morals.Consequently, this has led to the idea that is implicit in muchUS drug policy, that all illicit drugs and consequently all drugusers are inherently criminal and even evil. Theconceptualisation of the drug problem in such uncompromising,black and white terms means that there is little room to makeexceptions for arguably 'soft' drugs such as cannabis. Thirdly, the goals of the 'war on drugs' are not realistic.Kleiman has argued that US drug policy amounts to a 'holy war'against drugs, and as such it is not surprising that the policygoals are far from realistic ([21]Kleiman 1992). Those creatingand implementing the US drug strategy do not talk of 'minimisingthe harm' arising from drug use (as in Australia's National DrugStrategy); rather they aim to completely eliminate drug use, agoal that many would consider to be unreachable. Finally, in [22]Chapter Two of this report, we have suggestedthat the harms caused by the drug control regimes themselvesshould not outweigh the harms prevented by them. With respect tocannabis use it has been argued that the harm caused by controlregimes clearly outweighs the harm caused by the drug([23]Kleiman 1992). It has also been argued that those developingpolicy in the US have failed to make the distinction between theproblems created by drugs and the problems created by prohibition(e.g. [24]Wardlaw 1992). The USA has a number of severe socialproblems associated with drug use, including forcing users intothe criminal milieu, demeaning the criminal law in the eyes ofusers, increasing the number of people with criminal records,increasing the level of imprisonment, and increasing the level oftransmission of the AIDS virus. These problems, and therelatively limited achievements in reducing drug use anddrug-related problems, have prompted ever increasing efforts inthe 'war against drugs'. It is likely, however, that many of thesocial problems are created not by the drugs themselves but bythe strategy of total prohibition. Part B: The Netherlands: LEGISLATIVE PROHIBITION WITH AN ADMINISTRATIVE EXPEDIENCYPRINCIPLE Background Between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s in The Netherlands,the use of illegal drugs grew from 'almost non-existent toconstitute a serious health and public order problem in urbanareas' ([25]van Vliet 1990). Although the use of cannabis in TheNetherlands came to public attention in the late 1950s, debate ondrug policy only began in earnest when heroin use and theproblems associated with it became increasingly visible between1972 and 1975. Amendments to the Opium Act were introduced in 1976 and canbe seen as heralding a new era in drug policy. Until this timedrug policy in The Netherlands was much like that of othercountries ([26]Wijingaart 1990, p668, cited in [27]Wardlaw 1992,p16). Drug law and policy in The Netherlands The Opium Act of1976 makes a clear distinction between 'drugs presentingunacceptable risks' (heroin, cocaine, LSD, amphetamines) and'cannabis products'. The changes introduced in this legislationincreased penalties for dealing in 'drugs presenting unacceptablerisks' and decreased the penalties for possession and dealing incannabis products. The purpose of the legislation was to separate drug marketsand user groups in an effort to prevent cannabis users frominvolvement in the 'hard' drug scene. Although the legislationfalls clearly within a total prohibition framework, as Dutchcommentators have pointed out 'law in practice is more relevantthan law in books' ([28]Leuw 1991). A clause in The NetherlandsCode of Criminal Procedure, known as the 'expediency principle',states that the prosecution office may decide whether or not toenforce certain laws, to prosecute or to initiate criminalinvestigation on the basis of whether or not such action would be'in the public interest'. Using this clause, the Minister ofJustice issued guidelines in 1976 for the enforcement of druglaws and the investigation and prosecution of breaches of druglaws. Essentially it is these guidelines rather than legislationthat determines drug policy in The Netherlands. [29]Marshall etal. (1990) have noted that the priorities in the guidelinescorrespond to the distinctions made between 'hard' and 'soft'drugs in the Opium Act. High priority is given to detecting theimportation and exportation of drugs that are seen to representan 'unacceptable risk'. Investigation and prosecution of 'soft' drug violations, withthe exception of the import and export of large amounts of suchdrugs, are assigned a low priority (Marshall et al. 1990).According to the guidelines, dealing, possessing or producingsmall amounts (30g or less) of marijuana, do not require policeinvestigation, arrest or prosecution. A low priority is alsogiven to the investigation and prosecution of retail dealing incannabis, and police are only required to confront dealers whenthey advertise publicly or conduct their business in aprovocative manner. As long as there is no sale to minors, noadvertising, no sale of 'hard' drugs, and if the dealing takesplace without causing a public nuisance, then (generallyspeaking) there will be no police intervention. Where there arebreaches of the type outlined above, administrative measures,such as the withdrawal of permits to serve drinks and food, areimposed. If the parties involved persist in contravening theguidelines, they are issued with a warning. Confiscation of thedrugs may be another consequence of continuing breaches of theguidelines. [30]Marshall et al. (1990) report that only veryrarely is imprisonment the consequence of such violations. Theextent to which the guidelines, or the Opium Act, are followeddepends on local circumstances. Sanctions imposed may varybetween different districts of The Netherlands. Rationales Pragmatic rationales The goals or rationales for Dutch drug policy include thefollowing: to promote safer methods of consumption of cannabis; to limit sales of cannabis to specialist sellers; to limit progression from cannabis use to other drugs; to limit the amount of violence in the cannabis distribution system; and to limit the substitution of other (more damaging) drugs for cannabis. Philosophical rationales The 'drug problem' in The Netherlands has always beenrecognised as a complex social problem and as such, lawenforcement and penal sanctions alone have never been seen torepresent a complete solution . During the parliamentary debateon the revised Opium Act of 1976 Irene Vorrink, the Minister ofPublic Health, identified the following aims that form the basisof drug policy in The Netherlands: the central aim is the prevention and amelioration of social and individual risks caused by the use of drugs; a rational relation between those risks and policy measures; a differentiation of policy measures which will also take into account the risks of legal recreational and medical drugs; a priority of repressive measures against the trafficking of drugs other than cannabis; and the inadequacy of the criminal law with regard to any other aspect of the drug problem ([31] Handelingen 1976, cited in Leuw 1991, p10). The aims outlined above illustrate that The Netherlands drugpolicy is characterised by a number of factors. First, thecriminal law was never thought to be a solution to the drugproblem. Government policy with respect to 'hard' drugs isbroadly based and focuses on treatment and assistance for theuser and punishment for the commercial dealer ([32]Marshall etal. 1990). Secondly, it is recognised that the basis of drugpolicy should be to minimise harm rather than eradicate drug use,and thirdly, it is argued that drug policy should not be the samefor all illicit drugs. Cannabis is seen in a different light fromother drugs. Clearly there are pragmatic reasons for thisseparation, as the user markets for different drugs are dividedand users of cannabis are, it is argued, less likely to progressto the use of 'harder' drugs. However there is also evidence that suggests that the use ofcannabis was never perceived by Dutch society to be aparticularly compelling social problem. Leuw claims that: Inaccordance with the legal differentiation between cannabisproducts and hard drugs, drug policy encompassing prevention andassistance developed primarily in reaction to the emerging heroinproblem. The cannabis problem - if there ever had been one seemedto have disappeared from the face of the earth even before theamended Opium Act became effective ([33]Leuw 1991, p725). The separation of cannabis from other drug problems also hashad the effect of making the drug problem more manageable.[34]Van Vliet (1988) is critical of the US style of drug policythat makes no moral or legal distinction between different typesof drug offences or different types of drugs and claims that 'bylumping all these different phenomena together, societies andgovernments help to create a problem which is unsolvable' (vanVliet 1988). Conversely, The Netherlands breaks down the'inextricable' problem into 'manageable bits'. In the mid-1980s, a Government-sponsored research project ledto the development of the concept of 'normalisation' or 'culturalintegration' which added to the sophistication of Dutch drugpolicy ([35]van Vliet 1990;[36] Leuw 1991). 'Normalisation'recognises that some type of drug use is natural to all humansocieties and argues that the eradication of all drug use is anunrealistic policy goal. The reduction of drug use and the socialand individual problems associated with it are felt to be farmore reasonable policy goals. Central to the concept of'normalisation' is the idea that drug users should not bemarginalised from the rest of society. In a speech to the DutchParliament, the State Secretary of Health stated, in 1985, that:Normalisation ... includes the cultural integration of drug usersin society ... This does not mean the elimination of the drugphenomenon as a social reality: it means a change of contextwhich clears the way for a different approach ... drug addictsshould be treated neither as criminals nor as dependent patientsbut as 'normal' people to whom we can make 'normal' demands andwho should be offered 'normal' opportunities ([37]van Vliet 1990,p727). The implications for cannabis policy of 'normalisation' areclear. According to the Dutch, the eradication of cannabis use isan unrealistic policy goal and the creation of a 'deviant status'for drug users means that users are more likely to 'drop out' ofmain stream society and perhaps start using more dangerous drugs.The use of the criminal law to deal with cannabis use wouldmarginalise cannabis users and this would be seen asunnecessarily destructive in terms of its social costs. Outcomes Today it is possible to openly buy and use cannabis in anumber of coffee shops in Amsterdam and other regional centres.Most of these coffee shops do not sell any other drugs and manydo not even sell alcohol. However, the public consumption ofcannabis has been subject to criticism from other countries, whoseem to equate public consumption with increased use. Downes(1988) has claimed that the image of The Netherlands portrayed inthe international media is one of 'a blinkered liberalismbelatedly struggling to cope with the results of its ownpermissiveness' and cites an example of a British journalist whowrote in the Sunday Times that 'Amsterdam has a long history offree-thinking and tolerating most things except law and order ...But the city's tolerance has been worn thin by crime, drug abuseand militant squatters' ([38]Downes 1988, p123). Unsurprisingly, Dutch commentators do not subscribe to theview that their society is on the brink of collapse. They arguethat the 'hash cafes' have been integrated as normal urbanfacilities and do not pose a threat to public order ([39]Leuw1991). The point has also been made that visible drug use onlysignals failure if maintaining an image of a drug-free society isan aim of drug policy (Leuw 1991). In contrast, the Dutch, whoaim to prevent drug users from being marginalised, may seevisible drug use as a sign of success. Despite the impression presented in the international media,most studies suggest that the policies implemented in TheNetherlands have not resulted in any significant increase in druguse or changes in patterns of use ([40]Engelsmann 1989;Wijingaart 1988a cited in [41]Wardlaw 1992, p23). A recent studycombined the results of over 20 Dutch studies that examined thepercentage of the population who had 'ever used' cannabis andcompared them with data from Norway, Sweden and the USA. Theperiod from 1970 to 1988 was examined and the authors concludedthat: The results of the time analysis show that the prevalence ofcannabis use since 1970 decreased, whereas the policy became moretolerant. Since 1979 a slight increase in the use of cannabis canbe observed. A comparison with data from other countries with amore restrictive policy reveals that the use of cannabis in TheNetherlands is on the same level as in Sweden and Norway (around10-15 per cent), but far lower than that in the US (exceeding 50per cent). However the downward trend in these three countriessince 1984 did not occur in The Netherlands ([42]Driesen, van Dam& Olsen 1989, p11 cited in Leuw 1991). The savings made to law enforcement and criminal justicebudgets of not processing large numbers of cannabis offenders aresubstantial and should be seen as one of the primary benefits ofthe Dutch approach to drug policy. In addition, the cannabismarket and distribution system is free from violence ([43]vanVliet 1990). It has also been argued that the Dutch approach has led tosafer patterns of cannabis use. First, the fact that users ofcannabis do not seem to turn to other more dangerous drugs isused as evidence that the policy of the separation of drugmarkets is working ([44]van Vliet 1990). [45]Cohen (1988) arguesthat Dutch cannabis users, unlike their counterparts in the USA,are not likely to ingest the herbicide paraquat in the cannabisthat they consume, and are also more likely to consume the drugin a safer way because the sale of drug paraphernalia such aswater pipes is legal in The Netherlands (Cohen 1988). Cohen hasalso argued that 'the knowledge of how to regulate cannabis usehas become an inconspicuous part of local Dutch youth culturebecause the development of drug use rules was not pushed out ofthe mainstream and into deviant sub cultures' (Cohen 1988, p24). In terms of the goals that Dutch policy makers identified,drug policy in The Netherlands has been moderately successful.However, the Dutch approach to drug policy has not been popularinternationally: Germany and the USA in particular have beenvocal in their opposition. In recent times this has led to theintroduction of tougher drug policies with respect to 'harddrugs' ([46]Marshall et al. 1990), however these pressures havenot yet had any impact on cannabis policy. Indeed, it has beenspeculated that Dutch cannabis policy is unlikely to change as aresult of international pressure ([47]Wardlaw 1992). CONCLUSION - THE DUTCH APPROACH In a variety of ways The Netherlands drug policy meets manyof the criteria outlined in [48]Chapter 2. First, Dutch policy makers have recognised the need to havedifferent policies for different drugs. The idea of separating'drugs of unacceptable risk' and cannabis is based on the ideathat the control regime that appears to be appropriate for oneillicit drug need not apply to others. Secondly, policy makers have managed to separate argumentsabout the consequences of drug use from arguments about morals.In fact, Dutch policy was intended to be 'non-moralistic'([49]Leuw 1991). It has been claimed that, in The Netherlands,drug use has never been seen as a 'moral' issue and it is arguedthat: Political speeches elaborating on the abhorrence of illegaldrugs have seldom been staged. They would appear as quitemisplaced in Dutch political culture. Consequently there are novotes to be won or positions to be conquered by rallying ananti-drug theme ([50]Leuw 1991). Thirdly, this non-moralistic approach to drug policy has ledto the development of realistic policy goals with respect tocannabis use. [51]Leuw (1991) notes that in The Netherlands therehas been no pledge of 'solving the problem' of drug use. Insteadof attempting to eradicate drug use Dutch authorities haveadopted the more pragmatic goal of minimising the risks anddamaging effects of drug use. Of concern to some observers,however, is the Dutch approach of formalising inconsistencybetween the provisions of legislation and its implementation. Anargument can be advanced that this conveys confusing messages tothe community. It is preferable, some would argue, forlegislation and policy on implementation to be aligned so thatboth permit (or proscribe) the use of cannabis in certaincircumstances. Having legislation creating an offence of cannabisuse, along with policy declaring that it is inexpedient toprosecute such offences, seems to be acceptable in the Dutchcontext, although it would possibly be unacceptable in othercultures. We return to this apparent difficulty in the concludingchapter of this report. Conclusion - the total prohibition options The Netherlands has been successful in terms of the goalsidentified by Dutch policy makers. Their policy has not resultedin the increased use of cannabis; indeed levels of cannabis useare markedly lower than those seen in the United States orAustralia. There is little violence associated with the cannabisdistribution system, cannabis users do not seem to progress tousing more serious drugs and the drug is consumed in a mannerwhereby the risks of harm are minimised. Dutch policy is also relatively successful in terms of manyof the policy goals that we discussed above. The separation ofcannabis from other drugs ensures that The Netherlands has a moremanageable drug policy. The goals of policy are realistic andpolicy makers have not confused moral arguments with argumentsabout the consequences of drug use. In contrast, the US drug strategy with respect to cannabisdoes not seem to be particularly successful. Despite considerableeconomic and social costs, cannabis use is far from beingeradicated in the USA. Cannabis users may be consuming the drugin a particularly dangerous manner, the illicit drugsdistribution system (of which cannabis is a part) is associatedwith violence, and law enforcement, criminal justice processingand the imprisonment of cannabis-related offenders costs Americantax payers millions of dollars every year. The USA has not emerged favourably in relation to the goalsidentified in the first part of this report. Apparently Americanpolicy makers have not recognised the need to consider differentpolicy strategies for different drugs, leaving cannabis part ofthe larger, seemingly unsolvable 'drug problem'. Moral argumentshave been confused with arguments about the consequences of druguse, and this has led to the development of unrealistic policygoals and a failure to recognise that the control regime imposedto deal with the problem of cannabis use may be causing more harmthan the cannabis use itself. Examples from the USA and TheNetherlands demonstrate that the legislative option of totalprohibition can be implemented in very different ways. The twocountries have very different philosophical and pragmaticrationales for their policies and, unsurprisingly, the outcomesof the policies have varied considerably. In developing policy, international examples are of benefitto Australian policy makers. It should be remembered, however,that the relative success or failure of drug policies depend asmuch on cultural factors, existing patterns of drug use, andpublic views of drug use, as they do on the soundness of thepolicy. References Boaz, D. 1990, 'The consequences of prohibition', in TheCrisis in Drug Prohibition, ed. D. Boaz, Cato Institute,Washington DC. Cohen, P. 1988, 'Building upon the successes ofDutch drug policy', The International Journal on Drug Policy,vol. 2, no. 2, pp22-24. Downes, D. 1988, Contrasts in Tolerance:Post-war Penal Policy in The Netherlands and England and Wales,Clarendon Press, Oxford. Driessen, van Dam & Olsen 1989, 'Deontwikkeling van het cannabisgebruik in Nederland, enkeleEuropese landen en de VS sinds 1969', Tijidschrift voor alcohol,drugs en andere psychotrope stoffen, vol. 15, pp2-15, cited inLeuw, E. 1991, 'Drugs and drug policy in The Netherlands,' inCrime and Justice: A Review Of Research, vol 14., ed. M. Tonry,University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Engelsman, E. L. 1989,'Dutch policy on the management of drug-related problems',British Journal of Addiction, vol. 84, pp211-218. Inciardi, J.(ed.) 1990, Handbook of Drug Control in the United States,Greenwood Press, New York. Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1989, Marijuana:Costs of Abuse, Costs of Control, Greenwood Press, United States.Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1992, Against Excess: Drug Policy for Results:Alcohol, Cocaine, Heroin, Marijuana, Tobacco, Basic Books, NewYork. Kleiman, Mark A.R & Saiger, A.J. 1990, 'Druglegalisation: The importance of asking the right question', TheHofstra Law Review, vol. 18, 1989-90, pp527-565. Leuw, E 1991,'Drugs and drug policy in The Netherlands,' in Crime and Justice:A Review Of Research, vol. 14, ed. M. Tonry, University ofChicago Press, Chicago. Marshall, I E., Anjewerierden, O. &Atteveld, H.A. 1990, 'Toward an Americanisation of Dutch drugpolicy', Justice Quarterly, vol. 7, no. 2, pp391-420. Nadelmann,E.A. 1991, 'Drug prohibition in the United States: Costs,consequences and alternatives', Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethicsand Public Policy, vol. 5, no. 37, pp783-808. National Instituteon Drug Abuse 1991, Household Surveys as cited in US Bureau ofJustice Statistics 1992, Drugs Crime and the Justice System, USGovernment Printing Office, Washington. Reuter, P. 1987, 'Whatimpasse? A skeptical view', Nova Law Review, vol. 11, no. 3,pp1025-1040. Single, E. 1989, 'The impact of marijuanadecriminalisation: An update', Journal of Public Health Policy,vol. 10, no. 4, pp456-466. US Bureau of Justice Statistics 1992,A National Report. Drugs, Crime and the Justice System, USGovernment Printing Office, Washington. van Vliet, H. 1988, 'Drugpolicy as a management strategy', The International Journal onDrug Policy, vol. 1, no 1, pp27-19. van Vliet, H. 1990, 'Theuneasy decriminalisation: A perspective on Dutch drug policy',Hofstra Law Review, vol. 18, 1989-90, pp717-750. Wardlaw, G.1992, 'Overview of national drug control strategies' inComparative Analysis of Illicit Drug Strategy, Monograph Seriesno. 18, National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, eds M. Bull, D.McDowell, J. Norberry, H. Strang, & G. Wardlaw, AGPS,Canberra. Wijingaart, Govert Frank van de 1991, CompetingPerspectives on Drug Use: The Dutch Experience, Swets andZeitlinger, Amsterdam. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-23IA031-000652-B046-223http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131920 text/html 83826HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:04 GMTContent-length: 83608 Australian Cannabis (Marijuana) Report - Chapter 5 CHAPTER 5: DIVERSION AND COMPULSORY TREATMENT Introduction This chapter covers the two related fields of diversion andtreatment - including compulsory treatment - for drug offenders,particularly where cannabis is involved. Such diversion maysimply involve diversion from the criminal justice system forindividuals involved in minor cannabis offences; it may alsoinvolve diversion to treatment for those who either want, or arejudged by others, to need treatment for drug use sufficientlyserious to bring them into contact with the criminal justicesystem. Diversion is a form of intervention in the lives of offendersprimarily based on humanitarian grounds (i.e. to keep them out ofprison), but also, more pragmatically, to relieve the burden onthe courts and the prisons imposed by the very large numbers ofpeople charged with very minor offences. While diversion from acourt appearance is a mild form of intervention receiving broadcommunity support, diversion to treatment, particularly whenmandated by the court, raises philosophical issues relating tothe degree of intervention the state should be empowered toexercise over people's lives. Compulsory treatment when it takesthe form of civil commitment is the most extreme form ofintervention, and, where ordered for drug offenders, is morallydistasteful to many and the subject of much controversy.Nevertheless, there are legislative provisions for civilcommitment of drug offenders in many countries, includingAustralia. We begin the chapter with a discussion of the concept ofdiversion, then review existing diversion programs in Australiaand overseas, with particular reference to programs involvingtreatment. The subject of compulsory treatment, including civilcommitment for drug offenders, is dealt with next, with anoverview of international legislation and treatment programs,along with such evaluations as exist. The implications of thisfor offenders whose primary drug is cannabis are discussed andsome conclusions are drawn regarding treatment for repeatoffenders. Finally, we present a summary of the major findings forcannabis users resulting from our review of the key Australianand international literature dealing with diversion and treatmentfor drug offenders. The concept of diversion In the US, accordingto Tomasic ([1]1977, cited in Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p6),official use of the term 'diversion' occurred for the first timein the US President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice. The following are two definitions ofdiversion from the US literature: ... the disposition of acriminal complaint without conviction, the non-criminaldisposition being conditioned on either the performance ofspecified obligations by the defendant, or his participation incounselling or treatment, ([2]Nimmer 1974, cited in Dept ofAttorney-General 1982, p6). ... those formally acknowledged andorganised efforts to utilize alternatives to the initial orcontinued criminal justice processing of alleged offenders, whichare undertaken prior to adjudication but after a prosecutableaction has occurred, ([3]Rovner-Pieczenik, cited in Dept ofAttorney-General 1982, p6). Due to fears, in the case ofnon-trial disposition, of unfairness, lack of proceduralprotection and lack of follow-up treatment to prevent recurrenceof the offence, the Commission recommended formalising theprocedure and adding extra-legal services such as treatment andpreventative education as an integral part of the non-trialdisposition. The total package came to be known as 'diversion'([4]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p8). The early justifications for diversion included: relief of overburdened courts; avoiding the further criminalisation of first offenders; avoiding the disadvantaging of first offenders on re-entry to society by their being labelled as criminals; providing a preferable way of dealing with certain offenders such as juveniles or drug users, who could be better dealt with in the community than in prisons; and providing cost-benefits to the community and a more humane way of dealing with certain categories of offenders ([5]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p9). The term 'diversion' when used in relation to the Australiancriminal justice system may incorporate a 'range of related butrelatively exclusive procedures some of which are seen aspotential alternatives to "due process" others asadditions to it' ([6]Williams 1981, p3). Those falling into the'alternatives' classification include: pre-arrest diversion: this amounts to discretionary measures taken by police at the point of apprehension of an offender; and pre-trial diversion (or 'pre-court', in Australia): in this case certain conditions have to be satisfied by the offender, following which the alleged offences are struck off the record. Those falling into the 'additions' classification include: +pre-sentence diversion: this is essentially remand for assessmentand/or treatment; and + post-conviction diversion: in this caseoffenders are directed to some form of treatment-relatedsupervision as a part of their sentence (presumably in lieu ofimprisonment). Prisoners may also be diverted from jail totreatment as a condition of their parole. These additions to dueprocess, therefore, function as increased sentencing options([7]Williams 1981, p3). The subject of diversion has been a neglected area inAustralia, although there have been 'official' diversionaryprograms operating at least since 1977 (in NSW). The termdiversion is applied to a wide variety of programs, and inAustralia can occur pre-court or pre- or post-sentence. Pre-courtdiversion can vary from a police warning or an expiation noticefor a minor drug offence, to referral for drug-treatment as analternative to a punitive sentence. Unlike some countries, in Australia cannabis use andpossession offences are not regarded as very serious incomparison with offences involving 'harder' drugs, and thesubject of treatment for cannabis use has similarly not beenconsidered much of an issue. In fact the legislation in someStates does not cover diversion for treatment on the grounds ofcannabis use alone. If cannabis users are diverted for treatmentit is usually because they are polydrug users, as many of themore serious users are. The main diversion programs operating in Australia will bebriefly described, and an overview presented of diversion in theUS and other countries, with reference to their relevance forcannabis users. Key features of treatment programs for drug usersare discussed, along with the issue of compulsory treatment and,what is known in the United States as, civil commitment. Diversion programs in Australia (10) AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY The ACT Drugs of Dependence Act 1989 (as amended in 1992 and1993) allows as a sentencing option anyone found guilty of acrime to be sent for assessment as to whether they aredrug-dependent and therefore suitable to be referred fortreatment. Those brought to court usually appear on a combinationof charges of different degrees of seriousness. Often a communityservice order may be the sentence or a conviction onrecognisance, which can include a good behaviour bond or apartially or fully suspended sentence. Assessment or treatmentorders are rare and are typically given for such offences asunlawful possession, stolen property offences, burglary and motorvehicle theft (where drug dependence is believed to havecontributed to the criminal behaviour).11 The DODA (Drugs of Dependence) Referral Program works in thefollowing way: anyone committing an offence requiring a courtappearance who seems to defence counsel to have a drug problem(or who claims to have a drug problem) is entitled to have thisfact raised before sentencing. If the court issues an assessmentorder, the client then has to contact the DODA Referral Programwhere a counsellor takes a case history to be sent to theTreatment Assessment Panel. The panel consists of a legal person(usually a solicitor) and two others with extensive knowledge ofdrug and alcohol treatment in the ACT, who are appointed for ayear. The client is assessed and options for treatment putforward. The client then goes to the chosen treatment centrewhich reports back to the panel as to whether the client issuitable or not suitable for treatment. The client then goes backto the panel for a second time at which time the panel looks atthe information from the treatment centre and listens to what theclient has to say, since the client has high input andresponsibility throughout the process. If the client fails tocome back (or fails to attend at any stage) an arrest warrant maybe issued, or the panel may suggest a Breach of Assessment Order.This information goes to the court, where a warrant for arrestmay be issued, or the failure to attend may be brought up whenthe client next comes before the court and the client may losethe right to the alternative to sentencing. This does not happenvery often, as the court usually chooses the treatment order whenthey have the option. The court specifies the length of time atthe treatment centre and periodic reviews by the panel, which canbe every three months. The program tries to be lenient if theclient misses one or two reviews, as the objective is harmminimisation rather than abstinence (unless the client has optedfor abstinence). If the client consistently fails to appear forreview or is not doing well (this is not the usual outcome) it ispossible to breach them. The breach is issued in court but DODAprovides the report on behalf of the panel. Then a summons can beissued and the usual court process (arrest warrant issued) isfollowed. The magistrate primarily concerned with diversion made thefollowing observations: Most drug-related offences are caused by alcohol, often used in conjunction with cannabis, which is particularly dangerous if the offender is driving. The DODA Program does not cover alcohol. There is concern about the danger posed by offenders combining alcohol and cannabis prior to driving (many alcohol-dependent people coming before the DODA treatment panel are also cannabis-dependent). Clients should not be referred for treatment in the case of cannabis use unless assessed as 'seriously dependent on cannabis', in order to screen out those seeking simply to avoid conviction. A distinct preference was expressed for post-court diversion, as opposed to pre-court diversion, so that the court has the opportunity to assess offenders. Offenders may be diverted more than once. The goal is 'harm reduction', and total rehabilitation is not expected after the first treatment. It was confirmed by the magistrate and treatment personnelthat there have been clients coming to the program who complainof cannabis dependence. Personnel at the DODA Referral Programreport that there is very little treatment for cannabis users. Itis usually outpatient treatment and 'is not 100 per centsuccessful'. The treatment they use is adapted from the treatmentfor tobacco, i.e. a process of slow cessation, while keeping adiary of the situations and times of use, with counselling once aweek. Ideally the treatment should be tailored to theindividual's needs. Very few cannabis users would be referred toa residential facility such as Karralika, and if so, it would beon the grounds of polydrug use. The DODA program is the only one of its sort in Australia,and mainly deals with fairly longstanding opiate users withlengthy records. There is a juvenile panel, but this has not beenused much. If magistrates send more juveniles in future, theprogram would be especially relevant for alcohol use. A formalevaluation has not yet been done, but program staff claim thefollowing desirable results: a reduction in criminal activity onthe part of its clients; monitoring their progress rather thanseeing them go to jail; and reducing their drug use. Very fewbecome drug-free, but there is significant harm reduction fromthe social, personal and economic viewpoint. SOUTH AUSTRALIA The drug diversion scheme operating in South Australia wasestablished when the Controlled Substances Act 1984 provided forthe South Australian Drug Assessment and Aid Panel (the panel) asan alternative to the criminal law for illicit drug users.12 Thepanel is only one of 13 penalty outcomes for drug offenders inSouth Australia, ranging from a $50 expiation fee for possessionof small amounts of cannabis and cannabis resin to $1 million andlife imprisonment for the most serious trafficking offence. Theunderlying philosophy is to make a clear distinction between thedrug dealer and the drug user (Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold1992). The new Act came about primarily as a result of therecommendation of the Sackville Commission that drug assessmentand aid panels should be established to which all persons chargedwith simple possession offences involving drugs must be referredbefore a prosecution may proceed. Juvenile Aid Panels were alsoestablished - as an alternative to the juvenile court system -which continue to operate and to provide for the diversion ofsome, but not all, young offenders out of the criminal justicesystem ([8]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992). The panel provides for absolute diversion in so far as thepanel and its clients, not the courts and prosecutors, determinethe outcome of proceedings. All persons charged with a 'simplepossession' offence (i.e. involving personal use of illicit drugsother than cannabis and cannabis resin and including use orpossession of implements for the use of an illicit drug) must bereferred to the panel, thus precluding any issue of discretion onthe part of courts or prosecutors, and removing the offender fromthe court system ([9]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p129). The panel, however, considers only a limited number ofoffences, and although an amendment to the Act permitted courtsto refer matters to the panel for the preparation of pre-sentencereports, this power has rarely been exercised ([10]Gray, Reynolds& Rumbold 1992, p130). The panel consists of a lawyer and twopeople with extensive knowledge of the problems and/or treatmentof illicit drug use. Hearings are private and proceedingsconfidential in order to create an atmosphere of trust. Clientsare referred from either the police or the courts, more often theformer. Before being dealt with by the panel, the client musthave admitted to the offence and be willing to undertake theassessment and any treatment or counselling which may berequired. The client may choose the option of being dealt with bythe courts. Those who do not appear willing to change their livesand those who do not respond to the initial letter from the panelor attend their appointment are referred back to court. Those dealt with by the panel must undertake to comply withthe directions of the panel and attend panel sessions asrequested over a six-month period.13 At the end of this periodthe panel instructs the court and the police to withdraw thematter, and no record of any drug offence may be usedsubsequently against the client ([11]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold1992, p129). The major findings of an evaluation of the panel were that: Out of the 1,400 clients seen between May 1985 and September 1991, most were male and in their 20s, directed to the panel for illegal possession of, mostly, amphetamines followed by heroin. The panel did not provide the early intervention hoped for. Although most clients were being offered the opportunity for assessment for treatment for the first time, many already had criminal histories. Intervention at an earlier stage is desirable for a more successful outcome. The amount of polydrug use 'should be seen as a matter of significance and concern. This includes the dangerous - though legal - drugs, alcohol and tobacco, which will often prove more of a problem and potentially more destructive to clients than the illicit drug problem that brought them to the attention of the panel in the first place' ([12]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p133). While cannabis and cannabis resin offences were excluded from the panel's jurisdiction, 'there were indications of extensive and potentially harmful levels of cannabis use among many clients' ([13]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p132). The characteristics of most of the clients were such that the treatment required was based on coping and lifestyle skills 'rather than strategies influenced by models of physiological addiction' ([14]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p132). The panel is only as effective as the treatment and other social supports which are available. The statutory barrier allowing only people over 18 to be seen by the panel means that many have had drug habits for years. Although structured to deal with these cases, the Childrens Aid Panel is not sufficiently a specialist drug assessment and aid body, nor are drugs its primary concern. Overall 'the justification for the panel as a means ofdiverting offenders from the criminal justice system andproviding intervention opportunities is overwhelming' ([15]Gray,Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p134). Interviews with criminaljustice personnel indicated that the panel is satisfactory fromthe point of view of cutting down on court congestion and fromthe point of view that it is treatment-focused rather thanpunitive. There is also no stigma of a conviction being recorded.However, it seems that within the confines of the Act, the policehave the discretion as to what charge to lay, e.g. if theoffender is known by the police and has an amount of the drugwhich could be trafficked, he may instead be charged withtrafficking. NEW SOUTH WALES Offences relating to alcohol or drug use in New South Walesare covered by the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985 (NSW).This Act distinguishes between cannabis and other drugs only inthe case of commercial trafficking. Possession and administrationof cannabis are prosecuted summarily and offenders are liable toa penalty of $2,000 and/or two years' imprisonment. Cultivation,manufacture and production, and supply are prosecuted onindictment, an offender being liable to a fine of $2,000 and/ortwo years imprisonment if there are less than five plants or lessthan a quantity of 25g. New South Wales was the first State inAustralia to introduce a drug diversion program. Its current program, the Drug and Alcohol Court AssessmentProgramme (DACAP) is a post-conviction, pre-sentence programwhere offenders on drug-related charges (such as possession of anillicit substance) or drug-involved crime (such as property crimeto finance drug use) are bailed/remanded to attend a treatmentagency and undergo a comprehensive assessment which forms thebasis of a pre-sentence report for the magistrate, containingrecommendations for sentencing, including treatment options([16]Desland & Batey 1990, p796). Successful completion of the treatment program, the length ofwhich is determined by a health worker, finalises the matter([17]Walters & Coventry 1993). A further objective is to'provide drug offenders with a comprehensive assessment that mayencourage them to consider improving their health and socialfunctioning' ([18]Schlosser 1984, pxi). DACAP further attempts through these assessments to match theindividual's drug-related problems to the most appropriate rangeof therapeutic interventions within a legal/health framework(Schlosser 1984).'... the diversion from the Criminal JusticeSystem to the health care system provides to the offender in manycases, the initial insight and confrontation that criminalactivities are directly related to their health. Often thisinsight initiates motivation to address the problems of substanceabuse' ([19]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p92). DACAP statistics between 1990 and 1992 indicate that, whileheroin was the main drug of concern (after alcohol) in about onecase in five, both in 1990-91 and 1991-92, cannabis was the nextranking drug ([20]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p96).14 An interview withone of DACAP's clients who had been arrested for possession andsupply of a large amount of cannabis revealed that, although heknew that he had 'a big marijuana problem', he had never beenprepared to do anything about it and that DACAP provided theopportunity and a reason to 'address the issue'. The magistrateplaced this client under supervision, fined him, imposed asentence of periodic detention, with 20 hours at an AttendanceCentre and the requirement to undertake a series of courses onissues such as personal development, money management, drug andalcohol information and education. The client fulfilled theserequirements ([21]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p118). MSJ Keys Young's recent evaluation of DACAP included theobservations that: Magistrates generally agreed that a DACAP report might be considered appropriate in cases involving a relatively serious and/or repeated offence, where a custodial sentence was a realistic possibility (some used it even where a custodial sentence was unlikely), and where it appeared that drug/alcohol dependency might be a significant factor (1992, p113). It was very desirable to use the pre-sentence 'crisis' period to get the dependency problem acknowledged and, if possible, to start treatment, as if left until after sentence, the chances of success were much less (1992, p105); sometimes it takes a long time for a drug user to recognise dependency (e.g. in the case of cannabis) and an intervention such as that of DACAP can be very beneficial in confronting this. Some magistrates observed that they did not see many people who had been through the DACAP process coming before the court for repeat offences. Important issues were availability of places in treatment and skilled counsellors with broad views of dependency. Regarding the issue of coercion, several evaluations of DACAP have 'tentatively concluded' that the legal coercion into treatment as evidenced in the DACAP program was effective in acting as an early intervention into drug use, generating a younger client less involved with drugs, who is more amenable to an abstinent outcome (Desland & Batey 1988; [22]Schlosser 1984; [23]Bush & Scagliotti 1983; [24]Williams 1981; all cited in Desland & Batey 1988, p51). This is consistent with other studies of court-ordered assessment/treatment for substance use ([25]Salmon & Salmon 1983, cited in Desland & Batey 1987, p51). VICTORIA Victoria appears not to have any government-implementedpre-court drug diversion programs ([26]Walters & Coventry1993). The Alcoholics and Drug Dependent Person's Act 1968 (Vic),s13 provides for bonds under which offenders may be ordered toattend treatment as an alternative to a custodial sentence (Skene1986, cited in [27]Walters 1993, p11). Programs are available foroffenders who are detected to be intoxicated at the time of theoffence and considered by the court to be 'habitually usingintoxicating liquor or drugs of addiction'. The Court Advice and Assessment Programme precipitates acourt report which makes recommendations on the suitability of acommunity-based order, and provides a management plan based onthe offender's level of substance use. Referral to the program isat the discretion of the court, and applies only at themagistrate's jurisdiction, but is not limited to particularoffences ([28]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p130). Inaddition, s67 of the Act allows for a good behaviour bond forfirst offenders so that the number of drug users ending up incourt is not large. A current study being carried out in Victoria by the NationalCentre for Socio-Legal Studies ([29]Walters & Coventry 1993)for the Victoria Police, is considering a pilot pre-court drugdiversion program for 'all first-time drug offenders apprehendedfor use and possession offences regardless of the illicitsubstance'. At the time of detection and arrest these offenderswould be considered 'recreational users', and one option forprocessing such offenders would be a diversion panel. In thiscase it would be up to the panel to assess the nature and extentof drug use and recommend a course of action ([30]Walters &Coventry 1993, p7). WESTERN AUSTRALIA In Western Australia, the Bail Act 1982 provides fortreatment as a condition of bail in the case of a defendant whois suffering from alcohol or drug dependence. Their pre-courtdiversion system, the Court Diversion Service (CDS) has beenoperating since 1988 as a cooperative venture between the WestAustralian Alcohol and Drug Authority (WAADA), the Department ofCorrective Services and non-government drug treatment agencies,coordinated by the WAADA. Any person with a drug dependencyproblem who is charged with a criminal offence is entitled toapply to the court for inclusion in the CDS program. However, itis important to note that persons are disqualified whose primarydrug problem is alcohol or cannabis unless there is evidence ofother current substance use that is a contributing factor.Informal referral and preassessment does occur and clients mayvoluntarily engage with a treatment agency prior to a formalreferral by the court (CDS 1993). CDS policy requires only that aperson admit to substance use, not to an alleged offence, thusthe person can be formally engaged in treatment for an admitteddrug problem and maintain a not guilty plea throughout the legalproceedings. If formal referral does not occur, the CDS is not empoweredto oversee the defendant's drug treatment and no CDS reports canbe provided to the courts on the defendants progress (CDS 1993). When formal referral to the CDS does occur, defendants areinformed of the relevant drug treatment agencies and theirphilosophies, and must choose. They are then required to remainwith that agency unless otherwise instructed by the CDS officer.Court appearances after formal referral are accompanied byinterim reports regarding progress, and at the point of plea orof a finding of guilt the defendant is generally remanded for afull pre-sentence report. The coercive nature of the CDS inengaging drug dependent persons in treatment programs duringtimes of legal crisis is acknowledged, and it is emphasised topotential clients that progress in treatment is only one aspecttaken into consideration by the sentencing judge or magistrate(CDS 1993). CDS personnel expressed the view that, whereas in the earlydays of the program there were mostly self-referrals, now mostare court-generated. People have always had the option oftreatment but clearly the catalyst is often a legal charge. Themore familiar the courts become with the process the more it isused, and it is regarded as being generally well accepted. Pre-court or pre-sentence diversion? As long as personalcannabis use/possession/cultivation remains illegal, thefundamental problem exists of the involvement of policediscretion and variation in enforcement policies from one officerto another and from one jurisdiction to another. Any contactbetween the cannabis user and the police (at street level) orbetween the user and the court has the potential for theindividual to have continuing involvement with the criminaljustice system. Police discretion at street level at the point ofarrest (or non-arrest) is inevitable. Police officers have thediscretion regarding whether or not to issue an expiation notice(in jurisdictions such as South Australia) or (in jurisdictionssuch as Victoria) to choose which (if any) of a number ofpossible charges they will lay, which can vary from possession totrafficking. While this could work in the interests of the offender, itmay also act in a discriminatory fashion, which is why many wouldmake the argument in favour of diversion systems which bring alloffenders before the court, thus guaranteeing them due process.Many lawyers tend to support leaving the conventional criminalprocessing intact 'to ensure that the diversion program does notresult in more coercive treatment of offenders through thenon-judicial exercise of discretion' (Dept of Attorney General1982, p78). In the case of expiation fines, it appears that manyfines are not being expiated.15 Therefore the objective ofrelieving the burden on the courts, while achieved to asubstantial degree, has not yet been 100 per cent successful, andthere is room for improvement in terms of reducing the number ofnon-expiators and consequently removing more offenders from thecriminal justice system. Diversion programs in other countries UNITED STATES The most prominent drug diversion programs in the US are theTreatment Alternatives to Street Crime (TASC) programs,established primarily to try to reduce the crime associated withdrug use (mainly heroin). This national pre-trial diversionprogram was expanded to include all drug users (except thosedependent on alcohol), including juveniles, recruited at allpoints of entry to the criminal justice system (e.g. throughpre-sentence referral, conditional probation, police diversionand conditional parole). The program varies with the differentlegal systems and drug problems existing from State to State. Forinstance, marijuana users and juveniles were excluded inColorado, whereas in Michigan marijuana users were preferred.Overall, however, most programs concentrated on heroin users([31]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, pp10-11). Such programs were not particularly amenable to satisfactoryevaluation and usually were restricted to an examination of howwell program objectives had been met. The results indicated: Dissatisfaction among law enforcement officials because of reduced opportunities for information from defendants regarding drug supplies (an example of the clash of philosophies between health authorities and law enforcement, which can be a factor contributing to failure in many diversion programs; this also indicates the emphasis on the supply reduction approach in the US, which is greater than that in Australia). Most of those diverted did not totally abstain from marijuana use although they reported reduced use (again this was not acceptable from the US total prohibition point of view, but a reduction in use can be seen as a successful program outcome in many treatment programs in Australia). There were fewer arrests and convictions (though marginally) among those diverted. There was some reduction in workload in the case of the prosecutor and the court but greatly increased workloads for the probation service. Purely from the treatment outcome point of view for the individual, the results were encouraging (though lack of adequate data precluded assessment of recidivism over the long term). Individuals' characteristics prior to program entry are an important determinant to successful program outcome (Rovner-Pieczenik cited in [32]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p14). Criticisms of the program also include: The argument that the workloads of courts and prisons are not really reduced because people are being brought into the criminal justice process who would not have been processed at all, since they would have been handled in the community. Diversion programs are sometimes utilised by prosecutors and courts when less official procedures might accomplish the same objective with less intervention and use of court time. The court is saved time only if the accused would have gone to trial and then to jail. However diversion appears to be more an 'alternative todismissal of charges or probation than to incarceration'(Gorelick 1975 cited in [33]Dept of Attorney General 1982, p16).This view was also shared by the Canadian Law Reform Commission(Dept of Attorney-General 1982). Further criticisms were: That diversion might also come to carry with it a social stigma if it is an 'institutionalised element of the criminal justice system'. Unsuccessful participants may be disadvantaged when returned to the court system. Legal analysts are concerned about the exercise of judicial discretion by non-judicial bodies. Diversion could be seen as an expansion of social control, and the concept of 'need for treatment' has no inherent limitation ([34]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, pp16-17). All of the points made above are also valid for Australiandiversion schemes. A very recent form of pre-court intervention(for the purpose of treatment) operating in the US is the WeekendIntervention Program (WIP) which is reported to be 'highlyeffective in identifying and intervening with persons chargedwith alcohol- and other drug-related driving offences' (Siegal& Cole 1993). The underlying philosophy of the program is that the crisisnature of an encounter with the criminal justice system, ifsuccessfully managed, provides a valuable opportunity tointervene in an individual's life by identifying the clinicalneeds of substance users who are not yet receiving treatment, andin a non-punitive way 'gently' confronting participants with theconsequences of their own drug and alcohol use. The individual isprovided with a diagnostic assessment and treatment programrecommendation 'with a specificity unavailable throughtraditional settings' ([35]Siegal & Cole 1993, p133). Theprogram consists of a three-day residential program to whichpersons involved in a drug or alcohol offence may be remanded bya court or other supervising agency. It consists of 'Marathonsubstance abuse counselling sessions using acognitive-behavioural-oriented approach combined withpresentations structured around a modified health belief model'.This participation in the assessment and referral process itselfis regarded as being able to help prepare the substance user forany treatment to be received ([36]Siegal & Cole 1993,pp133-4). NEW ZEALAND New Zealand has an adult pre-trial diversion scheme whichcommenced operation in 1988. It was developed and is managed bythe New Zealand Police as part of a wider program which entailsan increasing emphasis on the use of discretion by police intheir handling of minor offenders. The scheme is not, at present,statutorily based although the Government is considering thisoption. The scheme is widely accepted by police officers, members ofthe judiciary and practising lawyers, as well as the offenderswho are offered pre-trial diversion. The New Zealand Police havedescribed the scheme in the following terms: The key steps in thescheme are that the offender must be a first offender (there arelimited exceptions in special cases), there is sufficientevidence to charge the offender, and information is then laid andat that stage the offender is considered for diversion. If theoffender meets the criteria [see below] and admits the offence tothe diversion coordinator (a police prosecutor) the court isasked to adjourn the case until the offender has completed therequirements of the diversion scheme. Those requirements mayconsist of paying money to a charity, doing community work,and/or attending specialist counselling depending on what problemthey may have, e.g. drugs, alcohol, anger management, etc. Oncethe requirements have been completed the police ask the court towithdraw the information (personal communication, New ZealandPolice, 17 December 1993). If the court agrees to withdraw theinformation, the offender is not convicted and the police destroythe offender's records, including fingerprints. The criteria for diversion are not rigid; they include thefollowing: The offender should be a first offender. There should be special circumstances which make the offender suitable for diversion. The offence must be non-serious. The offender must admit guilt, show remorse, and be prepared to pay full reparation to the victim. The victim must agree to diversion. The officer in charge of the case [generally the arresting officer] must agree to diversion. The offender must agree to diversion ([37]Young & Cameron 1991, pp9-10). The use of cannabis and the possession of small quantitiesfor personal use are considered to be minor offences, making anoffender eligible for consideration for diversion. (Clearly thecriterion relating to the consent of the victim is not relevantin such cases.) Consultants reviewed the scheme for the NewZealand Police in 1991. They reported that approximately 12 percent of the people dealt with through the diversionary processhad been charged with cannabis possession ([38]Young &Cameron 1991, pp41-6). The review indicated that the scheme wasgenerally very well received by all the parties involved and alsopointed to existing and potential difficulties and to ways inwhich it could be strengthened. The police and the Government arecurrently reviewing the scheme, considering the option of givingit a legislative base and ensuring that it operates in a similarmanner throughout the country. This diversionary scheme, combinedwith an actively implemented policy of cautioning minor offenderswhenever possible (rather than charging them), comprises anenlightened approach to the handling of minor offenders such ascannabis users. OTHER COUNTRIES An overview of international legislation relating todiversion, in countries covered by the World Health Organization([39]Porter, Arif & Curran 1986), indicates that manycountries provide for diversion to drug- and alcohol-dependencetreatment programs both separately and in combination, thecovering legislation falling into a variety of categories (e.g.mental health, public health, criminal or specialised treatmentlaws).16 The legal disposition of drug- or alcohol-dependent personsis frequently covered by the criminal law (e.g. under specifiedstatutory offence) or mental health legislation. In Victoria, forexample, treatment programs for drug and alcohol dependenceinclude provision for both voluntary and involuntary admission,while other provisions governing treatment may be found in roadtraffic laws and the mental health legislation (Porter, Arif& Curran 1986, pp36-37). Porter et al. emphasise theimportance of treatment as a service to the public and theindividual concerned, which should be available at every stage ofthe criminal justice system. Initial contact between the offender and the police can bevery important, as it may create the kind of crisis thatmotivates a person to undergo effective treatment, and the policeshould be 'both legally entitled and encouraged to refer theperson directly to a treatment program, in lieu of arrest, for ashort time until the emergency passes'. They claim that there aredefinite advantages in including treatment provisions in drugcontrol legislation because of the flexibility it gives to thecourts in imposing alternatives to penal sanctions ([40]Porter,Arif & Curran 1986, p116). To summarise some relevant points raised by Porter et al'soverview of international diversion legislation: 1. Cannabis is rarely named specifically in legislation relating to diversion for drug users who commit offences. Usually the legislation refers to 'narcotics', 'opiates', 'alcohol' or 'other drugs'. Although cannabis is usually not specifically singled out (as distinct from alcohol, for example, which is mostly treated in a special class of its own with specialised treatment), it falls within the general class of substances for which many countries legislate compulsory reporting and/or registration followed by referral into a treatment program. 2. There are many precedents among overseas countries for diversion and voluntary or non-voluntary commitment to treatment. There are also examples of such diversion occurring at every stage of the criminal justice process. 3. There is a clear lack of evaluation of programs, which means results cannot be quantified, but the general impression is one of diversion to treatment being more acceptable all round than imprisonment without rehabilitation, which would otherwise be the situation in countries with a total prohibition policy. 4. Civil commitment appears to be common internationally, but in Australia legislative provisions for civil commitment exist only in certain States, e.g. NSW and Victoria. (This is discussed further under the heading Compulsory Treatment for Drug Offenders: Criminal Justice System-Initiated Treatment and Civil Commitment.) 5. There are a wide variety of legislative approaches to treatment and many different routes. Among the problems raised are: 1. The different objectives (sometimes conflicting) of health professionals and legal practitioners, when diversion for treatment is involved. 2. The clear need for evaluation programs and for planning for these when the program is established. The importance is stressed of evaluating treatment programs in terms of the objectives stated in the legislation. It is important to establish realistic and concrete objectives for treatment in addition to the overriding goal of reducing morbidity and mortality. 3. With regard to compulsory treatment, it is acknowledged that it is in conflict with individual liberty and freedom of decision, and it is emphasised that the legislation should lay down the conditions governing participation in voluntary treatment programs, e.g. should the 'voluntary' status be ended if the client is not cooperating? 4. On occasions there may be legislation that is not used or does not work because of lack of suitable treatment facilities and resources. Drug diversion schemes of various types operate in overseascountries. In France, for example, an offender who complies witha court-determined treatment order is not liable to prosecution;in Germany, a period of treatment can be credited against acustodial sentence; in Massachusetts, a court-appointed diversionscheme operates to stay court proceedings ([41]Porter 1986,p171). In some countries, e.g. France and Italy, a personvoluntarily undergoing treatment, on completion is issued with acertificate as evidence to protect against subsequent prosecutionfor offences committed prior to treatment ([42]Leroy 1991). Ofthe 51 jurisdictions surveyed by the WHO, 22 diverted persons fortreatment at one or more of these stages in the criminal justiceprocess: (a) instead of arrest; (b) after arrest, pending trial;(c) after trial in lieu of imprisonment (e.g. suspendedsentence); and (d) correction with imprisonment (e.g. duringconfinement or as a condition of parole) (Porter, Arif &Curran 1986, p57). A major issue for legislators is whether such diversionshould be mandatory. If diversion is mandatory prior to orinstead of trial, this amounts to decriminalisation of theoffending behaviour.17 In Sweden, which allows for compulsorycommitment, there is now legislation in place criminalising druguse and widening the powers of the authorities to take adultalcohol and drug-dependent people into care. Sweden is a countrywith a strong temperance tradition which has led to 'an obsessionwith substance misuse generally'. Faced with the problem of AIDSand with economic difficulties, a 'new moralism' has developed inthis country leading to these harsher drug measures (Gould 1989,p731). Another approach to the handling of cannabis offenders isthat taken in the United Kingdom, where more than half of thepolice constabulary areas have allowed police officers to takenote of drug users found in possession of quantities of drugsconsistent with personal use. Police then have the option not toproceed with a legal charge unless the individual has beencautioned on more than two occasions previously ([43]Wodak 1993). A recent example of a pre-court initiative involving anattempt to bring drug users into contact with treatment is the'Southwark Arrest Referral Pilot Program', funded by the BritishHome Office Local Drug Prevention Team. This three-year pilotprogram, commenced in March 1991, is being carried out toestablish the effectiveness of arrest as an intervention for drugusers wanting help. Police provide arrestees with information onlocal drug referral agencies and cards are sent to all chargedoffenders. Also, drug workers are on call to visit the relevantpolice stations. Though referrals were not numerous, most ofthose participating in referral programs reported reduced druguse in the following 12-month period. The flaw in the program to date is the lack of effort andencouragement on the part of the police. However, it reflects anattempt to bring into a closer working relationship police andlocal welfare agencies in a harm reduction effort rather thansimply to exercise law enforcement against drug users([44]Walters & Coventry 1993, p12). Although the BritishCriminal Justice Act was proclaimed in 1991 with specificsections relating to the treatment of drug and alcohol dependentoffenders (Criminal Justice Act 1991, s69, schedule 1, cited inWalters and Coventry 1993, p11) and allowing for referral andassessment procedures as components of non-custodial orders, itdoes not establish diversionary programs for drug offenders. Compulsory treatment for drug users CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM-INITIATED DRUG TREATMENT AND CIVILCOMMITMENT A number of literature reviews have concluded that treatmentcan effectively reduce drug use as well as the criminal activitywhich often accompanies it ([45]Anglin & Hser 1990; Gerstein1990; Office of Technology Assessment 1990 in Anglin & Hser1991, p244). There is also increasing evidence that those coercedinto treatment by way of the criminal justice system achieve thesame success as those entering voluntarily (Anglin & Hser1991, p244). The issue for makers of social policy is how to increase thenumber entering treatment, since 'the nature of drug use,especially at abusive and addictive levels, often inhibits orprecludes self-motivation in the user toward voluntarily seekingtreatment' (Anglin & Hser 1991, p247). Many would say that 'when offenders, such as arrestees,probationers, inmates or parolees, are identified as substanceabusers by the criminal justice system, remanding to treatment isa necessary and logical action ... One of the most successful ofcoercive efforts has been civil commitment' (Anglin & Hser1991, p247; see also discussion below of countries which employcivil commitment). Carney, in his Drug Users and the Law inAustralia (1987), points out that, in Australia, civil commitmentpolicies for drug-dependent people date back to the 19th century,and were based on the early view of drug use as a 'disease' forwhich in-patient therapy should be compulsory (1987, p1). As early as 1867, Victoria copied Scotland's move to amendits lunacy laws to allow inebriates to be admitted to 'lunaticasylums', and in 1872 passed the Victorian Inebriates Act, whichwas the first comprehensive Inebriates Act to be enacted outsideAmerica. The other Australian States followed, with legislationin Tasmania in 1873, in South Australia in 1874, in Queensland in1898, in New South Wales in 1900 and in Western Australia in 1903(1987, p3). Much of the Australian State legislation has survivedto the present time. When Queensland was debating its legislationin 1896, the subject of drugs other than alcohol, i.e. 'opium,chloral and other drugs', came up for the first time (1987, p13).Legislation providing for voluntary or compulsory civil admissionto treatment facilities of alcohol or drug-dependent people is inforce in most of the major Australian jurisdictions - but is notmuch utilised. Carney (1987, pp52-53) outlines four approaches tothe regulation of entry to civil treatment schemes for dependentdrug users - the fourth 'applies the classic justifications forthe enactment of criminal law, namely that the actions of theprospective patient constitutes an intolerable degree of harm toother members of the community. Judicial commitment of offenders,and some third party proceedings initiated by police officers,fit this model' (1987, p53). Moving to the United States, the origins of 'civilcommitment' for opiate-dependent (and also alcohol-dependent)people date back to the second half of the 19th century when someof the laws enacted to provide for the civil commitment of thementally ill also permitted civil commitment of people dependenton narcotics ([46]Rosenthal 1988). In the United States civilcommitment generally takes the form, described by [47]Brown(1988, p664), of the direct remanding of the individual to thehealth care system in which civil procedures alone are broughtinto play ... This administrative/judicial action need notinvolve provision of legal counsel, the potential for judgment byone's peers, access to witnesses for one's defense, etc. With some exceptions (see Newman 1986, cited in [48]Brown1988), diversion from the criminal justice system for drugtreatment seems to be acceptable to both health and criminaljustice authorities. However, in democratic countries, civilcommitment of the drug user conflicts with many people's viewsregarding civil rights, the proper relationship of the individualto the State and the use of the health care system for socialcontrol. Regardless, legislation in a number of countriesprovides for such civil commitment for drug use. [49]Porter etal. (1986) point out that in 27 (comprising 32 separatejurisdictions) of the countries they surveyed, there wasprovision for civil commitment under certain conditions, as thereare in 35 American States. It has been argued (Bejerot 1983 & Webster 1986, cited inBrown 1988) that such extreme measures to deal with drug use musthave wide public support. Generally the rationale for such actionis that drug use is a threat to the country's stability (as inSingapore in the case of heroin dependence among young males) ora threat to the country achieving its economic goals, e.g.Malaysia, where the Government decided that the drug problem wasa threat to national security as the country was 'losing itsmanpower to drugs' ([50]Rysavy 1990).18 In 1983, due to an increasing heroin problem in Malaysia, thepowers of police and drug rehabilitation officers were extended,allowing them to arrest and detain persons suspected of usingillegal substances. A positive urine sample resulted in mandatorydrug treatment. Ten per cent of those in treatment in 1989 wereundertaking rehabilitation for cannabis use only. All programswere the same, lasting a maximum of two years with two years'compulsory aftercare, an important part of which was theassignment of a drug-free 'guardian' to act as a role model andto provide positive support. Any infringement of rules duringtreatment resulted in severe punishment, and any drug use afterrelease from treatment resulted in incarceration (Rysavy 1990).Needless to say the program has a high success rate, but isunlikely to fit other countries with cultures differing from thatof Malaysia. Brown summarises the conditions that 'on the basis of othersocieties' actions, have been described as necessary to theimplementation of civil commitment procedures: there needs to be the appearance of risk to the larger society through the subgroup's (i.e. drug users') inappropriate behaviours; there needs to be the capacity to marshal public support for such action; there must be a capacity to identify and isolate the subgroup demonstrating the offending behaviour; the subgroup must be without sufficient political support to withstand the competing political pressure; there must be the machinery to process, detain and confine those whose behaviour is inappropriate or threatening; and there should be a belief in the ability of the community to put in place initiatives that will humanely change individuals' behaviour for their own and for the larger society's well-being ([51]Brown 1988, p676). Brown goes on to say that it is likely that jurisdictionswill retain the option to call upon civil commitment in the eventof a situation arising which has the capacity to 'disrupt thenormal course of society and for which criminal prosecution maybe seen as either inappropriate, unwarranted or infeasible'. Atthe same time, only with the greatest conservatism will civilcommitment be likely to be employed, due to a general distastefor such emergency measures ([52]Brown 1988). The contribution tothe spread of AIDS of intravenous drug use, and its repercussionsfor individual drug users and the wider society, is potentiallyone such situation. Throughout the wide variety of countries providing for civilcommitment for drug use, there have been few studies of theefficacy of such treatment ([53]Brown 1988). However, somestudies have been produced by the US and these are discussedbelow. Generally, in the majority of countries, grounds forcommitment are provided either in mental health legislation orspecific drug legislation. Countries using mental healthlegislation usually include provision for commitment for threatsboth to others and to self. Germany, Japan and Somalia, forexample, provide for civil commitment if the drug-relateddisorder 'constitutes an imminent threat to public safety, orwhen individuals pose a danger to their own life and health'([54]Brown 1988, p666). Bangladesh, on the other hand, specifiesonly the existence of psychiatric disturbance without elaborationof threat, and Trinidad and Tobago emphasise the individual'sinability to provide for himself (Brown 1988). Fifteen out of 43countries surveyed by [55]Porter et al (1986) provide for civilcommitment under legislation specific to drug use, where thecriteria may be limited to evidence of dependence (as in Mexico,Columbia, Peru, Thailand and Malaysia). Some (i.e. Argentina,Italy, Australia and Sweden) also include reference to the threatposed to others and/or to the need for treatment. In Victoria(Australia) under the Alcoholics and Drug Dependent Persons Actof 18 December 1968, an alcohol- or drug-dependent person'suitable for treatment' (i.e. 'who habitually uses drugs ofaddiction to such an extent that he has lost the power ofself-control with respect to the use of drugs of addiction'(Porter et al 1986, p126), may be committed for seven days and,at the discretion of the medical officer in charge of theassessment centre (the decision-making authority), for anotherseven days. A consensus statement issued by the participants at a meetingin the US to examine research findings relating to civilcommitment and mandatory treatment, particularly in relation tohindering the spread of AIDS, found that 'treatment is effectivein reducing intravenous drug abuse and that the length of time intreatment is positively related to treatment success, thecriminal justice system is important for identification andretention of drug abusers in treatment' ([56]Leukefeld & Tims1988). It was further recommended at this meeting that 'the term"compulsory treatment" be used rather than "civilcommitment" to capture a wider range of possibleinterventions, since civil commitment is only one type ofcompulsory treatment. Further, it is essential that candidatesfor compulsory treatment receive appropriate legal protections.'In the US, despite interest in the early 1970s due to 'high ratesof recidivism and criminal justice system over-crowding and theshift away from a rehabilitative philosophy in corrections,programs for drug-abusing offenders have languished in the 1980suntil fairly recently' ([57]Anglin and Hser 1990, p424). However, the 1960s saw the beginning of civil commitment fordrug-abusing offenders in some States of the US. These were basedon the therapeutic community philosophy. There are fewevaluations of treatment for offenders except for these civilcommitment programs, and such programs as have been developed areso recent that they have not been evaluated. CIVIL COMMITMENT IN THE US Compulsory treatment of drug users has been a controversialissue worldwide for decades. In response to two forces, one aimedat more effective treatment of problem drug users and the otherat social control of the problem user, civil commitmentlegislation was enacted in the US in the 1960s and 1970s([58]Rosenthal 1988). Following this, three major treatment programs wereestablished: the California Civil Addict Program, the New YorkCivil Commitment Program and programs under the federal NarcoticAddict Rehabilitation Act (NARA) ([59]Anglin & Hser 1990,p425), enabling large-scale commitment of drug-dependent people.However, relatively few persons were committed under theMassachusetts law, one of the earliest in the country, anddespite civil commitment laws in many other jurisdictions theyremained only statutes on the books (Rosenthal 1988). Since involuntary civil commitment involves a substantialdeprivation of liberty, various aspects of the California and NewYork programs were challenged quite early - the federal programfor involuntary civil commitment of drug users not charged with acrime was not challenged in this way, presumably because thefederal program permitted only relatives to initiate commitment,and few relatives did. Despite challenges to theconstitutionality of involuntary treatment, the Californian andNew York courts held in its favour. They were, however,influenced by the Supreme Court case of Robinson v. Californiawhich did not really involve the constitutionality of involuntarycommitment at all but rather the question of whether it wasconstitutional for a State to make 'addiction' a crime:'Nevertheless, the Supreme Court declared (in a dictum) that aState might establish a program of compulsory treatment foropiate addicts either to discourage violation of its criminallaws against narcotic trafficking or to safeguard the generalhealth or welfare of its inhabitants' ([60]Rosenthal 1988, p641). It has been suggested that because this case did not involvethe constitutionality of involuntary treatment of opiate users,the Supreme Court did not go into that question as deeply as itmight have and, in turn, the California and New York courtsrelied too much on the Supreme Court dictum without delvingdeeply enough into the question. The Supreme Court decisiontherefore meant almost inevitably that in future cases thesubstantive validity of involuntary civil commitment would beupheld (Rosenthal 1988, p643). Under the legislation discussed here anyone found in amedical examination to be dependent on drugs (usually heroin)could be committed. Mostly those committed had been arrested forproperty crimes or drug trafficking and were diverted from theusual criminal processing. Usually there were two phases oftreatment, initially one of imprisonment, plus a period of paroleor monitored community release. During both phases the goal wasreduced drug use and criminal behaviour; vocational training wassometimes added. The California Civil Addict Program was more successful thanthe New York State program, primarily due to better management.The main results of evaluations were that program participantsreduced 'narcotic use and associated property crime' to one-thirdcompared with those not in the program ([61]Lindblad 1988).Overall, studies of the California CAP concluded that civilcommitment and other drug treatment programs, particularlymethadone maintenance, were effective in reducing narcoticsdependence and minimising the associated adverse social effects,the important issue being that the dependence should be broughtinto an environment where intervention can occur over time. In this respect, civil commitment and other legally coercivemeasures were found to be useful where the dependent person wouldnot enter treatment voluntarily ([62]Anglin 1988a). A vital issueis the implementation strategy employed, which can 'ensure orsabotage success' (Anglin 1988a, p539). Although NARA was acomparatively short-lived program superseded by otherlegislation, it provided a national network of treatmentproviders and was regarded as an effective way of bringingnarcotic dependent people into treatment. NARA allowed treatmentfor offenders as a pre-trial civil commitment, rather thanprosecution for drug-dependent people convicted of a specificcrime and for voluntary applicants. Those admitted to the programdid as well or better than those in other programs (Lindblad1988). TASC PROGRAMS IN THE US More recently in the US, coordinated programs have beendeveloped in a number of States to refer 'drug-abusing offendersto community-based treatment in lieu of prosecution or probationrevocation', e.g. the Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime(TASC) program ([63]Anglin & Hser 1990, p428), begun in 1972and by 1988 operating in 18 States (Cook et al. 1988 in Anglin& Hser 1990, p428). This provides community-based treatmentfor drug-dependent offenders who 'otherwise might becomeprogressively more involved with the criminal justice system'(p428). Diversionary dispositions such as deferred prosecution,creative community sentencing, and pretrial intervention are usedto motivate offenders to enter and remain in treatment.Evaluation Such limited evaluation as has taken place (throughthe Treatment Outcomes Prospective Study) indicates that criminaljustice referred clients, because they were monitored, tended tostay in treatment longer than voluntary clients, which is usuallyassociated with more successful treatment outcomes ([64]Anglin& Hser 1990, p429). Although evaluations of treatment are positive, it remains aquestion as to whether improvements would have occurred over timeanyway due to maturation or other outside influences. In terms ofclient characteristics and treatment effectiveness, it was foundthat 'addicts who have a more stable family background, an intactmarriage, a job, a history of minimal criminality, less evidenceof alcohol or polydrug abuse, and less severe psychiatricdisorders are more likely to achieve a better outcome in mostprograms' (Anglin & Hser 1990, p429). Many studies have shown that, while older clients, mostlyopiate users, tend to stay in treatment longer and thereforebenefit most (possibly due to the 'maturing out' effect noted byWinick (1962 in Anglin & Hser 1990, p435), those under 25tend to leave treatment prematurely, thus limiting theirprospects for effective results. In terms of program factorswhich appeared to be most beneficial, the significant ones were:psychotherapy, urine testing, and legal coercion. 'Clientsreferred from the criminal justice system have been shown to stayin treatment longer than other clients' (Collins et al., cited in[65]Leukefeld & Timms 1988, p57) and longer retentionsuggests better treatment outcomes than with other clients (butsee above). Some argue that treatment cannot be effective if the clientis coerced, and the findings are not consistent on this issue.However, the best-designed studies 'generally support theproposition that a collaborative relationship between thecriminal justice system and community-treatment delivery systemsproduces, at an aggregate level, enhanced treatment outcomes'([66]Anglin & Hser 1990, p439). While length of retention intreatment is an important predictor of success it appears that'for many drug abusers, repeated exposure to treatment is moreeffective than one episode' (McLellan & Druley 1977 in Anglin& Hser 1990, p441). Total time in treatment may be more important, when accruedacross treatment episodes, than retention in a single program(p441). In a number of other countries, any illegal drug useincluding that of cannabis is sufficient grounds for recommendingor ordering treatment, implying that some other countries regardcannabis use more seriously than Australia does, and deserving oftreatment. The mode of treatment depends on the profile of theindividual user and on such factors as are mentioned elsewhere inthis report, e.g. whether the person is a polydrug user, lengthof time of use, degree of psychopathology and so forth.Outpatient non-methadone programs which involve clients with alltypes of drug use who tend not to have serious criminalhistories, are the most obvious option for treatment of cannabisdependence. Therapeutic communities are not necessarily specificto any class of drug and could also therefore potentially be ofbenefit to certain cannabis-dependent persons. Since the numbers of cannabis users who have problems isstill small and very few are likely to be seriously enoughdependent to be referred by the court, it is unlikely thattreatment facilities could not incorporate them. Summary of findings A summary of findings from Australian and internationalliterature concerned with diversion and treatment for drugoffenders suggests the following conclusions with relation tocannabis users: While the vast majority of cannabis users do not report any problems, there are increasing reports of individuals both in Australia and in other countries (e.g. the United States and New Zealand) who are seeking treatment for cannabis dependence. It is generally accepted that a prison sentence is unsatisfactory for offenders with drug problems, and diversion with the purpose of treatment is a widely used alternative, welcomed by judges and magistrates. Usually the illegal drug involved is heroin but occasionally cannabis is the offender's primary drug. Criminal justice involvement is seen as providing an opportunity to intervene in drug users' lives in order to confront the users with their drug problems and to bring them into contact with treatment agencies, often for the first time. The earlier the intervention in the users' lives the better, and the longer (or more frequent) the periods of treatment, the more successful the treatment outcome. In some cases merely attending for assessment is sufficient to bring about a change in attitude since the users are often confronted with their drug problem for the first time. While some dispute the value of coercion in getting drug users into treatment, it is often the only way, and there is more evidence to indicate successful treatment results for involuntary than for voluntary clients. This is primarily due to the length of time spent in treatment. Frequently the attitude of an unwilling client will change quite quickly once treatment has begun. The success of diversion to treatment programs depends on the skill and experience of the drug counsellor, the availability of sufficient places in suitable treatment facilities, and close cooperation between health and criminal justice agencies. It would be more cost effective to provide additional funds for the training of counsellors and the provision of suitable facilities than to continue to send repeat drug offenders to prison. Conclusions regarding treatment for cannabis offenders, particularly repeat offenders, are as follows: There are reports from most diversion programs/treatment agencies of individuals being referred for other drug use who also have serious problems in reducing or ceasing their cannabis use. Some of these may also be alcohol-dependent. There appears then to be some demand for cannabis treatment in this country. Interpreting treatment in its broadest and most ideal sense (i.e. as a program personally selected by the client in consultation with a counsellor, tailored to the needs and characteristics of the particular individual), for a repeat offender facing a prison sentence, treatment is a preferable alternative. Treatment appears to have the potential to help offenders restructure their lives in such a way as to avoid breaches of the law which bring them continually into contact with the criminal justice system. In the sense that treatment may be 'compulsory' (i.e. court mandated), while the client must be assessed as suitable for treatment (genuinely motivated to participate, although there may be some initial resistance), the advantage of the compulsory nature of the treatment is that it provides the 'crisis' generally acknowledged as necessary to get most drug users into treatment and to keep them there long enough for a successful outcome. In the case of cannabis use, the earlier the intervention the better, since there is likely to be less criminal involvement and therefore more likelihood of a successful outcome for the client. Young users, particularly juveniles, should receive more attention than they appear to be getting at present in Australia from, for instance, juvenile 'panels' (such as those in South Australia) for whom this is not a major focus. A final consideration regarding the treatment option for cannabis users is the availability of treatment programs and facilities and counsellors of sufficient quality and in sufficient numbers to accommodate those referred from the court system, since this is vital for successful treatment outcomes. Conclusion In this chapter we have discussed the two related fields ofdiversion and treatment for drug offenders. We believe that fewpeople would disagree with the wisdom of diversion from thecriminal justice system for minor cannabis offenders. Further,though some would object that treatment of drug offenders is aform of social control and that the concept of the 'need fortreatment' has no inherent limitation, the evidence suggeststhat, although methodological problems exist in the evaluation oftreatment programs, most of the programs outlined here haveachieved a certain level of success in terms of meeting theirobjectives - which generally means, in the Australian context,reducing the drug use, and associated involvement with thecriminal justice system, of the individual undergoing treatment. Disagreement arises regarding the degree of interventionwhich should be exercised by the criminal justice system, as anagent of the State, in coercing drug offenders into treatment -in its most extreme form, through civil commitment. While theUnited States, for example, indicates considerable support forcivil commitment, in Australia, although commitment exists as alegislative option, there has been reluctance to use it. Thisdecision with respect to the balance between protecting societyand infringing the rights of individuals is a matter for theparticular society involved and the prevailing mores at the time. References Anglin, M.D. 1988, 'A social policy analysis of compulsorytreatment for opiate dependence: Introduction', Journal of DrugIssues, vol. 18, no. 4, pp503-504. Anglin, M.D. 1988a, 'The efficacy of civil commitment intreating narcotics addiction', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 18,no. 4, pp527-545. Anglin, M.D. & Hser, Y. 1990, 'Treatment of drug abuse',in Drugs and Crime, ed. Tonry & J.Q. Wilson, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp393-460, Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 13. Brown, B.S. 1988, 'Civil commitment-An internationalperspective', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 18, no. 4, pp663-678. Bush, R. & Scagliotti, L. 1983, 'Programmes for opiateusers at the criminal justice and health care interface, asystems analysis of the New South Wales experience', paperpresented at the Stipendiary Magistrates Conference in New SouthWales, May, pp95-120. C ourt Diversion Service (Western Australia), 1993, Briefsummary of the Court Diversion Service, provided by the WesternAustralia Alcohol and Drug Authority, Central Drug Unit, EastPerth. Department of the Attorney-General & of Justice. NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics & Research. 1982, TheSydney Drug Diversion Programme, The First Two Years. Desland, M. & Batey, R. 1990, 'Criminality of heroinusers presenting to an Australian hospital-based drug and alcoholunit', British Journal of Addiction, vol. 85, pp795-801. Desland, M.L. & Batey, R.G. 1992, 'A 12-month prospectivecomparison of court-diverted with self-referred heroin users',Drug and Alcohol Review, vol. 11, pp121-129. Desland, M. & Batey, R. 1991, 'Legal Coercion andTreatment, Screening for Drug Abuse - A Community Challenge',proceedings of a Conjoint Conference organised by the AustralianAssociation of Clinical Biochemists and the Australian Medicaland Professional Society on Alcohol and Drugs, ANU, Canberra1988, Monograph/The Clinical Biochemist; 5th Maylands, W.A. Australian Association of Clinical Biochemists. Gray, Y.,Reynolds, C. & Rumbold, M. 1992, 'The South Australian DrugAssessment and Aid Panels: An alternative to the criminal law forillicit drug users', in Drug Problems in Society: Dimensions andPerspectives, ed. J. White, pp127-134. Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N. & Bachman, J. 1976, 'Clinicalstudies of cannabis tolerance and dependence', Annals of the NewYork Academy of Sciences, vol. 282, pp221-239. Kleiman, M.A.R. 1992, Against Excess. Drug Policy forResults, Basic Books, New York. Leroy, B, 1991, The Community of Twelve and the Drug Demand.Comparative Study of Legislations and Judicial Practice,Commission of the European Community, Luxembourg. Leukefeld, C.G. & Tims, F.L. (eds) 1988, CompulsoryTreatment of Drug Abuse: Research and Clinical Practice.Rockville, MD, National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIDA ResearchMonograph 86. Lindblad, R. 1988. 'Civil commitment under the FederalNarcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act', Journal of Drug Issues, vol.18, no. 4, pp595-624. McBride, D.C. & Inciardi, J.A. 1993, 'The focusedoffender disposition program: Philosophy, procedures, andpreliminary findings', Journal of Drug Issues, vol 23, no.1pp143-160. Ministry of Welfare, Health and Cultural Affairs/Ministry ofJustice (Netherlands), 1992. The Drug Policy in the Netherlands,Government report, December 1992 version, Rijswijk's/Gravenhage. MSJ Keys Young 1992, Evaluation of NCADA-Funded Drug andAlcohol Services in the Department of Corrective Services and theCommunity Corrections Service, MSJ Keys Young, Surry Hills. New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.1992, New South Wales Recorded Crime Statistics 1991, Sydney. Nowlan, R. & Cohen, S. 1977, 'Tolerance to marijuana:Heart rate and subjective "high"', ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, vol. 22, no. 5, pp550-556. Porter, L., Arif, A.E. & Curran, W.J. 1986, The Law andthe Treatment of Drug- and Alcohol-dependent Persons: AComparative Study of Existing Legislation, WHO, Geneva. Roffman, R.A., Stephens, R.S., Simpson, E.E. & Whitaker,D.L. 1988, 'Treatment of Marijuana Dependence: PreliminaryResults', Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, vol. 20, no. 1,pp129-137. Rosenthal, M.P1988, 'The constitutionality of involuntarycivil commitment of opiate addicts', Journal of Drug Issues, vol.18, no. 4, pp641-661. Rysavy, P. 1990, 'Drug rehabilitation in Malaysia',Australian Therapeutic Communities Association Magazine, October,pp 36-37. Salmon, R. & Salmon, K. 1983, 'The role of coercion inthe rehabilitation of drug abusers', International Journal of theAddictions, vol. 8, pp9-21. Sarre, R., Sutton, A. & Pulsford, T. 1989, Cannabis. TheExpiation Notice Approval, Office of Crime Statistics, SouthAustralian Attorney-General's Department, Adelaide. Schlosser, D. 1984, An Investigation of Court Referrals andVoluntary Referrals at Bourke Street Drug Advisory Service(Sydney, NSW): Main Report, Sydney, NSW Drug and AlcoholAuthority Publication. Siegal, H.A. & Cole, P.A. 1993, 'Enhancing criminaljustice based treatment through the application of theintervention approach', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 23, no. 1,pp131-142. South Australia Police Department, 1992, Crime Statistics andAnalysis, Supplement to the 1991-92 Annual Report, Adelaide. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1979, Final Report, South Austrlian Government, Adelaide. Tennant, F.S. 1986a, 'The clinical syndrome of marijuanadependence', Psychiatric Annals, vol. 16, no. 4, pp225-42. Tennant, F.S. 1986b, 'Neurophysiology of marijuanadependence', paper presented at Marijuana Dependence: A NationalConference, San Francisco, October. Victoria Police. 1992, Statistical Review 1991/92, Melbourne. Walters, R. & Coventry, G. 1993, A Proposal forEstablishing a Pre-Court Drug Diversion Program in Victoria.Draft Discussion Paper-For Information Only, May, National Centrefor Socio-Legal Studies, Melbourne. Williams, R.J. 1981, The Drug and Alcohol Court AssessmentProgramme (DACAP). Pilot Project: (December, 1979 to December,1980), Final Report to the N.S.W. Drug and Alcohol Authority,Diversion 3/81. Wodak, A. 1993, 'Prohibition has Failed. What Next?', paperdelivered at the Australian Institute of Criminology's Law,Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, Surfer's Paradise, 6-8July. Young, W. & Cameron, N. 1991, Adult Pre-trial Diversionin New Zealand, Young & Cameron Policy & ResearchConsultants, Wellington. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-24IA031-000652-B046-244http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131929 text/html 13419HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:14:46 GMTContent-length: 13201 Australian Cannabis (Marijuana) Study - Chapter 6 Chapter 6: EVALUATING NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACHES TO CANNABIS The principle of evaluating new policy and legislation iswidely accepted, but is less frequently observed in practice. InAustralia and most Western nations, little has been done,especially by government agencies, to monitor and evaluate, in asystematic manner, their national drug policies. This is the casein instances where legislation has developed incrementally (as inmost of Australia's States and Territories) and where newapproaches have been implemented following detailed policyreviews (e.g. the Australian Capital Territory's cannabisexpiation notice initiative). Too often evaluation is consideredrelevant only after a policy has been in place for some time andchanges are being considered. To be of most value, new initiatives should be designed andimplemented with an explicit and adequately resourced monitoringand evaluation component built into the initiative from theoutset. In the context of evaluating new legislative approachesto cannabis, we suggest that policy evaluation and programevaluation be considered separately. The bulk of this paper hasaddressed the evaluation of policies, as reflected throughlegislative options. The details of evaluating the implementationof policies, focusing on the programs themselves, are matterswhich need to be addressed after the broad policy issues aresettled and particular new approaches are agreed upon. We provide below an overview of the steps involved in bothevaluative tasks. The National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97(Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy 1993) provides theframework within which we base our recommendations relating tomonitoring and evaluation. The Plan is explicitly goal-attainmentfocused, the approach that we argued for in [1]Chapter 2, where we highlighted theimportance of clarity in the specification of the goals of drugpolicy, legislation and program implementation. The Plan providesan overarching goal (or 'mission') for Australian drug policy:'The overall mission of the National Drug Strategy is to minimisethe harmful effects of drugs and drug use in Australian society'(MCDS 1993, p6). Policies and programs in specific areas, including cannabis,should be evaluated in a manner consistent with this nationalgoal. Applying goal attainment models of evaluation is a morecomplex task than it sometimes seems to be initially. Substantialtechnical difficulties exist in both designing and conductingevaluation research; part of this is the often complex task ofidentifying policy and program goals. Our discussion in [2]Chapter 2referred to the fact that, in practice, a particular cannabispolicy can relate to goals which are inconsistent: the attainmentof one may militate against the attainment of another. Needschange over time; often policy and legislation are far behind.For a given policy, it is likely that a hierarchy of goals willexist: the mission statement of the National Drug Strategic Planis an overarching goal, one which must be articulated in termswhich encompass other goals such as those concerned specificallywith cannabis. Policy evaluation and decision-making In [3]Chapter 4 we outlined fivebroad policy and legislative options for cannabis in Australia.The approach taken there is a contribution to policy evaluationin this area, and, by extension, a contribution todecision-making. But how are decisions about drug policy to bemade? One approach is the making of ad hoc decisions. This must berejected in favour of more systematic policy choice models. Theliterature differentiates two groups of decision-making modelsfor use by governments: 'rational' and 'incremental' approaches(see, e.g. Corbett 1992, pp59-76; Davis et al.1993, pp157-81).The rational approach, illustrated below, is something of anideal. It is not always easy to implement in practice, but thealternative (making decisions incrementally without everreconsidering the overall needs and patterns of policy responses)is much less attractive. Applying a rational approach todecision-making in evaluating new legislative approaches tocannabis use (as different from evaluating the actualimplementation of new legislation and resulting programs), wesuggest that the following issues be taken into account: The need to examine the sources of the proposal and the context within which it has been presented. The need to clarify just why that approach (rather than a different one) is proposed. The need to identify the goals which the new approach, if implemented, would attain. The philosophical and pragmatic goals should both be specified. Multiple goals may be identified and inconsistencies between them made explicit. The need to assess the likely impacts on key stakeholders, if the approach were to be implemented. For each key stakeholder, assess the likely costs and benefits, both intended and unintended. The need to review the depth, breadth, relevance and quality of the data currently available to assist the evaluation of the proposed approach. Determine whether or not it is, in fact, feasible to reach a conclusion on the value of the proposed policy, given the availability of data to answer questions about the proposal's likely outcomes and impacts. The need to make judgments regarding: (a) the value of the goal or goals; (b) how achievable the goals are; and (c) if the goals are judged to be achievable, how effective, efficient and appropriate are the implementation programs. This systematic approach to policy evaluation is not oftenseen in the development of drugs policy. Nevertheless, in thearea of legislative options for cannabis in Australia, policymakers have the capacity to apply such a process. This should beundertaken as part of the National Drug Strategic Plan's projectto develop a national statement on cannabis, one which includes acontemporary perspective on the most appropriate legislativeoption or options for cannabis. Program evaluation It is beyondthe scope of this report to present details on the techniques ofprogram evaluation. These are to be found in standard textbooks(Brinkerhoff et al. 1983; Hawe et al. 1991; Guba & Lincoln1989; Morris 1987; Patton 1990; Rossi & Freeman 1989). One point to be made, however, is that the evaluationresearch model and techniques employed should be selected on thebasis of answering a precisely defined evaluation question. Ifthe evaluation question is, for example, 'What has been theimpact on policing of a new legislative approach to cannabis',quite different evaluation techniques will be used from asituation where the evaluation question is 'How cost-effectivehas the new approach been', or 'How relevant is currentlegislation to contemporary needs?'. No single approach coversall circumstances. Again, the National Drug Strategic Plan emphasises theimportance of monitoring and evaluation. Under the heading'Policy Approach', it states: The National Drug Strategic Planexplicitly identifies policy objectives and indicators to enablethe effectiveness of the program to be evaluated. The NationalDrug Strategic Plan is committed to the application ofneeds-based planning and evaluation activities to ensure theeffectiveness and efficiency of strategies employed to minimisedrug-related harm (MCDS 1993, p5). We commend those responsiblefor this emphasis, but note that this policy cannot beimplemented without the allocation of a significant level ofresources. The oft-stated policy that evaluation should be anintegral part of all drug-related programs can only be realisedif program budgets include sufficient funds to cover the designand conduct of monitoring and evaluation, and if reporting timeframes are appropriate to the evaluation model being employed.Indicators A related strength of the National Drug Strategic Planwhich is highly relevant to the present review is its focus onindicators of program implementation, short-term outcomes andlonger-term and broader impacts. The indicators selected for thispurpose will depend on the particular initiative being evaluated;accordingly, they cannot be comprehensively described here.Within Australia, the work of Sarre, Sutton and Pulsford (1989)and of Christie (1991) in evaluating the South Australiancannabis expiation notice scheme, and of the Queensland CriminalJustice Commission's Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs (1993)are examples of the effective use of indicators in the monitoringand evaluation of cannabis legislation. Single's (1989) review ofthe USA experience of marijuana 'decriminalisation' demonstratesthe dearth of information available in that country to evaluatethe legislative changes initiated over the last 20 years.Elsewhere in this paper we have referred to such evaluation dataas are available relating to other nations. Without seeking to beexhaustive, we list here some examples of indicators which aresignificant inputs to policy and program evaluation relating tonew legislative initiatives concerned with cannabis: The impact on social justice in Australian society of the implementation of cannabis legislation. Costs of cannabis controls, including the transfer of resources. The effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation of policies and legislation. Public opinion concerning cannabis. Cannabis consumption patterns and levels. Numbers and characteristics of the people presenting to treatment agencies with cannabis-related health and social problems. Cannabis-related offences. Cannabis-related driving and motor vehicle crashes. THC levels of the cannabis available to consumers. Cannabis-related workplace accidents. Conclusion In this section we have discussed the evaluation of newlegislative approaches to cannabis use in Australia. We havedifferentiated between policy evaluation and program evaluation,and have pointed to the need to develop indicators, tied tospecific initiatives, of activities, outcomes and impacts.Undertaking high quality, systematic policy evaluation concerningcannabis is essential and this paper contributes to that process.Research aimed at developing evaluation techniques and programindicators will be needed as part of the development andimplementation of new legislative approaches in this area. References Brinkerhoff, R. et al. 1983, Program Evaluation, Kluwer-Nijhoff, Boston. Corbett, D. 1992, Australian Public Sector Management, Allen & Unwin, St Leonards. Davis, G., Wanna, J., Warhurst, J. & Weller, P. 1993, Public Policy in Australia, 2nd ed., Allen & Unwin, St Leonards. Guba, E. & Lincoln, Y. 1989, Fourth Generation Evaluation, Sage, Beverly Hills. Hawe, D., Degeling, P. & Hall, J. 1990, Evaluating Health Promotion: A Health Worker's Guide, MacLennan & Petty, Sydney. McDermott, F., Pyett, P. & Hamilton, M. 1991, Evaluate Yourself: A Handbook for Alcohol and Other Drug Treatment Agencies, [National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, Canberra]. Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy (MCDS) 1993, National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97, AGPS, Canberra. Morris, L. (ed.) 1987, Program Evaluation Kit, 2nd ed. 1987, Program Evaluation Kit, 2nd ed., nine volumes, Sage, Beverly Hills. Patton, M. 1990, Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, Sage, Beverly Hills. Rossi, P. & Freeman, H. 1985, Evaluation: A Systematic Approach, Sage, Beverly Hills. Rotem, A. 1985, 'Evaluating programs on drug and alcohol related problems', Australian Alcohol and Drug Review, vol. 4, pp181-186. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-25IA031-000652-B046-260http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131936 text/html 9907HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:14:40 GMTContent-length: 9690 Legislative options for cannabis use in australia:Conclusion Chapter 7. Conclusion This paper has addressed the legislative options availablefor cannabis in Australia, and has argued that choosing fromamong these options requires a process of policy evaluation.Accordingly, the paper first considered the policy frameworkswithin which decision-making occurs, emphasising the necessityfor clarity in the goals that society seeks to attain throughlegislating in this area. The paper places contemporary Australian cannabis legislationwithin its broader context: historical and international. Despitethe work of numerous Royal Commissions and other officialinquiries, much of Australia's legislation concerning cannabisreflects the dynamics of earlier times, when Australia tended tomimic other nations' policies without taking sufficient accountof local circumstances. Our framework of legislative prohibitionwas put in place at a time when there was virtually no cannabisuse in Australia. In the 1990s, when over four millionAustralians report having used the drug and nearly half of themreport having done so during the last year, most jurisdictionsmaintain total prohibition as their legislative stance, eventhough only a tiny proportion of the offenders against theirlegislation will ever be prosecuted. We have reviewed the range of legislative options available,classifying them as: total prohibition; prohibition combined witha civil penalty for personal use, etc; partial prohibitionwhereby personal use, etc., is not an offence, but traffickingand large-scale growing of cannabis remains prohibited; the legalavailability of cannabis under various forms of regulation; and,finally, the option of unregulated, free availability. Each ofthese options is reviewed in terms of its rationale, experienceswith it to date and its impacts. The related topics of the diversion from the criminal justicesystem of people who come to the attention of the police forcannabis offences, and the compulsory treatment of cannabisusers, have also been discussed. Experience to date suggests thatwell-resourced and managed diversionary programs can beeffective, and desirable, alternatives to imprisonment for someoffenders. Very few cannabis users will need treatment, asconceived of through a medical model, simply because of theircannabis use. Many users can benefit, however, from a helpingintervention, the success of which may be potentiated by thecrisis of a 'bust' for cannabis use or related offences. Cannabis is used mainly as a recreational drug and thispattern of use has been the focus of this paper. Forcompleteness, we have included in the appendixes information onthe medical and industrial/agricultural uses of the cannabisplant and its by-products. In doing so, we remind readers that,in drug policies, we are not faced with 'all-or-nothing' choices.Within the range of available policy options lies the possibilityof prohibiting the recreational use of cannabis while permittingits use for other purposes. (This occurs, of course, withopiates: the opium poppy is grown in Tasmania to provide rawmaterial for the manufacture of pharmaceutical products.) Australia's National Drug Strategy provides a policyframework within which new legislative approaches may bedeveloped. Both existing and new approaches have the possibilityof both enhancing and detracting from the achievement of themission of the National Drug Strategy, that of minimising theharmful effects of drugs and drug use in Australian society. Ourreview of the policy options, set out in Chapter4, demonstrates this. No single 'best option' for cannabis legislation exists. Whatis most appropriate will depend upon what goals both policymakers and the community are seeking to achieve. It is not therole of researchers to dictate policy goals; rather we have drawnattention to their importance, outlined an approach to evaluatingthem and described the likely outcomes, in terms of policy goals,of the five broad categories of legislative options which areavailable now. Our review suggests that two of the five legislative optionsdiscussed in Chapter 4 areinappropriate in contemporary Australian circumstances. They arethe options which we have characterised as 'total prohibition'and 'free availability'. The arguments for rejecting theseoptions will not be repeated here as they are detailed in Chapter 4. We point out, however, that the cultivation, possession andsupply of cannabis remain an offence in all Australian States andTerritories (and using it is an offence in most), even thoughcannabis use is commonplace and little evidence exists thatcannabis itself causes significant harm when used in smallquantities. Australian society experiences more harm, weconclude, from maintaining the prohibition policy than itexperiences from the use of the drug. Widespread interest exists in the Dutch approach to drugpolicies. We have categorised them, in this paper, under theheading of total prohibition, as that is the Dutch legislativeposition. However, as detailed above, the application of theprinciple that it is, in their terms, 'inexpedient' to prosecutepeople for minor drug offences (including selling cannabis incertain coffee shops) means that Dutch policy and practice (ascontrasted to legislation) is closer to the regulatory optionthan the total prohibition option. The regulatory option is oneof the approaches which we suggest is more appropriate toAustralian circumstances than is total prohibition. It could be argued that the Dutch approach is a product of adifferent culture and system of administration of criminaljustice. If the Australian States and Territories resolve not toarrest and proceed against people using, possessing or supplyingcannabis, by far the best approach is for this policy to beimplemented through legislation, rather than through anadministrative decision not to prosecute cannabis offenders. Thisis because the Australian system of legal justice is based uponthe principle of legal clarity and consistency in theimplementation of the law. Nevertheless, the reality is that, for a variety of reasons,Australian governments may well prefer to implement the Dutchapproach. A number of precedents exist whereby, especially inareas of moral contention, certain illegal activities, as amatter of policy, are excluded from the purview of the criminaljustice authorities. In the Australian Capital Territory, forexample, we understand that the Director of Public Prosecutionspublicly announced that he would not conduct any prosecutions inthe area of prostitution. Abortion and certain types of gambling(e.g. playing two-up on ANZAC Day) are or were similarly dealtwith. Police general orders frequently remind officers of thedesirability of exercising their discretion not to arrest orsummons a person found committing only a minor offence. Warnings,formal cautions and referral to other agencies are encourageddespite the existence of legislation prohibiting the behaviourinvolved. We suggest, then, that if governments agree that totalprohibition is not the most desirable approach, but are unwillingor unable to legislate to enable a more preferable option to beimplemented, then the Dutch approach is a desirable alternative.It would entail the government, the State/Territory Director ofPublic Prosecutions, or another appropriate authority declaringthat, as from a certain date, no person would be prosecutedbefore the courts for specified (minor) cannabis offences. Wesuggest that this is a legitimate, but not optimal, pragmaticoption currently available to Australian governments. We also reject the legislative option found at the oppositeend of the continuum from total prohibition, the totallyunregulated, free availability of cannabis. Our society is onewhich accepts that governments and others have both the right andthe responsibility to intervene in diverse ways to protect peoplefrom harm and to advance the common good. It would beunreasonable, we suggest, to argue that cannabis should beavailable in an uncontrolled manner: issues of quality control,protection of the young, road safety, etc., demand at least somedegree of control over the drug's availability. We conclude, then, that cannabis law reform is required inthis country. Numerous options for policy, legislation andimplementation processes exist within the broad categories ofprohibition with civil penalties, partial prohibition andrelatively free but regulated availability. We believe, on thebasis of the available evidence, that widely acceptable socialgoals, well attuned to the needs of contemporary Australiansociety, will be attained through the adoption and implementationof policies which lie within these options. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-26IA031-000652-B046-279http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131947 text/html 9945HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:16 GMTContent-length: 9728 Appendix 1. The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis APPENDIX 1. THE MEDICINAL USE OF CANNABIS (19) The medicinal use of cannabis in the ancient world has beenwell documented (Abel 1980). In the United States, cannabis wasfirst mentioned as a medicinal drug in 1843 and by 1852 it wasincluded in the US dispensatory list of medicines. It was thoughtto be beneficial in the treatment of 'neuralgia, gout, tetanus,hydrophobia, cholera, convulsions, chorea, hysteria, depressionand insanity' (Wood & Bache 1854, cited in [1]Abel 1980,p182). In Australia, tincture of cannabis was used in medicineuntil the 1960s, when it was declared a prohibited drug([2]Cartwright 1983). Since the introduction of legislation prohibiting therecreational use of cannabis, its use for medicinal purposes has,in most Western countries, not been popular. However, recentlythe therapeutic benefits of cannabis have received closeattention in the United States. In 1991, Doblin and Kleimanconducted an anonymous survey of the members of the AmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology measuring the attitudes andexperiences of American oncologists concerning the use ofcannabis to treat nausea in cancer chemotherapy patients. Theyfound that, of those oncologists who replied to the survey (43per cent), more than 44 per cent of them reported recommendingthe illegal use of cannabis for the control of nausea to at leastone cancer patient. Some 48 per cent said that they wouldprescribe cannabis to some of their patients if it were legal([3]Doblin & Kleiman 1991). Cannabis has been used as an anti-emetic in the treatment ofAIDS patients and as a painkiller for those suffering fromchronic pain ([4]Grinspoon 1991). It has also been regarded bysome medical practitioners as being effective in reducingintra-ocular pressure in glaucoma patients ([5]Caswell 1992) andin treating epilepsy ([6]Cartwright 1983), Huntington's chorea([7]Moss et al. 1989) and Parkinsonian tremor ([8]Frankel et al.1990). Despite the attention that the medical use of cannabis hasreceived in recent times, legislation in the United States doesnot permit the medical use of marijuana. In the FederalControlled Substances Act, cannabis is categorised as a Schedule1 drug, and as such is described as having a high potential forabuse, no currently accepted medical use and no acceptable safelevel of use under medical supervision. In 1989, organisations such as the (US) National Organizationfor Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), the Alliance for CannabisTherapeutics (ACT) as well as various individuals,20 applied tohave cannabis rescheduled so that it could be used for medicalpurposes. The Administrator of the Drug EnforcementAdministration rejected these claims and stated that: It is clear that cannabis cannot meet the criteria ... forsafety under medical supervision. The chemistry of cannabis isnot known and reproducible. The record supports a finding thatmarijuana plant material is variable from plant to plant. Thequantities of the active constituents, the cannabinoids, varyconsiderably. In addition, the actions and potential risks ofseveral of the cannabinoids have not been studied ... (USGovernment, Federal Register, vol. 54, no. 249, 29 December 1989,p53,734). This position has recently been restated by Robert C. Bonner,a later Administrator of the US Drug Enforcement Agency, when heresponded to a subsequent petition lodged by NORML (USGovernment, Federal Register, vol. 57, no. 59, 26 March 1992,pp10,499-10,508). Those in favour of rescheduling the drug argue that, for some,the denial of cannabis as a medicine is particularly cruel.Grinspoon argues that 'sick people are forced to suffer anxietyabout prosecution in addition to their anxiety about the illness... Doctors are afraid to recommend what they know to be the besttreatment because they might lose their reputation or even theirlicence' ([9]Grinspoon 1991). The Australian medical community has not been as enthusiasticabout the therapeutic benefits of cannabis although many arguethat where the drug has been demonstrated to be effective its useshould be permitted. A study done at the Royal Children'sHospital in Melbourne found that THC (the psychoactive ingredientin cannabis) was an effective anti-emetic for some childrenundergoing chemotherapy ([10]Cartwright 1983). Dr LornaCartwright, a lecturer in Pharmacology at Sydney Universitystated: I think there are probably better drugs for medical uses. Thepoint is, though, I think it should be allowed to be used forconditions in which it has been shown to have effect, such as forglaucoma, for children having chemotherapy and for epilepsy. Ialways feel that if something is good even for a small percentageof patients, it should be allowed to be used (cited in[11]Caswell 1992, p498). Another pharmacologist, Dr Greg Chesher, argues that cannabisclearly has therapeutic benefits but that research into thepossible uses of the drug is being hampered by the fact thatcannabis is a prohibited drug (cited in [12]Caswell 1992). Theposition in Australia is different from that in the USA in thatin this country there is no legislation or binding administrativeruling specifically stating that no medical use exists forcannabis.21 Neither does the United Nations Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs, to which Australia is a party, specificallyforbid the medical use of cannabis. In fact the Conventionrecognises that some otherwise illicit drugs may have medicalpurposes and states that cannabis use should be 'subject to theprovisions of this Convention, to limit exclusively to medicaland scientific purposes the...use and possession of drugs'(Article 4(1) (c)). Given that the United Nations Conventions donot specifically proscribe the medical uses of cannabis,introducing legislation that allowed the use of the drug formedical purposes in Australia would be relatively simple. Clausesauthorising the therapeutic use of the drug could simply beinserted into relevant drug legislation and therapeutic productsscheduling. Politically, however, such a change in policy couldbe difficult. As an illicit drug, cannabis has a negative image and is seenas an being an inherently dependence producing, damaging drugthat has no possible benefits. Recognition of the medicalbenefits of the drug may challenge this dominant view ofcannabis. References Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, New York. Cartwright, L. 1983, 'Marihuana', Current Affairs Bulletin,vol. 59, no. 10, pp19-31. Caswell, A. 1992, 'Marijuana as medicine', The Medical Journalof Australia, vol. 156, pp497-498. Doblin, R. E. & Kleiman, M. 1991, 'Marijuana asanti-emetic dedicine: A survey of oncologists experiences andattitudes, Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 9, pp1314-1319. Frankel, J.P., Hughes, A., Lees, A.J. & Stern, G.M. 1990,'Marijuana for Parkinsonian Tremor', Journal of NeurologicalNeurosurgical Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp436-442. Grinspoon, L. 1991, 'Marijuana in a time ofpsychopharmalogical McCarthyism' in Searching for Alternatives:Drug Control Policy in The United States, eds M.B. Krauss & E.PLazear, pp379-389, Hoover InstitutionPress, Stanford, California. Moss, D.E., Manderscheid, P.Z. & Montgomery, S.P. 1992,'Nicotine and cannabinoids as adjuncts to neuroleptics in thetreatment of Tourettes Syndrome and other motor disorders', LifeScience, 1989, vol. 44, pp1521-1525. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT01-B32-27IA031-000652-B046-303http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_app2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131956 text/html 4076HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:56 GMTContent-length: 3859 APPENDIX 2. INDUSTRIAL AND HORTICULTURAL USES OF CANNABIS APPENDIX 2. INDUSTRIAL AND HORTICULTURAL USES OF CANNABIS Since ancient times the fibres from the cannabis or hempplant have been used to make fabric, rope and paper ([1]Abel1980). In World War II, the USA grew 50,000 acres of hemp, aspart of their war effort ([2]see United States Government 1944,Hemp for Victory), and hemp fibres were used to make rope forships and the canvas used in parachutes. More recently, experimental crops of a low THC-contentspecies of cannabis have been grown in The Netherlands, Italy,Spain, France and Tasmania. Its fibres have been used in theproduction of paper and fabric. Australian groups such as theBusiness Alliance for Commercial Hemp argue that Australia shouldallow the cultivation of hemp for industrial purposes. Theposition is that, if a State or Territory Government authorisesthe growing of cannabis, the Commonwealth will issue a permit forthe importation of seeds, provided that the applicant for theimport permit meets the criteria set out in the Act, such asbeing 'a fit and proper person'. The trade magazine for the US paper industry recently arguedthat hemp has a number of advantages over timber in the area ofpaper production, and there are a number of strong environmentalarguments for the commercial cultivation of hemp. Every fourmonths, each acre of hemp grown will produce 10 tons of fibre. Itcan produce four times the amount of paper per acre than20-year-old trees can, it requires less bleaching than pulp fromtimber and, because it is a very densely growing crop, weeds arechoked and there is less need for pesticides and herbicides([3]Young 1991). In addition, hemp requires less watering andpesticides than cotton and produces a fibre that is argued to bemore durable than cotton fabrics ([4]Cowperthwaite 1993). The United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs allowsthe cultivation of cannabis for industrial and horticulturalpurposes. Article 28(2) states that 'this Convention should notapply to the cultivation of the cannabis plant exclusively forindustrial purposes (fibre and seed) or horticultural purposes'.Australian drug legislation permits the cultivation of cannabisfor scientific purposes and some limited experimentation hasalready taken place in Australia. However, groups such as the Business Alliance for CommericalHemp argue that the full benefits of hemp production can only beobtained if hemp is grown on a wider scale, and that cannabiswith a very low THC content can be grown for industrial purposes.Legislation permitting the cultivation of cannabis for industrialpurposes could be included in existing drug legislation, however,as with the medicinal use of cannabis, introducing legislationthat recognises the industrial uses of a substance that isthought of simply as a dangerous illicit drug may pose politicaldifficulties for those advocating legislative change. References Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, New York. Cowperthwaite, V. 1993, 'Moral Fibre', Growing Today, June,pp23-27 United States Government 1944, Hemp for Victory, EducationalFilm. Young, J. 1991, 'It's time to reconsider hemp', Pulp andPaper, June. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-28IA031-000652-B046-325http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_app3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132005 text/html 3525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:51 GMTContent-length: 3308 APPENDIX 3. THE AUTHORS APPENDIX 3. THE AUTHORS David McDonald David McDonald is a Senior Criminologist at the AustralianInstitute of Criminology. He holds the degrees of BA, DipSocWk(Syd), MA (Alta), and GradDipPoplnHlth (ANU). Mr McDonald'sresearch interests lie in the areas of custodial health, policingand drug and alcohol policy. Prior to joining the Institute in1992, Mr McDonald held a research appointment in primary healthcare at the ANU's National Centre for Epidemiology and PopulationHealth. He has wide experience in research, program developmentand evaluation in the drug and alcohol field, having establishedthe Northern Territory's drug and alcohol services and served,for two years, as Director of the NCADA's National Drug AbuseInformation Centre. His publications are mainly in the fields ofalcohol and other drugs, correctional health, primary health careand Aboriginal health. Rhonda Moore Rhonda Moore is a Researcher in the Politics Department atthe University College (UNSW), Canberra. She holds a BA fromSydney University and a Postgraduate Diploma of Librarianshipfrom UNSW. She has worked as a contract researcher in the UK,Canada and Australia, primarily in the fields of criminology andpolitical sociology, and since 1987 has done research on drug usein Australia. Jennifer Norberry Jennifer Norberry BA(Hons), LLB(Hons), Dip Lib is a lawyeremployed at the Australian Institute of Criminology. Her researchinterests include illicit drugs policy, HIV/AIDS and prisons andenvironmental crime. Grant Wardlaw Grant Wardlaw BA, MA(Hons), PhD (Auckland), BA(Soc Sci)(Deakin), Grad Dip Intl Law (ANU). Dr Wardlaw is Director ofWardlaw Consulting Pty Ltd and currently acts as a consultant tothe Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department and a number ofother government agencies. Prior to this, he held senior researchpositions in the Australian Institute of Criminology (1976-1991)and worked as a clinical psychologist with the New ZealandDepartment of Justice (1974-76). Dr Wardlaw has published widelyin the areas of drug policy, drug law enforcement, andepidemiology of drug use. He is a member of the Commonwealth'sDrug Abuse Research and Education Advisory Committee, and anumber of other advisory boards. Dr Wardlaw has led a number ofmajor drug research projects funded by the Australasian PoliceCommissioner's Conference, the National Campaign Against DrugAbuse, and the US Department of Defence. Nicola Ballenden Nicola Ballenden BA(Hons) was employed as a research officeron the project. She is currently completing her Masters at theUniversity of Melbourne. Her research interests include mentalhealth law, drugs and medico-legal issues. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-29IA031-000652-B047-26http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132024 text/html 54706HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:20:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:21 GMTContent-length: 54488 CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a majorpublic health problem in the United States. The costs to societyof such abuse include thousands of premature deaths annually dueto drug-related illnesses, accidents, and homicides; economiccosts related to health care, criminal justice, and lostproductivity; and the mental and physical pain suffered bymillions of Americans. Many ills plaguing the nationtoday--including the AIDS epidemic, increased crime and violence,and homelessness--in some cases, may be linked to individuals'physical dependence on a variety of abusable substances. Theconsequences of substance abuse and addiction have been felt bypeople within every economic, social, racial, religious, andpolitical boundary. What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction?Why and how does addiction occur? Who are the substance abusers?What factors lead to addiction? What are the implications forprevention and treatment? ROOT CAUSES The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) was asked toidentify the root causes of substance abuse and addiction. Theterm root causes has been used in political discussions anddebate. To some, root causes of substance abuse and addiction areframed in a moral context, in which decisions related to use,abuse, and addiction are the responsibility primarily ofindividuals. To others, root causes include a multitude of socialand economic problems, such as homelessness, poverty, and racism.Many people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutesthe general root causes of substance abuse and addiction inpopulations, but no consensus exists about the specific rootcauses of substance abuse and addiction for particularindividuals. The OTA report has four parts: necessary preconditions,individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. Thefirst part, Necessary Preconditions, focuses on several factorsthat are necessary for substance abuse and addiction to occur.The second part, Individual Factors, focuses on risk andprotective factors in individuals that are thought to influencesubstance use, abuse, and addiction. The third part, CommunityContexts, looks at how risk and protective factors play out insubcultures and in major activity settings (home, school,workplace, and recreation). The fourth part, Policy Optionsaddresses a range of legislative issues and options for Congress. NECESSARY PRECONDITIONS No single or general set of variables explains the misuse ofalcohol and other drugs for every individual; in other wordsthere are no "root causes" for substance abuse thatuniversally apply to everyone. Nevertheless, OTA has identifiedthree major sets of necessary preconditions that must be presentin order for substance abuse and addiction to occur: biology and pharmacology, availability, and use and transitions to abuse and dependency. Biology and Pharmacology The first major set of preconditions includes biological andpharmacological factors, without which drug abuse and dependencywould be impossible. Underlying all alcohol and drug problems arethe actions and effects that drugs of abuse exert on the brain.It is important to understand how drugs work in the brain, whycertain drugs have the potential for being abused, and what, ifany, biological differences exist among individuals in theirsusceptibility to abuse drugs. A wide range of psychoactive substances have the potentialfor abuse (see box 1-1). The possession and use of severalsubstances (e.g., marijuana, heroin, cocaine) are illegal in all50 states. Other addictive substances (e.g., tobacco and alcohol)may be legally purchased, possessed, and consumed by manyAmericans. Some abusable substances (e.g., a wide range ofprescription drugs) are available on a restricted basis, usuallyby a physician's order, while others (e.g., inhalants) may belegally purchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. Biological factors that contribute to substance abuse andaddiction fall into two groups: the effects drugs of abuse exerton the individual in general, and the biological status ofspecific individuals taking drugs. The effects the drugs exertcan be either acute or chronic and will vary depending on thedrug and its route of administration. Most drugs of abuseinfluence the brain's reward system. The pleasurable sensationsthat drug use can produce reinforce drug-seeking and drug-takingbehaviors. These actions differ with different drugs; thus, somesubstances have greater potential for abuse and addiction thanothers. While growing evidence suggests that the brain rewardsystem plays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugsof abuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex and haveyet to be completely described (see figures 1-1 and 1-2). Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances canproduce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/ortolerance to a substance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal(see box 1-2). Behavioral changes also occur with continued druguse. An individual's drug-craving, drug- seeking, and drug-takingbehaviors are reinforced through neuroadaptive changes in thebrain's reward system. Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking anddrug-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmentalstimuli (i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug-cravingand drug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drugusers who have been drug-free for months and even years. Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchersagree that genetic factors play some part in the acquisition ofalcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.However, no conclusive evidence has been found to explainprecisely what is inherited or the overall importance of thisinherited material. It has been hypothesized that numerous genes(as opposed to one) interact in complex ways, and expression ofthose genes are affected by a myriad of environmental factors.Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensuresnor protects against drug addiction. Availability The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependencyincludes availability. A person cannot become a drug abuserunless a drug is physically available. In addition, however,availability is affected by social norms (e.g., factors withinthe community conducive to drug use, including level of parentalor guardian supervision, lack of consequences for alcohol anddrug offenses, lack of alternative activities, and portrayals ofalcohol and other drug use by friends and the media as aglamorous and healthy activity), prices (economic availability),and personal values (subjective availability) (see table 1-1). The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attackthe physical availability of illicit drugs through lawenforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increaseddrug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federalinmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugsare still widely available. Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs canalter social, economic, and subjective availability. Keycomponents of marketing include the promotion and advertising ofparticular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulationsof the consuming public, development of a product line that canbe targeted to subpopulations within the larger community ofconsumers, pricing strategies to attract new buyers, andidentification of retail outlets for sales. Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusablesubstances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs byplacing a variety of restrictions on how such products may bemarketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as towhether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. Use and Transitions to Abuse and Dependency The third set of preconditions for drug abuse and addictionis drug use, including the progression to heavier and moreharmful use. A person cannot become drug-dependent without firstusing a drug and then progressing to more harmful levels of use.Researchers have focused on stages in the progression of drug usein several ways. They have studied stages in the initiation ofthe use of different drugs, finding a sequence that moves fromthe use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to the use of marijuana,then hard liquor, and finally other illicit drugs. Because mostindividuals who use drugs do not go on to abuse drugs, andbecause the use of drugs at one level does not guarantee the useof drugs at a higher level, these stages are descriptive but notpredictive. Initiation is the first step in the progression to moreserious levels of drug use. Because drug use often begins duringadolescence, most drug use research has focused on drug useinitiation among adolescents. However, many individuals whoinitiate drug use do not progress to harmful drug use. Also, thefactors associated with such progression may often differ fromthe factors associated with initiation. Thus, the focus on theinitiation of drug use during adolescence is not sufficient foran understanding of the progression from use to abuse anddependency. In addition to initiation, research has focused on otheridentifiable stages in the full cycle of drug use and abuse,including continuation of drug use, maintenance and progressionof drug use within a class of drugs, progression in drug useacross drug classes, and regression, cessation, and relapsecycles. Research has also been done on the co- occurrence andpossible sequences in drug abuse and other problem behaviors,with some studies finding that problem behaviors often precedethe onset of drug abuse. INDIVIDUAL FACTORS Much of the research on substance abuse and addiction hasfocused on identifying individual risk factors for alcohol andother drug use, specifically among adolescents and young adults(see table 1-2). Risk factors have been identified as thosecognitive, psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,physiological, and developmental characteristics that fosterinitiation of drug and alcohol use and/or abuse by an individual.Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the riskof substance use and abuse and promote positive development, suchas appropriate role models, involvement in positive peer groups,and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. Because no individual risk or protective factor can becategorized as a root cause of substance abuse and addiction, afull analysis of each individual factor is beyond the scope ofthis report. However, an overview of selected factors highlightsassociations often present in substance abuse and addiction. Demographic Age The preponderance of substance abuse research points to thefact that children who use alcohol and other drugs before the ageof 15 have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol andother drug users, versus those youth who begin use at a laterage. While most substance use and abuse occur during theadolescent and young-adult years, older persons are not immune tothe addictive powers of these substances. For example, amongwomen, alcohol problems tend to appear on average several yearslater than they do among men (although this trend may bereversing). For black males, problem drinking patterns typicallyoccur after age 30, versus ages 18 to 25 for white males. Although substance abuse problems are not exclusive toadolescence, most prevention programs currently target youth. Theimportance of these types of programs is obvious--to prevent ordecrease the use of alcohol, tobacco, cigarettes, and other drugsby youth. Yet, adults can also be exposed to stressful lifesituations, such as unemployment, divorce, or death of a spouseor child, which could contribute to substance abuse problems. Theadult population presents unique and often overlooked challengesfor the planning and implementation of substance abuse preventionprograms. Gender Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioralstudies were conducted on male participants; women substanceabusers were not commonly included in research studies. Adistorted picture emerged, in which women were assumed to misusethe same substances, and for the same reasons, as men. Within thepast 10 to 20 years, however, some researchers have focused onthe causes and consequences of substance abuse problems amongwomen, and are beginning to report differences based on gender.Basic gaps in knowledge remain, however, regarding substance useand abuse among women. Until these gaps are addressed, theinaccurate and misleading practice of transferring data garneredfrom studies on men to women is likely to continue. Race and Ethnicity Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linkedwith, and often blamed for, many of the substance abuse problemswithin the United States (see box 1-3). Certainly, many urbanareas have high concentrations of minorities, and within many ofthese areas the prevalence of substance abuse may be high. Oftenoverlooked, however, is the prevalence of substance abuseproblems in suburban and rural areas throughout the UnitedStates. In the minds of many, the link between minoritypopulations and rampant substance abuse is inaccurate andderogatory. Adolescent research has documented substantial racial andethnic differences in substance use among high school seniors. Onaverage, licit and illicit substance use is highest among NativeAmerican Indian youth, somewhat lower among white and Hispanicyouth, substantially lower among black youth, and lowest amongAsian youth. However, such findings do not include populationsmost likely to be excluded from self-reporting studies (e.g.,high school dropouts). Until recently, much of the analysis of substance use and/orabuse data has concentrated on the relationship between the useof a substance and one or two variables such as race andethnicity and/or educational level. Often a positive associationwas found between minority populations and the use or abuse ofcertain substances. While statistically correct, these analysescan be simplistic and misleading. Clearly many risk andprotective factors interact to produce substance use and abuse.If the majority of these variables are excluded from theanalysis, a skewed picture may arise as to the importance ofcertain variables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethniccategories are often broad. The most popular groupings are black,white non- Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. While each of thesecategories contains many distinct cultures, gross generalizationsare commonly made. Race and ethnicity have not been shown to be eitherbiological or genetic risk factors for substance use or abuse. Todate, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused onracial and ethnic differences in response specifically toalcohol. Few studies have been completed on differences in racialand ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicit drugs. Economic Are poor individuals at greater risk of developing problemsrelated to substance abuse? While a relatively straight forwardquestion, its resolution is hampered by the fact that poverty isdifficult to define and drawing conclusions concerning anindividual's potential for future substance abuse based on one ortwo variables such as family income or educational level isoverly simplistic and deceptive. In recent years, attention has been paid to the plight of theurban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- citycommunities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. Forindividuals living in these localities, the consequences of theseproblems are serious and far reaching. To assess poverty and its relationship to substance abuseproblems, some researchers have used the federal guidelines forpoverty, while others employ measures of socioeconomic status(SES) such as educational level and household income. To date,the largest and most comprehensive analysis of SES variables andsubstance use has been accomplished by the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA). While the analysis revealed associationsbetween certain characteristics and patterns of substance use, itdid not reveal causality. From this analysis, a straightforward"yes or no" response to the initial question linkingpoverty to increased individual risk for substance use or abuseis clearly impossible. The NIDA analysis demonstrated that thetype and quantity of an individual's substance use is correlatedwith a variety of both individual as well as geographiccharacteristics. Furthermore, while the NIDA study was thelargest and most comprehensive to date, some segments of thepopulation (e.g., homeless, dropouts, institutionalized), many ofwhom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded fromthe survey. Psychosocial and Behavioral Many of the identified risk and protective factors relate topsychological, social, and behavioral characteristics. Conditionssuch as aggressiveness, delinquency, and mental disorders areoften linked with substance abuse and addiction. Experiences suchas physical and sexual abuse have also been identified aspotential risk factors. While relatively little research has beenaccomplished on protective factors, several elements identifiedwithin the resiliency literature, as well as religiosity andspirituality, have been associated with decreased substance use. However, the presence or absence of specific risk factorsneither predicates nor guarantees protection from substanceabuse. In addition, consensus is lacking within the substanceabuse field as to the importance, interaction, or order of thefactors. COMMUNITY CONTEXTS A growing body of research is focusing on factors andinterventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substanceuse, abuse, and dependency in the four principal communityactivity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,workplaces, and recreational settings. In framing prevention programs with divergent populations,researchers are attempting to better understand qualitative aswell as quantitative research methods, and the variety ofsettings in which substance abuse and addiction can take placeand can be combated (see box 1-4). Despite the promise of community-based research, severalproblems exist. First, much of the research does not addresssubstance abuse and addiction per se, but rather risk andprotective factors that can lead to a number of outcomes,including substance abuse and addiction. Second, research studiesvary widely in methodology, making it difficult to drawscientifically valid conclusions. Third, rigorous evaluation ofmany prevention research programs is missing, leaving theeffectiveness of such programs open to debate. Homes and Families Although American society expects families in their homes totake the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problembehaviors, families in this country generally receive onlylimited support in protecting themselves against substance abuse.This situation may result in part from the belief that mostnuclear families can raise their children largely independentlyand therefore do not need outside support, and in part from thebelief that teens and young adults are more influenced by theirpeers. The first belief, however, is not supported bylong-standing practices in most societies, where extendedfamilies and life-long neighbors have traditionally helped raisechildren (although in the United States many parents do not haveaccess to these additional child-rearing resources because ofurbanization, high technology, and family mobility). And thesecond belief is being questioned by growing evidence thatcertain parenting practices and family intervention programs cansignificantly reduce the risk of substance abuse amongadolescents and young adults. A growing body of research has identified risk and protectivefactors that may be particularly relevant in home and familysituations (see table 1-3). Programs that enhance protectivefactors include those providing parent education, prenatal andinfant care, preschool, and social support activities that helpstrengthen involved and responsive parenting. Programs that seekto decrease the presence of risk factors include those designedto reduce drug trafficking (e.g., community policing, cleansweeps of housing projects), physical and sexual abuse, theimpact of negative life events (e.g., mental health counseling),and parental neglect. Substance abuse treatment programs thatinclude an addict's family members also address risk factors. Schools and Peers Schools have been the target for prevention programs tocurtail drug use at school sites (e.g., Drug Free School Zones)as well as curriculum-based programs that target drug use in thecommunity as a whole. Because school-age youth are especiallylikely to initiate the use of alcohol and other drugs, much ofthe research has focused on use, rather than on abuse anddependency. Such research is nevertheless relevant to anunderstanding of abuse and dependency, since use is aprecondition and contributor to abuse and dependency and becauseeven experimental use can be harmful. OTA conducted the most extensive compilation and examinationof survey research on school-aged substance use to date-- 9,930statistical analyses from 242 separate studies. The studiesreported statistical relationships between substance use and itspostulated causes. Statistical findings from the study reportswere sorted into 11 major categories and 50 subcategories (seetable 1-4), and then analyzed to identify strong, moderate, andweak statistical relationships, as well as those that had beeninsufficiently studied. The four variables that dominated ascorrelates of and possible contributors to substance abuse are:1) prior and concurrent use of substances, 2) substance use bypeers and friends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substanceuse, and 4) offers to use substances. The prominence of prior andconcurrent use is consistent with the reinforcing nature ofsubstance use itself. The prominence of the other three variablesemphasizes the importance of the social environment incontributing to and reinforcing substance use among school- ageyouth. Schools primarily seek to prevent substance use and abusethrough curriculum-based drug prevention programs. Such programshave dominated the field, largely because they are relativelysimple to understand, implement, and replicate, and becausemethods to evaluate them have become standardized.Curriculum-based prevention programs have been hampered, however,by a lack of good evaluation data needed to prove theireffectiveness. Workplaces The prevalence of drug abuse among the employed remainsinadequately documented, based on a small number of studies.Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such asaccidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,compensation claims, and insurance costs. Substance abuse inworkplaces can be affected by nonworkplace factors and workplacefactors. The primary interventions are employee assistanceprograms that help employees with personal problems by providingservices directly (through the work organization) or indirectly(through a provider in the community); health promotion programsthat typically seek to prevent illness and promote wellnessthrough behavior change; and alterations to workplaceenvironments that seek to reduce stress and strengthen supportfor workers. Recreational Settings Recreational activities and settings may also contribute tothe prevention of substance use and abuse or, by their absence,increase the risk. Examples of recreational activities andsettings include Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts,organized sports, and local park and recreation departmentprograms. Research on the impact of organized youth activities onsubstance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies haveaddressed the issue directly. However, existing researchindicates that involvement in youth programs and activities isassociated with fewer at-risk behaviors, including substance useamong youth. The youth development field, including the resourcesof park and recreation departments, provides opportunities forbroad-based prevention interventions. Involvement in activities does not by itself protect againstsubstance abuse. Some activities, such as those that areunstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks ofsubstance use and abuse through association with a wider range ofpeers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activitiesperceived as boring may not protect against substance use andabuse. More research is needed to clarify the aspects ofrecreational and other leisure activities that may protectagainst substance use and abuse. Research might focus on whetheractivities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) areassociated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. POLICY OPTIONS Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have longoccupied the attention of the American public (see table 1- 5).Congress has authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed atreducing or preventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs andregulating the availability of illicit substances, and hasappropriated billions of dollars each year to federal agencies,provided oversight of federal programs, and passed broad-basedlegislation to coordinate programs as part of the war on drugs.In addressing what some policymakers term as the root causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction, the list of relevant statutesexpands significantly, as many domestic and social programs caninfluence the risk and protective factors that can lead anindividual into or away from substance abuse and addiction. A total of 12 executive branch departments, four independentagencies, one multiagency program (Weed and Seed), one WhiteHouse office (the Office of National Drug Control Policy--ONDCP), and the Judiciary, all receive federal funding as part ofnational drug control strategy. These efforts includeinterdiction, treatment, and prevention programs. The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primaryfocus the eradication of the supply of drugs. Congress currentlyappropriates more than $12 billion annually on antidrug efforts,with approximately two-thirds of this amount supporting druginterdiction and law enforcement activities, and the remaindersupporting demand- side activities, such as drug treatment,research, and prevention programs. Drug demand reduction efforts focus on providing treatmentfor abusers and addicts, prevention programs for variouspopulations, and biomedical and behavioral research on the causesof substance use, abuse, and addiction. Of these, the federalgovernment spends the most on treatment, followed by preventionand causality research. Drug treatment and prevention programsare funded at both the federal and state levels, while causationresearch is funded primarily by the federal government. A recentGeneral Accounting Office (GAO) study revealed that for studyingthe causes of drug abuse, funding has remained comparativelytiny. In 1990, for example, such research was funded at a levelof $6 million, about one-tenth of one percent of the nation'sdrug control budget for that year. OTA, in conjunction with GAO, surveyed federal agenciesidentified as having substance abuse prevention efforts. OTAfinds that substance abuse prevention efforts are scattered overa number of federal agencies, and that federal prevention effortsare dictated by statutory mandates, rather than directed atidentifying causes of substance abuse and addiction per se. TheWhite House ONDCP, charged with coordinating federal antidrugefforts, lacks the statutory mandate to forcibly integrate oralter the multitude of programs that make up the federalgovernment's war on drugs. Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressingthe causes of substance abuse and addiction: o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the driving cause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk and protective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, and addiction. o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by ONDCP, are spread among many federal agencies, whose authorization and appropriations fall under the jurisdiction of numerous congressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drug demand reduction efforts alone involved federal agencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makes coordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creation of new domestic programs or the enhancement of existing programs that target known risk and protective factors in individuals and communities. The framework and literature reviews presented in this report make clear that substance abuse and addiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors in individuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effective intervention requires prevention practitioners to select from a variety of options, so they can target the specific factors that are especially important for the particular populations and communities they are addressing. This does not mean that everything must be done at once nor that everything be known in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakers and practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, as resources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps that address a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. o Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically accepted standards for determining their success or failure. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporated into prevention programs, a critical component of success is careful, rigorous evaluation. Answering "what works?" is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. In choosing which policy issues to address, OTA focused onthose areas directly addressed in this study. OTA identified aseries of policy issues in four broad categories: federal focusand prevention program structure, research needs, communityactivity settings, and availability (see table 1- 6). A number ofpolicy questions and options for congressional action emerge fromthese four categories (see table 1-7). A full discussion of thepolicy issues and options for congressional action can be foundin chapter 9 of the full report. Given the broad nature offederal antidrug efforts, many important issues relating tofederal antidrug efforts remain beyond the scope of this report.Such topics include drug treatment, interdiction and enforcement,and drug legalization. BOX 1-1: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other PsychoactiveSubstances Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is acentral nervous system depressant with effects similar to thoseof sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcoholmay be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due tothe depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcoholdiffers from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is usedprimarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. Examples 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. "Hard" liquor (e.g., whiskey,gin). Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics are drugs of diverse chemical structurethat exert a nonselective general depressant on the centralnervous system. In addition, they reduce metabolism in a varietyof tissues in the body, depressing any system that uses energy.Depending on the dose, any sedative hypnotic compound may beclassified as a sedative (an agent that allays excitement), atranquilizer (an antianxiety agent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducingagent), or an anesthetic (an agent that eliminates pain).Sedative-hypnotics are used medically as sedatives, anxiolytics(antianxiety agents), hypnotics, antiepileptics, musclerelaxants, and general anesthetics. Examples 1. Barbiturates ("downers" or "barbs"):pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--taken orally. 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxidehydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent in marijuana,alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, and behavior, thoughthe mechanisms of action are not entirely clear. Researchers havefound, however, that THC changes the way in which sensoryinformation is processed by the brain. It can be used medicallyto relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapy in cancerpatients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. Examples 1. Marijuana ("pot" or "grass")-- smokedor eaten. 2. Hashish ("hash")--smoked or eaten. 3.Hashish oil ("hash oil")--smoked (mixed with tobacco.4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is a centralnervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its action secondary tostimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory) synapses bothwithin the brain and in the peripheral nervous system. Examples 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewingtobacco). Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is a potentcentral nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates thesympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity ofcardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also producesbronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topicalanesthetic for surgical procedures. Examples 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder ("coke" or"street cocaine")--usually snorted or injectedintravenously.(d) 2. Cocaine alkaloid ("freebase" or"crack")--smoked.(e) Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTS(f) 1. Amphetamines Amphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds,all of which are potent central nervous system and behavioralstimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treatattention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction inchildren, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodesof sleep), or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Amphetamine ("speed" or "uppers"(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) 2. Methamphetamine ("speed" or "crystalmeth" or "ice") [MethadrineR]--taken orally,injected, or snorted.(g),(h) 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines, nonamphetamine stimulates are centralnervous and behavioral stimulants. Some non-amphetaminestimulants (e.g., PreludinR) are used for weight control, andsome (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR) are used medically to treathyperactivity, minimal brain dysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely)depression. Examples 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally orinjected.(d) 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.(d) 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--takenorally, or injected.(d) Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are a heterogeneous group ofcompounds that affect a person's perceptions, sensations,thinking, self-awareness, and emotions.(i) Examples 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or"acid"--taken orally or put in the eyes. 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or"mesc" and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;tablets taken orally. 3. Psilocybin ("magic mushrooms")--chewed andswallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--takenorally. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactive vapors.Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abused inhalantsproduce effects similar to those of anesthetics, which act toslow down the body's functions or produce feelings of dizziness.At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amyl nitrite isused for heart patients because it dilates the blood vessels andincreases blood supply to the heart. There are no medicalindications for most of the inhalants. Examples 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. 4. Amyl nitrite ("snappers" or "poppers")and butyl nitrite ("rush")--vapors inhaled. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates are natural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, asubstance derived from the opium poppy, have analgesic(pain-relieving) properties. Heroin is not approved for medicaluses in the United States. The major medical use of other opiatesis for the relief of pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcoticsare used to relieve coughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treatdiarrhea. Methadone is used in the treatment of narcoticabstinence syndromes and as an analgesic in terminal illness. Examples 1. Heroin ("smack" or "horse")--injected, smoked, or inhaled.(d) 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.(d) 3.Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, or inhaled. 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally orinjected. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTINGSYMPHATHOMIMETICS Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters thefunctions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociativeanesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic butwas subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it wasdiscovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as animmobilizing agent. Examples PCP ("angel dust" or "lovely")--takenorally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) (a) According to Julien, one could conceivably classifypsychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1) mechanism ofaction, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioral effects.Probably the most useful approach would be to classify them bymechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain's physiology istoo limited for this approach to be comprehensive. A limitationof the second approach is that many drugs of apparently similarstructure exert quite different effects, and many drugs ofdissimilar structure exert quite similar effects. Theclassification in this table largely reflects the behavioraleffects approach. The classification used here is based on thecategories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of theclasses of psychoactive substances listed in this box exceptnicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotineis associated with dependence but not abuse. (b) The potential physiological, psychological, andbehavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown arediscussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend inpart on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode ofadministration. (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that canelevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a senseof increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve taskperformance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, andirritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecularstructures and mechanisms of action. (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, theroute of administration of a psychoactive substance is animportant variable in determining whether use will lead todependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration thatproduce more efficient absorption of the substance in the bloodstream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase thelikelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leadsto dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactivesubstances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)are associated with higher levels of consumption and with anincreased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminatedneedles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and otherillnesses. (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting"street cocaine" (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purifiedbase that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar tothat of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter moreintense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapidabsorption of the drug through the lungs. "Crackcocaine" is the street name given to freebase cocaine thathas been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical baseby cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refersto the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequatelydescribe its properties. Drug use surveys typically meanamphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveysregard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) andnonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds usedin No-Doz, diet pills, and "fake pep pills"). Cocaineand nicotine (described above) are also central nervous systemsimulants. (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduledunder the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared byunderground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects ofcontrolled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. Asof June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl andmeperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in theform of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,"ice" (one of the common street names ford-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a formsuitable for smoking. (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can inducehallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the termhallucinogen does not adequately describe the range ofpharmacological actions of the diverse group of substancesusually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposedby Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the abilityto alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered"mind expanding." The effects of hallucinogens areunpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user'spersonality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in whichthe drug is used. (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of druguse. SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on thefollowing sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5thed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.Shaffer, and M. Burglass, "The Biological Basics: Drugs andTheir Effects," Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: ClinicalInterventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine," Rockville, MD,1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public HealthService, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Designer Drugs,"NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute onDrug Abuse, "Marijuana Update," NIDA Capsules,Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Methamphetamine Abuse," NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up DrugFree: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). BOX 1-2: Tolerance, Sensitization, Dependence, and Withdrawal Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolongedperiod of use, more of the drug is required to produce a giveneffect. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when theeffects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeatedadministration. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drugexposure. With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adaptto its presence such that the drug is required to maintain normalcell function. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behavesabnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, thewithdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs andsymptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation andirritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants producesprofound depression. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 1-3: Drugs and Discrimination In America, tensions between the majority and variousminorities often hinge on concerns raised by drug use. The groupschange over time and place, but the dividing issues remainremarkably similar. Those in power decide which drugs are legaland how rules should be enforced. Minorities charge that unfairpolicies result from prejudice, ignorance, and hypocrisy. When? 1850 Where? Boston Who? Irish Immigrants Impoverished Irish immigrants brought the tradition ofdrinking whiskey with them. In American cities, people oftenblamed whiskey for neighborhood quarrels. In the mid-19thcentury, clashes with Irish immigrants occurred so often thatpolice vans came to be known by the term "paddywagons." When? 1880s Where? San Francisco Who? Chinese Immigrants Fear of immigrant Chinese often focused on their recreationaluse of opium. In 1875, San Francisco outlawed opium smoking,which most residents associated exclusively with the Chinese.This citywide ban became nationwide in 1909. When? 1882 Where? Ohio Who? German Immigrants Beer drinking often brought Germans into conflict withtemperance advocates. Cincinnati's lively German communitygathered at beer gardens on Sundays to sing, dance, drink, andargue politics. In 1882, Ohio's governor denounced Germans as"sabbath breakers, criminals, and free thinkers." When? 1930s Where? Colorado, New Mexico Who? Mexican MigrantWorkers The Southwest welcomed Mexican migrants during laborshortages. But during the Depression, anxiety over competitionfor jobs shifted to wildly exaggerated fears of the effects ofmarijuana use customary among Mexicans. To placate fears,Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which prohibitedrecreational use of the drug. When? 1991 Who? African Americans Police forces are largelywhite and inner-city residents are mostly black. Between 1980 and1990, the drug-arrest rate in the city of Rochester, New York,was about five times that for suburban Monroe County. SOURCE: "Altered States: Alcohol and Other Drugs inAmerica," Strong Museum, Rochester, NY, 1993. BOX 1-4: Ethnography Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study howenvironmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, andbehaviors of individuals and groups. For three decades,researchers have documented societal and cultural influences onthe patterns of substance use, abuse, and addiction; using arange of methodologies and working in diverse contexts,ethnographers have contributed to the understanding of substanceabuse. Interacting with drug users under a wider set ofcircumstances than do strict quantitative researchers,ethnographers have expanded the framework of substance abuseresearch hypotheses. They have also assisted in the evaluationand interpretation of clinical and survey data to differentsubcultures and populations. Ethnographies also provide information on constantlychangingsubstance use patterns. By collecting data from substance usersin their natural environments, ethnographers have been able todocument who uses drugs and how drugs are used. This type ofmethodology is essential to the historical understanding ofsubstance use and abuse. Lastly, ethnographers have documented different styles ofsubstance use within American society as well as abroad.Differences are cited in experience and use patterns based onsocial class, cultural background, gender, and geographiclocation. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-30IA031-000652-B047-55http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132053 text/html 46692HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:20:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:09 GMTContent-length: 46474 CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION Substance abuse and addiction are pervasive in our society,with their consequences felt by people in every economic, social,racial, and political boundary. The United States has grappled with problems associated withsubstance abuse and addiction for over a century (see appendix Aand table 2-1). In 1986, then-President Ronald Reagan launchedwhat has become known as the war on drugs. Federal spending tocombat drugs increased from $1.5 billion in 1981 to more than $12billion in 1994, with spending in 1995 projected to pass the $13billion mark (see table 2-2). Nearly two-thirds of the federalantidrug budget goes toward efforts to curb the supply of drugs(e.g., border interdiction, law enforcement), with the remainderbeing spent on drug treatment and prevention programs. While theuse of illegal drugs has declined in the United States in recentyears, a vigorous debate continues as to whether the nation isindeed winning the war on drugs, and what the balance of federaleffort should be in formulating programs to decrease the supplyof drugs, treat drug abusers and addicts, and educate Americansabout problems associated with drug abuse and addiction. Congress has enacted a number of laws in an attempt to createa national policy to fight the scourge of drug abuse andaddiction. As part of oversight responsibility for national drugpolicy, several committees of Congress have requested the Officeof Technology Assessment (OTA) to undertake a study addressingthe socioeconomic, psychological, physiological, and geneticunderpinnings of substance abuse and addiction (see table 2-3). OTA has been asked to address a number of questions: o What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction? o Why and how does addiction occur? o Who are the substance abusers? o What factors, scientific and social, lead to addiction? o What are the implications for prevention? ROOT CAUSES At the outset, OTA was asked to address the root causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction. The term root causes has been usedin political discussions and debate (see box 2-1), and althoughmany people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutesthe root causes of drug abuse, no consensus exists as to what, ifanything, is inherent in every case of substance abuse andaddiction. OTA conducted a search of various bibliographicdatabases, which revealed only limited discussion about rootcauses of drug abuse (2). Research into drug abuse looks not at root causes per se, butrather at risk and protective factors that increase or decreasethe possibility that substance abuse and addiction will occur(see table 2-4), and how these risk and protective factors affectvarious subpopulations in different settings. WHAT ARE SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION? Drug consumption is divided into three levels or stagescommonly distinguished by clinicians and researchers: use, abuse,and dependence (see figure 2-1). Each of these stages is, onaverage, more hazardous, more obtrusive, and more likely toprovoke or induce social interventions (e.g., punitive sanctions,attention by prevention programs, admission to treatment) thanthe one before (4). A substance is abusable if it has thecapacity to induce dependence in those who use it. Dependence, aterm that is often used interchangeably with the term addiction,can include psychological dependence (a form of obsessivebehavior whose objective is the attainment of pleasure or theavoidance of unpleasantness) and physical dependence (developmentof tolerance, causing the user to need increasing amounts of thedrug for it to have its desired effect, and withdrawal symptomsif drug use is stopped) (5). Nevertheless, there is considerable controversy about whatconstitutes substance abuse and addiction. A number of issuescome into play, such as: o What substance is being used? A wide range of psychoactivesubstances has the potential for abuse (see box 2-2). Thepossession and use of several substances--such as marijuana,heroin, cocaine--are illegal in all 50 states. Other addictivesubstances--such as tobacco and alcohol--may be legallypurchased, possessed, and consumed by a majority of Americans.Other abusable substances--such as inhalants-- may be legallypurchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. o Does experimental use constitute abuse? Some maintain thatany use of an abusable or addictive substance constitutes abuse.Others suggest that experimentation-- particularly with suchpsychoactive substances as alcohol or tobacco that are availablefor purchase by adults of legal age--is part of normaldevelopment and does not necessarily have harmful consequences. o In what context are substance abuse and addiction beingaddressed? Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuserelated issues include: mass communications, criminal justice,medicine, and public health. These entities often operateindependently of one another, and use substantially differentterms when describing the use of illicit substances or theillegal use of licit substances (see appendix C). Public Health Model The traditional public health model incorporates the host-agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has anindividual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential useand/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may includepossible genetic, psychological, and biological susceptibility.Agent factors incorporate the substance's abuse liabilitycapacity, as well as how the substance is marketed. Lastly,environmental factors encompass not only the availability of thesubstance, but the social, cultural, political, and economicclimate as well. The focus of the public health perspective is tounderstand the importance social norms, environment, andavailability play in the shaping of alcohol- and drug-relatedproblems both on an individual and societal level. The public health approach toward substance abuse has severaldefining characteristics: o The substance abuse problem is primarily one of health, andrisks for ill-health. In every recreational, mood- altering druguser, use increases the risk of contracting one or more diseasesor conditions damaging to one's health. Drug use always createsthe potential, from great to small, for developing one or moredrug-related health problems. o The legality or illegality of a drug is an artificialbarrier that is not as relevant as the health-relatedconsiderations stemming from all types of drug use. Rather thanusing legal/illegal, the public health approach categorizes drugsby such characteristics as addictive potential and long-termhealth risks. o The drug abuse problem and the drug-related crime problemare not one and the same. As two distinct, interrelated problems,they have different, interrelated solutions. o Dealing with the drug problem primarily as a moral problemis considered inappropriate and counterproductive. Medical Model Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently citedtexts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence arethe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)issued by the American Psychiatric Association and used widely inAmerican medical practice, and the International Classificationof Diseases (ICD) published by the World Health Organization(WHO). The current ICD and DSM definitions of substance dependenceare nearly identical. However, the two manuals differ sharply onthe concepts of abuse, which DSM classifies as a maladaptivepattern of substance use leading to impairment or distress, asmanifested by one or more of several events occurring over thesame 12-month period (e.g., failure to fulfill major roleobligations at work, school, or home; recurrent substance-relatedlegal problems, such as arrests for substance-related disorderlyconduct. The current ICD-10 category of harmful use, whileapplicable cross-culturally, is limited to a pattern ofpsychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. Thedamage may be physical, as in cases of hepatitis from theself-administration of injected drugs, or mental, such asepisodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption ofalcohol (see appendix C for a full discussion of DSM and ICDdefinitions). Criminal Justice Model While it is well-known that many crimes are committed bypersons with substance use disorders and that these disorders canbe major contributors to their crimes, the criminal justicesystem has no systematic policy for the evaluation of thesedisorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state, orlocal, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicitsubstance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner isconsidered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitative analysesincluding blood, urine, and breath tests can be performed todetect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presence of illicitsubstances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation,psychological screening examinations or structured interviews areused infrequently to determine the level and severity of use,abuse, or dependence. For purposes of this report, OTA does not adopt any singledefinition for the terms substance abuse or substanceaddiction/dependence. The focus of this report, the underlyingcauses of substance abuse and addiction, relates to each of thedefinitions discussed above. MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a majorpublic health problem in the United States. Abuse of alcohol andother drugs has been associated with many problems (see figure2-2) costing Americans an estimated $144.1 billion annually. Federal survey data estimate that 11.4 million Americans aged12 and older used illegal drugs in 1992, continuing a steadydecline from a peak of 24 million in 1979. Findings from the 1992National Household Survey found the following about specificdrugs: o Illegal drugs. Since 1979, overall rates of current use(defined as use within the last 30 days) have dropped in all agegroups, except those aged 35 and older, whose use of drugs hasremained level. This has resulted in a general shift in the agedistribution of illegal drug users. In 1992, 23 percent ofillegal drug users were aged 35 and older, compared with only 10percent in 1979. o Cocaine. The number of cocaine users decreased 31 percentfrom 1.9 million users in 1991 to 1.3 million in 1992. This isdown from a peak of 5.8 million in 1985. The number of occasionalusers (defined as those who used the drug in 1992 but less oftenthan monthly) also continued a sharp decline from 4.3 million in1991 to 3.4 million in 1992. This is down from a peak of 8.6million in 1985. Frequent use of cocaine (defined as use on aweekly basis) remained unchanged between 1991 and 1992. In fact,no significant change has occurred in this number since it wasfirst estimated in 1985. o Marijuana. This is the most common illegal drug--used by 78percent of all illegal drug users in 1992. o Other illegal drugs. No major changes in the prevalence ofthe use of hallucinogens, such as lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD) and phencyclidine (PCP), between 1991 and 1992. The surveyestimates that approximately 1.8 million Americans have usedheroin at least once. However, the data on these categories aresomewhat unreliable, as these users are less likely to becontacted and reported in a household survey. o Alcohol. In 1992, approximately 98 million persons over theage of 12 had used alcohol in the last month, which isapproximately 48 percent of the population aged 12 and older.This number is down from an estimated high of 106 milliondrinkers in 1988. The number of heavy drinkers (defined as havingfive or more drinks per occasion on five or more days in the pastmonth) has remained steady at an estimated 9 million people. o Tobacco. An estimated 54 million Americans were smokers in1992, a rate of 26 percent of the population aged 12 and older.Cigarette smoking has declined since 1988, when an estimated 57million Americans smoked cigarettes. o Smokeless tobacco. An estimated 7.5 million Americans usedsmokeless tobacco in 1992, the vast majority of whom (7.1million) were males. o Inhalants. The use of inhalants (e.g., gasoline, glue, andnitrites) dropped slightly in 1992 as compared to 1991. o Prescription drugs. The estimated current nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics (sedatives, tranquilizers, stimulants, oranalgesics) dropped from 1991 to 1992. The survey also provides demographic variables useful tounderstanding substance use and abuse in the United States (seebox 2-3). However, these figures, as all data on drug use, aresuspect. Most surveys have strengths and weaknesses, which haveled stakeholders and policymakers to make widely divergentconclusions based on the same sets of data. MEASURING SUBSTANCE USE AND ABUSE Like the old fable about blind men describing an elephant,individual drug statistics usually tell us only part of the story(13). Each survey provides useful information, but at the sametime, each survey is flawed. Currently, no single measurement canby itself describe drug use and abuse in all its complexity.Nonetheless, several useful indicators do provide information topolicymakers. Three major national drug monitoring systems are the primarydata source for this review: The National Household Survey onDrug Abuse (the Household Survey), the National Survey of HighSchool Seniors (the Seniors Survey), and the Drug Abuse WarningNetwork (DAWN). These continuing data series have been sponsoredby the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) since the 1970s.Supplementary data sources include the few small area studiesthat compare drug use by poverty or income status and the DrugUse Forecasting System (DUF), sponsored by the National Instituteof Justice, which provides quarterly estimates of drug use amongthe criminal population in selected cities. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse Since 1974, NIDA has commissioned the Household Survey everyone to three years. The survey is based on a multistage randomsample of the household population in the 48 contiguous UnitedStates. The sample excludes persons living in group quarters,including institutions, prisons, military quarters, and collegedormitories, and those with no permanent address, including thehomeless. Since 1985, a number of enhancements have been made to theHousehold Survey. In 1985, blacks and Hispanics were oversampledto provide additional cases for subgroup analyses, and newmeasures of drug use frequency were introduced to identifypersons who used drugs monthly and weekly during the previousyear. In 1991, special supplementary samples were added for sixmetropolitan areas with highly publicized drug problems.Similarly, reports published since the early 1980s providegreater detail on the demographic characteristics of users byfrequency of use. National Survey of High School Seniors Every year since 1975 researchers at the University ofMichigan have surveyed a nationally representative sample ofapproximately 16,000 high school seniors. Beginning in 1976, afollowup survey of members from each graduating class, includingan over-sampling of drug users, has been conducted by mail. In1990, the followup sample included young adults aged 19 to 32. Drug Abuse Warning Network DAWN, established in 1972, is the federal government's majordata system for tracking patterns and trends in the serioushealth consequences of drug use. DAWN reports include statisticson the total number of hospital emergency room visits (episodes),separate counts of the number of drugs mentioned per episode(drug mentions), and drug-related deaths. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the DAWN program focusedprimarily on data from emergency rooms and medical examiners in27 metropolitan areas. The selection of reporting facilities,over 700 emergency rooms and 87 medical examiners by 1989, wasnot random, however, and the number of facilities reportingvaried from year to year, with facilities in metropolitan areasbeing overrepresented. Beginning in 1990, DAWN implemented anational probability sample for the collection of drug-relatedemergency room visit data to allow reporting of national as wellas metropolitan area information. Drug Use Forecasting System DUF, initiated in 1988 by the Department of Justice, providesestimates of drug use among booked arrestees in selected citiesbased on urinalysis tests. The tests, administered shortly afterarrest, measure very recent drug use among lawbreakers. Fourtimes a year, samples of about 250 male adult arrestees inparticipating cities are tested; some areas also test femalearrestees and juveniles. The proportion of persons arrestedexplicitly on drug charges is limited to 25 percent of the totalsample. Limitations of the Data The national drug monitoring surveys have several limitationsfor studying drug use, abuse, and addiction: o Most surveys rely on self-reporting. The results of suchsurveys rely on the veracity of the person responding to thesurvey. A major, and widely recognized, limitation in thenational surveys is that respondents may be unwilling or unableto report their drug use accurately. Comparisons of self-reportand urinalysis results based on DUF data indicate that, amongarrestees, the tendency to underreport drug use is substantial(12). As one Member of Congress noted, "how in the hell canyou expect people who live in households to share with anybody,let alone the government, how often they use drugs?" (3). o Surveys miss populations at risk for drug abuse.TheHousehold Survey, by definition, excludes certain groups whodo not reside in households, such as the homeless and persons injail or prison. Although the excluded groups represent only 2percent of the total population, drug use may be higher, ordifferent, among excluded groups such as the homeless and jail orprison inmates. The Household Survey may also fail to capturedrug users within the target population. Although overall surveyresponse rates are high (82 percent in 1990), drugs users mayhave been more difficult to locate and interview because theirlifestyles may involve irregular hours, avoiding authority, andother behaviors that reduce the likelihood of survey response. Inaddition, response rates tend to be generally lower among youngadults and residents of metropolitan and low-income areas, andthose not interviewed may be more likely to use drugs than thosewho respond to the survey. o Poverty indicators per se are not available. The nationaldrug monitoring systems contain very limited data on poverty, andnone that meet the official poverty definition (in 1991, thepoverty thresholds varied from $6,932 for a person living aloneto $27,942 for a family of nine or more members (6). The proxyvariables relating to employment, education, place of residence,and race and ethnicity unsuccessfully separate the effects ofincome from the effects of other correlated factors. Informationon drug use by income status is available only in the most recentHousehold Surveys, and then only by family income without regardto household size. More information is provided by the HouseholdSurvey on other variables related to poverty, includingemployment status, race and ethnicity, and neighborhoodcharacteristics. The Seniors Survey provides no income data. Forhigh school seniors, the only regularly reported indicators ofsocioeconomic status are college plans and parental education. Nosocioeconomic indicators are available for the followup sample ofyoung adults except current enrollment in college. Race andethnic status are not regularly reported for either sample, butfor high school seniors racial and ethnic patterns of drug useare analyzed and published separately. DAWN has severelimitations for an analysis of poverty and drug use. The onlyindicators in DAWN related to poverty are race and ethnicity. Nodata are available on income status of patients or the economicstatus of areas served by the facility. o Surveys may over- and underrepresent findings regardingpopulations at risk for drug abuse. Populations at risk for bothpoverty and drug abuse, for example, are excluded orunderrepresented in the major surveys and overrepresented inreports from hospital emergency rooms. These problems mean thatthe findings from these surveys are suggestive rather thandefinitive (see box 2-4). o Drug measures focus on use, rather than abuse or addiction.The common measures of drug use employed by the Household andSeniors Surveys--lifetime, past year, and past month use--areinsufficiently refined to distinguish between casual anddependent drug use. Definitions of alcohol, drug abuse, anddependency --such as those set forth in DSM (1)-- link thequantity and frequency of use to indications of persistent,uncontrolled consumption, impaired social and psychologicalfunctioning as a result of use, and physical problems includingwithdrawal symptoms. No published estimates of the number of drugusers meeting medical criteria for abuse or dependence by povertyindicators are available, with the single exception of the DAWNestimates of emergency room contacts for dependency, which arereported by race and ethnicity. o The surveys include few multivariate analyses. Since thesurveys do not examine variables while controlling for factorsrelated to drug use, an accurate link of drug use with the roleof income, race, education, and place of residence is impossible.The dearth of such analyses results in part from sample sizelimitations and in part from the fact that secondary analyses ofthe national survey data have not been encouraged. ORGANIZATION AND SCOPE OF THE REPORT This report has four parts: necessary preconditions,individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. The first part, Necessary Preconditions (chs. 3-5), focuseson several factors necessary for substance abuse to occur. Thesecond part, Individual Factors (ch. 6), explores researchconducted on risk and protective factors thought to be indicatorsin assessing an individual's substance use, abuse, and addiction.The third part, Activity Settings (chs. 7 and 8), looks at howrisk and protective factors play out in various populationsubgroups and in various community settings (home, school,workplace, recreation, and neighborhood). The fourth section,Policy Options (ch. 9), addresses the range of legislative issuesand options for Congress arising from chapters 3 through 8. This report focuses on factors that contribute to or protectagainst substance abuse and addiction, and the implications forprevention. It does not address in any depth drug treatment orlaw enforcement issues and interventions. Based on theliteratures reviewed by OTA about causes and prevention, however,it is clear that comprehensive prevention strategies willgenerally need drug treatment and law enforcement components, ifthey are to be effective. While drawing on data from federalantidrug prevention programs, the effectiveness of suchapproaches needs to be studied in greater depth than was possiblein this report. This report is the second and final publication of thisassessment. The first publication, a background report onBiological Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction, describedgenetic, pharmacological, and abuse liability research issues(9). Readers are also referred to earlier OTA reports thataddress issues related to drug interdiction efforts (10);alcohol, tobacco, and drug abuse prevention and services issuesin adolescent health (7); the effectiveness of drug abusetreatment in controlling AIDS/HIV infection (11); and alternativecoca reduction strategies (8). BOX 2-1: Root Causes: Two Views From the Political Arena "Many states and cities are on shoe-string budgets andmust provide services and alternatives to substance abuse inlocal communities. The failure to address the fundamental causesof substance abuse and to provide immediate interventionstrategies will impact city residents most... The committeerecommends that the National Drug Control Strategy be framed bybroader social and economic problems which require dramaticreforms in order to attack the root causes of substance abuse. Weneed to begin to build the infrastructure necessary to improvethe quality of treatment services by requiring medical schools toprovide comprehensive training to identify and treat substanceabusers; provide adequate treatment services at the communitylevel, including after care, vocational, educational, andpsychiatric assessments; and develop alternative leisureactivities for youth and adults to replace `street life' andassist individuals to escape the drug culture." House Committee on Government Operations committee report "One of [the Democrats'] tactics was to talk about theroot causes of drug use, the `deeper and more profound problems,'as they put it, of homelessness, poverty, helplessness, and thelike. The elites liked this shift in emphasis, too. It took thediscussion away from moral considerations to the (for them) morecomfortable ground of social theory. They wanted to talk about`hopelessness' as a condition caused by lack of governmentinvolvement. We talked about hopelessness, too, but talked aboutit as a condition caused by social decomposition and thebreakdown of the family and a lack of law and order in thesecommunities . . . I found it shocking and disappointing that whenwe argued for more police, jails, courts, and prisons because ofthe exploding crime epidemic in some of America's inner cities,some people responded by saying, `But what are the root causes ofthis? `That's an interesting debate which should go on at anelite university. But if there are drug dealers going aroundshooting people in the affluent suburbs, the citizenry will notcall for a seminar on root causes. They will raise hell anddemand that the dealers be arrested. And they are right to doso." William Bennett Former director, U.S. Office of National DrugControl Policy SOURCES: U.S. House of Representatives, Committee onGovernment Operations, H.Rept. 101-992, "The Role of DemandReduction in the National Drug Control Strategy"; Bennett,W., The De-Valuing of America: The Fight for Our Culture and OurChildren (New York, NY: Summitt Books, 1992).F:\USERS\LL\SUBSTAN\BOX2-2.TXT October 7, 1994 BOX 2-2: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other PsychoactiveSubstances Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is acentral nervous system depressant with effects similar to thoseof sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcoholmay be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due tothe depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcoholdiffers from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is usedprimarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. Examples 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. "Hard" liquor (e.g., whiskey,gin). SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics aredrugs of diverse chemical structure that exert a nonselectivegeneral depressant on the central nervous system. In addition,they reduce metabolism in a variety of tissues in the body,depressing any system that uses energy. Depending on the dose,any sedative hypnotic compound may be classified as a sedative(an agent that allays excitement), a tranquilizer (an antianxietyagent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducing agent), or an anesthetic (anagent that eliminates pain). Sedative-hypnotics are usedmedically as sedatives, anxiolytics (antianxiety agents),hypnotics, antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, and generalanesthetics. Examples 1. Barbiturates ("downers" or "barbs"):pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--taken orally. 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxidehydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent inmarijuana, alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, andbehavior, though the mechanisms of action are not entirely clear.Researchers have found, however, that THC changes the way inwhich sensory information is processed by the brain. It can beused medically to relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapyin cancer patients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. Examples 1. Marijuana ("pot" or "grass")--smokedor eaten. 2. Hashish ("hash")--smoked or eaten. 3.Hashish oil ("hash oil")--smoked (mixed with tobacco.4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is acentral nervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its actionsecondary to stimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory)synapses both within the brain and in the peripheral nervoussystem. Examples 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewingtobacco). COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is apotent central nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates thesympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity ofcardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also producesbronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topicalanesthetic for surgical procedures. Examples 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder ("coke" or"street cocaine")--usually snorted or injectedintravenously.d 2. Cocaine alkaloid ("freebase" or"crack")--smoked.e AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTSf 1. AmphetaminesAmphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds, allof which are potent central nervous system and behavioralstimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treatattention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction inchildren, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodesof sleep), or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Amphetamine ("speed" or "uppers"(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) 2. Methamphetamine ("speed" or "crystalmeth" or "ice") [MethadrineR]--taken orally,injected, or snorted.(g,h) 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected. 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines,nonamphetamine stimulates are central nervous and behavioralstimulants. Some non-amphetamine stimulants (e.g., PreludinR) areused for weight control, and some (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR)are used medically to treat hyperactivity, minimal braindysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally orinjected.d 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.d 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--takenorally, or injected.(d) HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are aheterogeneous group of compounds that affect a person'sperceptions, sensations, thinking, self-awareness, andemotions.(i) Examples 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or"acid"--taken orally or put in the eyes. 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or"mesc" and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;tablets taken orally. 3. Psilocybin ("magic mushrooms")--chewed andswallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--takenorally. INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactivevapors. Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abusedinhalants produce effects similar to those of anesthetics, whichact to slow down the body's functions or produce feelings ofdizziness. At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amylnitrite is used for heart patients because it dilates the bloodvessels and increases blood supply to the heart. There are nomedical indications for most of the inhalants. Examples 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. 4. Amyl nitrite ("snappers" or "poppers")and butyl nitrite ("rush")--vapors inhaled. OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates arenatural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, a substancederived from the opium poppy, have analgesic (pain-relieving)properties. Heroin is not approved for medical uses in the UnitedStates. The major medical use of other opiates is for the reliefof pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcotics are used to relievecoughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treat diarrhea. Methadoneis used in the treatment of narcotic abstinence syndromes and asan analgesic in terminal illness. 1. Heroin ("smack" or "horse")--injected, smoked, or inhaledd. 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.d 3. Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, orinhaled. 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally orinjected. PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTING SYMPHATHOMIMETICS Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters thefunctions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociativeanesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic butwas subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it wasdiscovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as animmobilizing agent. PCP ("angel dust" or "lovely")--takenorally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) ______________ (a) According to Julien, one could conceivablyclassify psychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1)mechanism of action, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioraleffects. Probably the most useful approach would be to classifythem by mechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain'sphysiology is too limited for this approach to be comprehensive.A limitation of the second approach is that many drugs ofapparently similar structure exert quite different effects, andmany drugs of dissimilar structure exert quite similar effects.The classification in this table largely reflects the behavioraleffects approach. The classification used here is based on thecategories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of theclasses of psychoactive substances listed in this box exceptnicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotineis associated with dependence but not abuse. (b) The potential physiological, psychological, andbehavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown arediscussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend inpart on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode ofadministration. (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that canelevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a senseof increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve taskperformance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, andirritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecularstructures and mechanisms of action. (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, theroute of administration of a psychoactive substance is animportant variable in determining whether use will lead todependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration thatproduce more efficient absorption of the substance in the bloodstream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase thelikelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leadsto dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactivesubstances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)are associated with higher levels of consumption and with anincreased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminatedneedles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and otherillnesses. (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting"street cocaine" (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purifiedbase that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar tothat of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter moreintense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapidabsorption of the drug through the lungs. "Crackcocaine" is the street name given to freebase cocaine thathas been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical baseby cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refersto the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequatelydescribe its properties. Drug use surveys typically meanamphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveysregard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) andnonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds usedin No-Doz, diet pills, and "fake pep pills"). Cocaineand nicotine (described above) are also central nervous systemsimulants. (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduledunder the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared byunderground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects ofcontrolled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. Asof June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl andmeperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in theform of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,"ice" (one of the common street names ford-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a formsuitable for smoking. (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can inducehallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the termhallucinogen does not adequately describe the range ofpharmacological actions of the diverse group of substancesusually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposedby Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the abilityto alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered"mind expanding." The effects of hallucinogens areunpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user'spersonality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in whichthe drug is used. (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of druguse. SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on thefollowing sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5thed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.Shaffer, and M. Burglass, "The Biological Basics: Drugs andTheir Effects," Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: ClinicalInterventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine," Rockville, MD,1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public HealthService, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Designer Drugs,"NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute onDrug Abuse, "Marijuana Update," NIDA Capsules,Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Methamphetamine Abuse," NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up DrugFree: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). BOX 2-3: Household Survey Demographic Portrait According tothe 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse:o Illegal druguse is most prevalent in the 18- to 25-yearage group.o Mostillegal drug users are in the white population (76percent of allcurrent users or 8.7 million people).o Men have a higher rate ofcurrent illegal drug use thanwomen.o Illegal drug use is highlycorrelated with educationalstatus. Those who had not completedhigh school had thehighest rate of use.o Unemployed people aretwice as likely as employed peopleto be using illegal drugs.o Theprevalence of illegal drug use in large metropolitancities isslightly higher than in nonmetropolitan areas.SOURCE: Office ofTechnology Assessment, 1994, based on U.S.Department of Healthand Human Services data. BOX 2-4: Two Contrasting Surveys Measuring Cocaine Use Because of populations not represented in the HouseholdSurveys (including homeless, run-away children, andinstitutionalized populations such as the incarcerated), thesurveys may greatly underestimate the involvement of the poor indrug use. Two years ago, for example, Abt Associates conducted astudy to determine the number of heavy cocaine users in theUnited States. Two measures of heavy cocaine use were employed,both of which measured use of cocaine in the very recent past.Estimates of the number of regular weekly cocaine users from the1990 Household Survey were compared to estimates of the number ofrecent cocaine users based on urinalysis tests of arrestees fromthe Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program. DUF urinalysis tests wereconducted at the time of booking, and the results measuredcocaine use during the day or two before arrest. DUF estimatestherefore measured the prevalence of very recent drug use amongthose involved with the criminal justice system in selected majorcities. The two data systems generated significantly differentestimates. From the Household Survey, Abt estimated that therewere about 662,000 heavy cocaine users in this country in 1990.This is substantially lower than the Abt estimate of 1.709million heavy cocaine users derived from DUF data. Reasons forthe differences include both possible underreporting on theHousehold Survey and the fact that many heavy cocaine users maybe excluded from the household population or may be exceedinglydifficult to locate and interview. Overall, the study indicatedthat approximately two-thirds of the heavy cocaine users in thiscountry are not counted by the Household Survey and thatapproximately 87 percent of all heavy cocaine users are involvedwith the criminal justice system. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994; based on AbtAssociates, Heavy Cocaine Use in the United States: The Number ofUsers (Washington, DC: Abt Associates, 1991). _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-31IA031-000652-B047-81http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132109 text/html 54349HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:20:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:57 GMTContent-length: 54131 CHAPTER 3 BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 3 BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY Substance abuse and addiction are complex phenomena that defysimple explanation or description. A tangled interaction offactors contribute to an individual's seeking out, use, andperhaps subsequent abuse of drugs. Since more individualsexperiment with drugs than eventually develop substance abuseproblems, great interest persists in understanding whatdifferentiates these groups. Factors that can play a role in drugabuse susceptibility include a person's psychological makeup(e.g., self-esteem, propensity to take risks, impulsivity,depression), biological response to drugs, environmentalsituation (e.g., peer groups, family organization, socioeconomicstatus), and the availability of drugs. The exact combination ofelements that lead to substance abuse varies among individuals. Underlying all substance use, abuse and addiction are theactions and effects that drugs of abuse exert. For a completeunderstanding of drug abuse and addiction one must address howdrugs affect the brain, why certain drugs have the potential forbeing abused, and what, if any, biological differences existamong individuals in their susceptibility to abuse drugs. Whilemany other factors ultimately contribute to an individual'sdrug-taking behavior, understanding the biological components iscrucial in understanding substance abuse, addiction, anddependency. Two biological factors contribute to substance use, abuse,and addiction: the effects drugs of abuse exert on a person; andthe biological status of the individual taking drugs. The formerrelates to the acute mechanisms of action of drugs in the brainand the long-term effects that occur after chronic exposure. Thelatter pertains to an individual's biological constitution, mostimportantly the presence of inherited characteristics that affectthat person's response to a drug. The biological mechanisms of substance abuse are complex andinteractive. A previously published background paper by theOffice of Technology Assessment (OTA) entitled BiologicalComponents of Substance Abuse and Addiction thoroughly discussesthe basic concepts, neuropharmacology, and genetics of drugabuse. This chapter is a synopsis of the background paper. DRUG ACTION Acute Actions Drugs of abuse alter the brain's normal balance and level ofbiochemical activity (see box 3-1). In order to have theseaffects, a drug must first reach the brain. This is accomplishedby the drug diffusing from the circulatory system into the brain.The routes of administration, methods by which a drug enters thebloodstream, affect how quickly a drug penetrates the brain. Thechemical structure of a drug plays an important role in theability of a drug to cross from the circulatory system into thebrain. The four main routes of administration for drugs of abuseare oral, nasal, intravenous, and inhalation. With oralingestion, the drug must be absorbed by the stomach or gut whichresults in a delay before effects become apparent. When the nasalroute of administration is used, effects are usually felt within3 minutes, as the capillary rich mucous membranes of the noserapidly absorb substances into the bloodstream. Intravenousadministration usually produces effects in 1/2 to 2 minutes andis slowed only by the detour back through the lungs that venousblood must take to reach the brain. Lastly, the inhalation methodbypasses the venous system completely because the drug isabsorbed into the pulmonary circulation which goes directly fromthe lungs to the heart and then to the brain. As a result,effects are felt within 5 to 10 seconds, making inhalation thefastest route of administration. The route of administration candetermine the drug's potency and the efficacy the drug will haveon affecting brain activity, thereby contributing to the abusepotential of the drug. Distinct from other psychoactive agents, drugs of abuse, inpart, affect those areas of the brain that mediate feelings ofpleasure and reward (see box 3-2). Evidence is accumulating thatpositive sensations experienced during these activities aremediated by the brain reward system. Studies have shown thatdirect stimulation of the areas of the brain involved in thereward system, in the absence of any goal-seeking behavior,produces extreme pleasure that has strong reinforcing propertiesin its own right (48,60). Animals with electrodes implanted inthese areas in such a way that electrical impulses produce apleasurable sensation will repeatedly press a bar, or do anyother required task, to receive electrical stimulation. The factthat animals will forego food and drink or will willinglyexperience a painful stimulus to receive stimulation of thereward system attests to the powerful reinforcing characteristicsof the reward system. Most drugs of abuse, either directly orindirectly, are presumed to affect the brain reward system. Inducing activity in the brain reward system gives drugs ofabuse positive reinforcing actions that support their continueduse and abuse. Drug reinforcement is defined as increasing thebehavior that led to the taking of the drug. Put more simply,individuals who use drugs experience some effect, such aspleasure, detachment, or relief from distress which initiallyestablishes and then maintains drug self-administration. Theconsequence of taking the drug enhances the probability that itwill continue to be used for some real or perceived effect and,hence, tends to lead to continued compulsive self-administration.In fact, the ability of a drug to support self-administration inexperimental animals is a measure of the drug's strength as areinforcer. While growing evidence suggests that the brain reward systemplays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugs ofabuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex, vary amongsubstances, and have yet to be completely described (41,42,43).For example, while some drugs of abuse directly affect thechemical release of dopamine (see box 3-3), the interactions ofother neurotransmitters such as gamma amino butyric acid (GABA),opioid peptides, and serotonin may also be important. Chronic Actions Chronic, long-term exposure to drugs of abuse can causechanges in the brain that may take weeks, months, and possiblyyears, to reverse once drug use has stopped. Most drugs of abuse have complex actions in the brain andother parts of the body resulting in a variety of behavioraleffects. In general, tolerance develops to many of the effects ofdrugs of abuse and a withdrawal syndrome occurs on cessationafter prolonged use. However, the details of these phenomena varyfrom drug to drug, and the specific details of the biologicalmechanisms that underlie these phenomena are not completelyunderstood. Recent advances in neuroscience research have begunto unravel how neuroadaptive responses manifest themselves forvarious drugs of abuse. Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolongedperiod of use, more of the drug is required to produce a giveneffect (33,38). This response occurs with many types of drugs. Itis a common, but unnecessary, characteristic of drug abuse (seebox 3-4). For example, while tolerance develops to some of theeffects of cocaine and amphetamines, sensitization can also occurto some of their other effects. Also, while it is unclear fromavailable data whether tolerance develops to cocaine'sreinforcing effects, the notion is supported by some experimentalevidence and anecdotal reports from cocaine users that the drug'seuphoric action diminishes with repeated use. In a recent study,it has been shown that acute tolerance to dopamine response isinduced by binge patterns of cocaine administration in male rats(51). Tolerance develops to most of the effects, including thereinforcing properties, of opiates, barbiturates, and alcohol. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when theeffects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeated, butintermittent, administration. Sensitization to a drug's effectscan play a significant role in supporting drug- taking behavior. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drug exposure.With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adapt to itspresence such that the drug is required to maintain normal cellfunction. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behavesabnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, thewithdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs andsymptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation andirritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants producesprofound depression. The magnitude of the withdrawal syndrome varies from drug todrug. Although the severity varies, withdrawal is associated withthe cessation of use of most drugs of abuse. Opiates, cocaine,amphetamines, barbiturates, alcohol, and benzodiazepines producepronounced and sometimes severe withdrawal symptoms(20,24,56,68,74) while those for nicotine and caffeine are lessintense (1,31). A mild withdrawal episode is associated withdiscontinued cannabis use, while none is associated with lysergicacid diethylamide (LSD) use (12,63). No matter the severity ofthe physical withdrawal syndrome, its existence can create acraving or desire for the drug and dependence can play a verystrong role in recurrent patterns of relapse and maintainingdrug-seeking behavior to forestall withdrawal. At one time, withdrawal was believed to peak within severalhours after drug-taking was discontinued and then dissipate;similarly, common knowledge held that tolerance to most drugs wasthought to dissipate gradually with time, as the brain readaptedto the drug's disappearance. Substantial evidence now indicatesthat persistent, residual neuroadaptations are present, which canlast for months or possibly years, and may or may not beassociated with the pathways that mediate physical dependence(33,44,45,77). An important component of this phenomena may bethe learning which takes place during drug-taking behavior.Moreover, with repeated cycles of abstinence and reinitiation ofdrug use, the time required to elicit drug dependence growsshorter and shorter. Evidence also indicates that theadministration of naloxone, a drug that blocks the actions ofopiates, may elicit a withdrawal syndrome in individuals who haveabstained from use for extended periods of time. These dataindicate the existence of long-lasting, drug- inducedneuroadaptive changes that persist for as yet undefined periodsof time. Although information explaining this effect is lacking,these changes may help account for the relapses that sometimesoccur in long-term abstinent, drug-dependent individuals. Abuse Liability The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act(Public Law 91-513) and the Psychotropic Substances Act of 1978(Public Law 95-633) gives exclusive authority to the Secretary ofthe Department of Health and Human Services to determine theabuse liability of substances and to make recommendationsconcerning substance regulation and other drug policy decisions.Although the Secretary receives advice from the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), andvarious other regulatory agencies, these laws explicitly statethat the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) must provide tothe Secretary information relevant to the abuse potential ofsuspected drugs of abuse and all facts key to an assessment oftheir abuse potential. On the basis of this information fromNIDA, and input from FDA and DEA, the Secretary makes a judgmentas to the dependence potential of new drugs. NIDA supports avariety of activities in commercial and private laboratoriesaround the country to provide this information. A drug's abuse liability is measured by the likelihood thatits use will result in drug addiction. Many factors ultimatelyplay a role in an individual's drug-taking behavior;nevertheless, the abuse potential of a drug is related to itsintrinsic rewarding properties and/or the presumed neuroadaptivemotivational effects that result from its prolonged use. Drugscan be tested and screened for their abuse liability in animals.Four criteria can be evaluated to classify a drug as havingsignificant abuse potential: o pharmacological equivalence to known drugs of abuse, o demonstration of reinforcing effects, o tolerance, and o physical dependence. The capacity to produce reinforcing effects is essential toany drug with significant abuse potential, whereas tolerance andphysical dependence often occur but are not absolutely requiredto make such a determination. Testing new pharmaceuticals for their abuse potential is animportant step in new drug development. Many major pharmaceuticalfirms today emphasize the development of new and safer drugs forpain reduction and in the development of psychoactive compoundsfor treatment of brain disorders. In particular, scientificstrides in understanding the brain, neurological disease,psychiatric disturbances, and aging are fueling research intotreatment of brain disorders. As psychoactive compounds becomeavailable, they must be screened for abuse potential. The abuseliability assessment of new products is not simply at thediscretions of the manufacturer. Various federal regulatory lawsmandate such testing and federal regulatory agencies are chargedwith seeing that testing is carried out. The College on Problemsof Drug Dependence (CPDD), and, specifically, its Drug EvaluationCommittee (DEC), provides the majority of abuse liability testinginformation to NIDA. Animal models are generally used to screen for the abusepotential of new drugs in earlier stages of drug development orto evaluate abuse potential in drugs that cannot be readilystudied in humans (2). Laboratory methods for abuse potentialevaluation in humans are also well developed and is an area ofactive research (21). However, factors such as the heterogeneityof drug-using populations, the use of multiple drugs, and theother biological, social, and environmental factors involved inhuman drug use make human studies complex. In terms of the validity of animal models as a means ofstudying human drug addiction, an excellent correlation existsbetween predicting the abuse liability of specific classes ofdrugs in animals and humans (34). However, it is recognized thatanimal models are imperfect and, in fact, there are examples ofdrugs that proved to have significant abuse potential in humans,whereas the preclinical testing in animals revealed relativelyminimal abuse potential (9,33,38). The ultimate answer to theissue of whether a drug has significant abuse potential islong-term experience with the drug once it has become available,either legally or illegally. Nevertheless, animal models serve asthe only practical means of initially screening drugs for abuseliability and have proven to be the most effective means ofdetecting whether there is likely to be a problem in humans. Self-Administration The predominant feature of all drugs with significantaddiction-producing properties is that they are self-administered. In fact, self-administration of a drug to the pointwhen the behavior becomes detrimental to the individual is theprimary criterion for classifying a drug as having significantabuse potential for addiction. In addition toself-administration, another contributing factor to abuseliability is the notion of craving (9,33,38). Although craving isa difficult term to quantify, once a drug is voluntarily orinvoluntarily withdrawn, the increased desire to take the drugcan play a role in the relapse to substance abuse. As previouslymentioned, the reinforcing properties of the drug may shift thepattern of administration established during the initial, earlyphase of drug?addiction. Specifically, the drug may haveinitially been self-administered for its pleasurable effects butmay eventually be self-administered to relieve the discomfortassociated with withdrawal. Animals can be readily trained to self-administer drugs in avariety of settings (9). Animal models of self- administrationprovide a powerful tool that can give a good indication of theabuse liability of new or unknown drugs. These models also permitexamination of the behavioral, physiological, and biologicalfactors leading to sustained self-administration. Drug Discrimination Another tool in the assessment of abuse liability of drugs isdrug discrimination, which refers to the perception of theeffects of drugs (3,9). Specifically, animals or humans trainedto discriminate a drug from a placebo show a remarkable abilityto discriminate it from other drugs with different properties.These procedures also permit a determination of whether thesubject considers the drug to be the pharmacological equivalentof another drug. Pharmacological equivalence refers to the factthat drugs of particular classes, such as opiates, stimulants,and depressants cause a series of affects on the brain and otherorgans which collectively constitute their pharmacologicalprofile. Drug discrimination provides a useful measure in animalsto assess the subjective effects of drugs in humans. Dependence and Tolerance Physical dependence and tolerance to drugs of abuse canreadily be induced in animals by chronic administration of thesedrugs (37,38). Following abrupt cessation of these drugs, awithdrawal syndrome will often develop and, if given theopportunity, self-administration rates will be increased.Furthermore, since the understanding of the biological changeswhich take place during the development of physical dependenceand tolerance are poorly understood in humans, with the possibleexception of opiate dependency (45), animal models offer a uniqueopportunity to carry out experiments designed to address theseissues. GENETIC FACTORS Why does one person abuse or become dependent on drugs whileanother, exposed to a similar environment and experiences, doesnot? To date, the majority of biomedical research has focused onthe role, if any, that genetics plays in individualsusceptibility to substance abuse and dependence. There isgrowing interest, however, in researching other factors thateffect a person's biological status. For example, nutrition,biological development, in utero experiences, early exposure toenvironmental lead, head injuries, and other environmentalcomponents, can modify individual neurophysiology. Thus, whilethis section features genetics, there are many other factors thatcan influence individual biological susceptibility to the effectsof a drug. Progress in understanding the genetics of various conditionsand diseases has brought with it a realization that substanceabuse and addiction probably involve a genetic component. Thatis, hereditary biological differences among individuals may makesome more or less susceptible to drug dependency than others.However, a genetic component alone is undoubtedly insufficient toprecipitate substance abuse and addiction. Unlike disorders suchas Huntington's disease and cystic fibrosis that result from thepresence of alterations in a single gene, any genetic componentof substance abuse is likely to involve multiple genes thatcontrol various aspects of the biological response to drugs,individual temperament, and the propensity to engage inrisk-taking behaviors, or physiological predisposition to becomean abuser. In addition, the involvement of many behavioral andenvironmental factors indicates that any genetic component actsin consort with other nongenetic risk factors to contribute tothe development of substance abuse and addiction. Thus, thepresence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensures drugaddiction nor precludes it. Two questions arise when consideringa genetic component to substance abuse and addiction. Doinherited factors exist? If so, what are they? To date, most ofthe work done in this field is related to alcoholism; much lessis known about the genetics of other drugs of abuse. Do Inherited Factors Exist? Results from family, twin, and adoption studies as well asextensive research on animal models indicate that there areheritable influences on patterns of alcohol use. Animal studiesusing selective breeding techniques have established that alcoholpreference, the reinforcing actions of alcohol, alcoholtolerance, and alcohol physical dependence can be affected bygenetic factors. Although fewer studies have examined the geneticcomponent of vulnerability to the addictive properties of otherdrugs of abuse, evidence from animal studies confirms the role ofa genetic influence on the use and abuse of drugs other thanalcohol. To study nonalcoholic drug abuse in humans has beendifficult because of substantially lower population prevalenceand marked changes in availability and, hence, exposure to thesesubstances. Investigation in this area is further hampered by thecomplexity of subjects' drug use--most drug abusers have used(and had problems from using) multiple substances. This has ledresearchers either to concentrate on one class of drug or totreat all illicit drug use as equivalent. The tendency to lumpall illicit drugs into one category makes results difficult tointerpret or compare. Family Studies: Alcoholism References to a familial tendency or hereditary"taint" of alcoholism date back to classical times(23). Family studies have repeatedly confirmed that the risk ofalcoholism is higher among first-degree relatives (i.e., parents,siblings, children) of alcoholics as compared with the generalpopulation (54). Moreover, while family studies can establishthat a disorder (or liability to a disorder) is transmitted, ingeneral they fail to distinguish between biological andenvironmental transmission. This issue, however, can be evaluatedin large family studies by analyzing multiple classes ofrelatives with differing degrees of genetic relatedness. Results of numerous family studies indicate that alcoholismsegregates within families, with male first-degree relatives ofalcoholics having a higher incidence (ranging from 27 to 54percent) than female first-degree relatives (6 to 17 percent) ascompared to first-degree relatives of nonalcoholics (20 percentof males, 4 percent of females) (26,66,76). In fitting models ofinheritance to family data, researchers concluded that observedpatterns of inheritance were consistent with the hypothesis thatfamilial factors predisposing to alcoholism were the same in menand women, but that nonfamilial environmental factors exertedmore influence in the development of alcoholism in women (14).However, a review of drug abuse research on women presentedseveral comparative studies of men and women showing thatalcoholism among some women appeared more highly correlated witha family history of alcohol problems. Compared to alcoholic menin various studies, alcoholic women had a greater likelihood ofhaving an alcoholic father and/or parents, as well as alcoholicsiblings (47). Additionally, while perhaps not geneticallyinfluenced, familial alcoholics (those with at least one relativewith alcoholism) appear to have earlier onset, more antisocialsymptoms, more social complications of alcohol use, and worsetreatment outcome than nonfamilial alcoholics (22,62,70). Familial is not identical to genetic, and in the case ofalcoholism, the familial patterns of inheritance are notconsistent with those of a purely genetic condition (36,79). Inaddition, researchers suggest that the transmissibility ofalcoholism has increased over time (65). Thus, any geneticfactors promoting the development of alcoholism are significantlymoderated by nongenetic influences. Family Studies: Other Drugs Although fewer family studies have been conducted on thegenetic transmission of liability to other drugs of abuse,researchers suggest that, as in the case of alcohol, addiction toother psychoactive substances appears to run in families. One study found evidence of drug use running in families,based on family history obtained from individuals admitted forsubstance abuse treatment (53). However, this study combined useof all illicit drugs into one category and relied on self-reportsby the subject on his or her drug use as well as that of familymembers. A large family interview of opiate addicts found thatthe relatives of opiate users had elevated rates of drugaddiction as compared with the controls (67). In addition, anassociation was found between opiate use and the presence ofantisocial personality disorder (ASPD). Further analysis of thesedata revealed that the incidence of both drug abuse and ASPD washigher among the siblings of the opiate subjects than among theirparents (49,50). A familial association between opiate addiction andalcoholism has been noted in some studies (46). However, anotherfamily history study found that while both opiate addiction andalcoholism clustered within families, co- occurrence of thedisorders within families occurred only as frequently as expectedby chance, thus supporting the hypothesis of independenttransmission (29). Little has been done to test hypotheses regarding familialtransmission of liability to addiction to specific substancesother than opiates or alcohol. One study examining treated drugabusers and their relatives found that alcoholism was equallycommon among relatives of individuals who preferentially abusedopiates, cocaine, or sedative-hypnotics (27 percent, 31 percent,and 24 percent of male relatives, respectively), whereasrelatives of sedative-hypnotic users were subject to diagnoses ofother substance abuses (2 percent of male relatives, versus 11percent of male relatives of opiate abusers and 16 percent ofmale relatives of cocaine abusers) (55). Twin and Adoption Studies Twin and adoption studies provide information to distinguishbetween biological and cultural transmission. Twin studiesobserve siblings raised in the same environment, but compare howoften identical twins, who are genetically identical, andfraternal twins, who have the genetic similarity of nontwinsiblings are concordant for a trait. A high concordance rate fora trait among identical twins versus fraternal twins usuallyindicates a genetic component for the trait. Adoption studies, bycontrast, compare the presence of a trait among biological versusadoptive family members or other control groups. In this wayindividuals sharing the same environment but having differentgenetic heritages, or vice versa, can be compared. Evidence from twin studies suggests genetic influences ondrinking patterns as well as alcohol-related problems. Resultsfrom twin studies demonstrate genetic influences on measures ofalcohol consumption such as abstention, average alcohol intake,and heavy alcohol use (28,39,61). Twin studies also indicate aninherited risk for smoking (16). When evaluating the development of alcoholism, twin studieshave generally supported the existence of genetic influences overthe disorder's development. One early study found a higherconcordance rate for alcohol abuse between identical twins (54percent) than in fraternal twins (28 percent) (35), while twoother studies did not find such a relationship (25,61). A 1991study examined male and female identical twin pairs, and male andfemale fraternal twin pairs, with one member of the pair meetingthe criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence (64). Researchersfound that identical male twins differed from fraternal maletwins in the frequencies of both alcohol abuse and dependence aswell as other substance abuse and/or dependence. On the otherhand, female identical and fraternal twins were equally likely toabuse alcohol and/or become dependent on other substances, butidentical female twins were more likely to become alcoholdependent. Another study of 356 twin pairs also found higheridentical than fraternal rates of concordance for problemsrelated to alcohol and drug use as well as conduct disorder (52).The same study also noted that among men, heritability played agreater role in the early rather than late onset of alcoholproblems, whereas no such effect was seen among women. However, astudy of 1,030 female twin pairs found evidence for substantialheritability of liability to alcoholism, ranging from 50 to 60percent (40). Thus, twin studies provide general agreement that geneticfactors influence certain aspects of drinking. Most twin studiesalso show genetic influence over pathological drinking, includingthe diagnosis of alcoholism, which appears (like many otherpsychiatric disorders) to be moderately heritable. Whethergenetic factors operate comparably in men and women, and whetherseverity of alcoholism influences twin concordance is less clear.How psychiatric comorbidity may affect heritability of alcoholismalso remains to be clarified. Adoption studies have supported the role of heritable factorsin risk for alcoholism (6,11,71). The results from a series ofstudies conducted in Denmark during the 1970s are typical.Researchers studied male adoptees, later comparing them withnonadopted brothers; female adoptees, later comparing them withnonadopted daughters of alcoholics, comparisons were also madewith matched control adoptees. Sons of alcoholic and nonalcoholicparents who were put up for adoption were compared for thedevelopment of alcoholism. Sons of alcoholic parents were foundto be four times as likely as sons of nonalcoholic parents tohave developed alcoholism; evidence also suggested that thealcoholism in these cases was more severe. The groups differedlittle on other variables, including prevalence of otherpsychiatric illness or "heavy drinking." Being raisedby an alcoholic biological parent did not further increase thelikelihood of developing alcoholism; that is, rates of alcoholismdid not differ between the adopted-away children and theirnonadopted brothers. In contrast, a study of daughters ofalcoholics revealed no elevated risk of alcoholism (23). Another analysis examined factors promoting drug abuse aswell as alcoholism (10). In this study, all classes of illicitdrug use were categorized into a single category of drug abuse.Most of the 40 adopted drug abusers examined had coexisting ASPDand alcoholism; the presence of ASPD correlated highly with drugabuse. Among those without ASPD, a biological background ofalcoholism (i.e., alcoholism in a biological parent) wasassociated with drug abuse. Also, turmoil in the adoptive family(divorce or psychiatric disturbance) was associated withincreased odds for drug abuse in the adoptee. Finally, results from other adoption studies suggest twoforms of alcohol abuse (7,13). The two forms were originallyclassified by C.R. Cloninger as "milieu-limited" ortype 1 alcohol abuse and "male-limited" or type 2alcohol abuse (15). Type 1 alcohol abuse is characterized bymoderate alcohol problems and minimal criminal behavior in theparents, and is generally mild, but occasionally severe,depending on presence of a provocative environment. Type 2 isassociated with severe alcohol abuse and criminality in thebiological fathers. In the adoptees, it is associated withrecurrent problems and appears to be unaffected by postnatalenvironment. While the appropriateness of the biological and environmentalparameters used in the Cloninger study have been challenged, thediscriminating characteristics used to classify individuals astype 1 or 2 alcohol abusers have not been--until recently. A newstudy of familial and nonfamilial male alcoholics hasinvestigated the type 1 and 2 classifications by analyzing theimportance of age differences and cohort distributions (19). Theresearchers showed that among the male alcoholics, there was nota clear distinction between familial and nonfamilial basedalcohol abuse problems and type 1 or 2 characteristics, asreported in previous studies. Additionally, another recentpublication discusses the absence of paternal sociopathy in theetiology of severe alcoholism, and the possibility of a type 3alcoholism (30). This type of research raises obvious questionsas to the validity of the discriminating characteristicsoriginally outlined by Cloninger and currently used in theclassification of individual alcohol abusers. In summary, adoption studies of alcoholism clearly indicatethe role of biological, presumably genetic, factors in thegenesis of alcoholism. They do not exclude, however, a possiblerole for nongenetic, environmental factors as well. Moreover,researchers have suggested more than one kind of biologicalbackground may be conducive to alcoholism. In particular, onepattern of inheritance suggests a relationship between parentalantisocial behavior and alcoholism in the next generation. Thus,adoption studies, like other designs, suggest that even at thegenetic level, alcoholism is not a homogeneous construct. What Is Inherited? While study results indicate a probable genetic component toalcoholism and probably other drug abuse, they lack informationabout what exactly is inherited. For example, do individuals witha family history of drug abuse have an increased susceptibilityor sensitivity to the effects of drugs with reinforcingproperties? If a susceptibility exists, what are its underlyingbiological mechanisms? To understand what might be inherited,both individuals who have a substance abuse problem and animalsmodels of substance abuse are studied. Various types ofinformation can be derived from these studies. As with family,twin, and adoption studies, much more information is availableabout alcoholism as compared with other drugs of abuse. First, it may be possible to identify specific inherited riskmarkers for alcoholism and other substance abuse. A risk markeris a biological trait or characteristic associated with a givencondition. Thus, if an individual is found to have an identifiedmarker for substance abuse, he or she is at risk for developing adrug dependency. To date, no biological characteristic has beenclearly identified as being a risk marker for either alcoholismor substance abuse, although evidence suggests some possiblecandidates. The identification of a valid and reliable riskmarker could provide important information about the fundamentalmechanisms underlying substance abuse and addiction and would bean invaluable aid in diagnosis and treatment. Second, inherited differences in biochemical, physiological,and anatomical processes related to differences in drug responsesmight be identified and studied. Animal models of substance abuseallow thorough biological assays to be carried out. Animalgenetic models of substance abuse consist of strains of animals(usually rodents) that have been selectively bred to eitherexhibit a preference for taking or refusing a drug, or to differin some way in their behavioral or physiological response to adrug. In the case of alcohol, studies suggest that low doses ofalcohol are more stimulating and produce a stronger positivereward in rats bred to have a high preference for alcohol ascompared with normal rats. Experimental data indicate that thismay be due to inherited differences in the dopamine, GABA, andserotonin systems (27,32, 57,73). These differences representinherited traits related to drug taking behavior, and theseanimals can be examined to determine what biological mechanismsare involved in the expression of these traits. Third, the genetic technique of linkage analysis can narrowthe area on a chromosome where a gene may be located. It can leadto the identification of the gene itself which in turn canimprove the understanding of the molecular events that underliethe expression of the gene. There have been few genetic linkagestudies related to substance abuse since few specific biologicaltraits associated with drug dependency have been identified. Somestudies in humans have been carried out related to alcoholism butthe findings of these studies are contradictory and inconclusive. Several studies have reported an association betweenalcoholism and a gene that regulates the number of a type ofdopamine receptor in the brain; other studies have found no suchlink (4,5,8,18,58). The reason for this discrepancy is unclear.One study revealed a relationship between the presence of thegene not only in alcoholics, but in other disorders such asautism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and Tourette'ssyndrome (17). Thus, the presence of this particular gene, whilenot uniquely specific for alcoholism, may cause an alteration inthe brain's dopamine system that somehow exacerbates orcontributes to alcohol abuse. Few studies have examined possible inherited biologicalmechanisms associated with the abuse of other drugs. For example,strains of rats and mice that differ in their sensitivity to thereinforcing effects of cocaine and in their cocaine-seekingbehavior have been observed to also have differences in theactual number of dopamine-containing neurons and receptors incertain brain areas. Also, a comparison of one strain of rat thatself-administers drugs of abuse at higher rates than anotherstrain, found that the higher self-administering strain exhibiteddifferences in the intracellular mechanisms that control activityin some of the neurons in the brain reward system (see box 3-2)as compared with the low self-administering strain. Additionalstudies exploring the role of genes in drug response are neededto more fully understand the full range of biological factorsassociated with drug abuse. The recent development of new andmore sensitive techniques to analyze brain activity and processeswill facilitate these studies. ROLE OF LEARNING The learning that occurs during drug-taking activities is animportant force in the continued use and craving of drugs(59,72). Drugs of abuse often produce feelings of intensepleasure in the user. In addition, such drugs produce changes innumerous organ systems (e.g., cardiovascular, digestive,endocrine). Both the behavioral and physiological effects of adrug occur in the context of the individual's drug-seeking anddrug-using environment. As a result, environmental cues arepresent before and during an individual's drug use that areconsistently associated with a drug's behavioral andphysiological effects. With repetition the cues becomeconditioned stimuli, that on presentation, even in the absence ofthe drug, evoke automatic changes in organ systems and sensationsthat the individual reports as drug craving. This is analogous toPavlov's classical conditioning experiments in which dogssalivated at the cue of a bell following repeated pairing of foodpresentation with a ringing bell. Evidence for this effect isseen in numerous studies showing that animals seek out placesassociated with reinforcing drugs and that the physiologicaleffects of drugs can be classically conditioned in both animalsand humans (72). Conditioning also occurs in relation to the withdrawaleffects of drugs (75). It was observed that opiate addicts whowere drug free for months and thus should not have had any signsof opiate withdrawal, developed withdrawal symptoms (e.g.,yawning, sniffling, tearing of the eyes) when talking about drugsin group therapy sessions. This phenomenon, termed conditionedwithdrawal, results from environmental stimuli acquiring theability, through classical conditioning, to elicit signs andsymptoms of pharmacological withdrawal. Conditioned withdrawalcan also play a role in relapse to drug use in abstinentindividuals. The emergence of withdrawal symptoms as a result ofexposure to conditioned cues can motivate an individual to seekout and use drugs. These associations are difficult to reverse. In theory,repeated presentation of the environmental cues, without the drugshould extinguish the conditioned association. Animal studiesindicate that stopping the conditioned response is difficult toachieve and does not erase the original learning. These types ofstudies examining drug conditioning have found that variousaspects of extinguished responses can either be reinstated with asingle pairing of the drug and environmental cue, can bereinstated with a single dose of drug in the absence of theenvironmental cue, or canspontaneously recover (72). Thus, exposure to environmental cues associated with drug usein the past can act as a stimulus for voluntary drug- seekingbehavior. If the individual succeeds in finding and taking thedrug, the chain of behaviors is further reinforced by thedrug-induced, rewarding feelings and the effects of the drug onother organ systems (59). The effects of the environmentalstimuli can be similar to the priming effects of a dose of thedrug. The complexity of human responses to drugs of abuse, coupledwith the number of drugs that are abused, complicatesunderstanding of the role of biology in drug use and abuse.Nevertheless, scientists know the site of action of many drugs inthe brain, and sophisticated new devices are expected to improvethat understanding. A genetic component to drug use and abuse islikely, but it has not been fully characterized. SUMMARY Underlying all alcohol and drug problems are the actions andeffects that drugs of abuse exert. It is important to understandhow drugs work in the brain, why certain drugs have the potentialfor being abused, and what, if any, biological differences existamong individuals in their susceptibility to abuse drugs. Two biological factors contribute to substance abuse andaddiction: the effects drugs of abuse exert on the individual,and the biological status of the individual taking drugs. Theeffects the drugs exert can be either acute or chronic and willvary depending on the drug and its route of administration. Mostdrugs of abuse influence the brain's reward system. Thepleasurable sensations that drug use can produce reinforcedrug-seeking and -taking behaviors. These actions differ withdifferent drugs: and, thus, some substances have greaterpotential for abuse and addiction than others. Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances canproduce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/ortolerance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal. The behavioralchanges from continued drug use are directly related to thesebiological changes. An individual's drug- craving, -seeking, and-taking behaviors are amplified through the neuroadaptive changesin the brain reward system that occur with chronicadministration. Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking and-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmental stimuli(i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug- craving anddrug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drug userswho have been drug-free for months, even years. Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchersagree that genetic factors play some part in the heritability ofalcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.No conclusive evidence has been found to explain precisely whatis inherited or the overall importance of this inheritedmaterial. It has been hypothesized that there are probablynumerous genes (as opposed to one) that interact in complex ways,and whose expressions are affected by a myriad of environmentalfactors. Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factorneither ensures nor protects against drug dependency. BOX 3-1: Neuropharmacology Neurons are the cells that process information in the brain.Neurotransmitters are chemicals released by neurons tocommunicate with other neurons. When a neuron is activated itreleases a neurotransmitter into the gap between two neurons (seefigure 3-1). The molecules of the neurotransmitter move acrossthe gap and attach to proteins, called receptors, in the outerwall of an adjacent cell. Once the receptor is activated, theneurotransmitter is removed from the gap, either by reabsorptioninto the neuron that released it or by being broken downchemically. For each neurotransmitter in the brain, there are specificreceptors to which it can attach. Receptors and receptor subtypescan activate a variety of membrane and cellular mechanisms. Inthis way, one chemical can have diverse effects in differentareas of the brain. Many chemicals have been identified asneurotransmitters. Some particularly relevant to the reportedpleasurable sensations associated with drug abuse includedopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, opioids and otherneuropeptides, gamma amino butyric acid (GABA), and glutamate. A neuron can have thousands of receptors for many differentneurotransmitters. Some neurotransmitters activate neurons(excitatory neurotransmitters), while others decrease neuronactivity (inhibitory neurotransmitters). Some receptors arebiochemically coupled: the activation of one modulates thefunction of the other, either increasing or decreasing itsactivity. A neuron can also have receptors for the chemical itreleases. In this way, neurons can regulate their release of aparticular neurotransmitter. Thus, these so-called autoreceptorsact as a feedback mechanism. The activity of a neuron will bedetermined by the cumulative activity of all its variousreceptors. Drugs that work in the brain, including drugs of abuse, alternormal neuropharmacological activity through a variety ofdifferent mechanisms. They can affect the production, release, orreuptake of a chemical, they can mimic or block the action of achemical at a receptor, or they can interfere with or enhance theactivity of a membrane or cellular mechanism associated with areceptor. Prolonged drug use has the potential to alter each ofthese processes. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 3-2: The Brain Reward System Eating, drinking, sexual, and maternal behaviors areactivities essential for the survival of the individual and thespecies. Natural selection, in order to ensure that thesebehaviors occur, has imbued them with powerful rewardingproperties. The brain reward system evolved to process thesenatural reinforcers. The reward system is made up of various brain structures. Akey part of this system for drug reward appears to be themesocorticolimbic pathway (MCLP). The MCLP is composed of theaxons of neuronal cell bodies in the middle part of the brain(i.e., ventral tegmental area) projecting to areas in the frontpart of the brain (i.e., the nucleus accumbens, a nucleus in thelimbic system, a network of brain structures associated withcontrol of emotion, perception, motivation, gratification, andmemory; medial prefrontal cortex, part of the front of the braininvolved with higher ordered thinking) (see figure 3-2). Ventraltegmental neurons release the neurotransmitter dopamine toregulate the activity of the cells in the nucleus accumbens andthe medial prefrontal cortex. Other parts of the reward systeminclude the nucleus accumbens and its connections with otherlimbic structures, and other regions in the front part of thebrain (i.e., substantia innominata-ventral palladium). Thenucleus accumbens also sends signals back to the ventraltegmental area. Finally, other neuronal pathways containingdifferent neurotransmitters regulate the activity of themesocorticolimbic dopamine system and may also be involved inmediating the rewarding properties of drugs of abuse. SOURCE: Koob, G.F., "Drugs of Abuse: Anatomy,Pharmacology, and Function of Reward Pathways," Trends inPharmacological Sciences 13:177-184, 1992; Koob, G.F.,"Neural Mechanisms of Drug Reinforcement," P.W. Kalivasand H.H. Samson (eds.), The Neurobiology of Drug and AlcoholAddiction, Annals of the American Academy of Sciences654:171-191, 1992. BOX 3-3: How Drugs of Abuse Affect the Chemical Release ofDopamine The rewarding properties of stimulant drugs such as cocaineand amphetamines are due directly to the effects of the chemicaldopamine. Opiates, on the other hand, indirectly stimulatedopamine by activating other chemical pathways, which in turnincrease dopamine activity. Similarly, alcohol, barbiturates, andbenzodiazepines likely have an indirect action which increasesdopamine activity. All of these drugs have reinforcingproperties. Phencyclidine (PCP) is also a strong reinforcer butits relationship, if any, to activity in the dopamine pathway hasyet to be established. Other drugs are either weak reinforcers orhave not been shown to support self-administration in animalexperiments. Nicotine stimulates dopamine neurons; however, itseffect is modest when compared with cocaine or amphetamine.Likewise, caffeine is a weak reinforcer, but the precisemechanisms of its reinforcement are unclear. Finally, cannabisand lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) also produce positiveeffects that clearly support their use. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 3-4: The Two Types of Tolerance The two types of tolerance are: dispositional(pharmacokinetic) and pharmacodynamic. Dispositional tolerancedevelops when the amount of drug reaching active sites in thebrain is reduced in some way. Generally, this arises from anincreased breakdown of the drug or a change in its distributionin the rest of the body. Thus, more drug must be taken to achievethe same blood levels or concentrations at the active sites inthe brain. Pharmacodynamic tolerance represents a reduced response ofthe brain to the same level of drug. It develops during thecontinued and sustained presence of the drug. It may be that themechanism of adaptation may differ from drug to drug and dependon the original mechanism of action of a given drug. The neteffect is that more drug is required to overcome this newneuronal adaptation to produce an equivalent pharmacologiceffect. Although dispositional tolerance represents a component oftolerance to some drugs (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates), in mostcases much or all of the tolerance which develops to drugs withsignificant abuse potential can be attributed to pharmacodynamictolerance. Tolerance can contribute to drug- taking behavior byrequiring that an individual take larger and larger doses of adrug to achieve a desired effect. SOURCES: Jaffe, J.H., "Drug Addiction and DrugAbuse," The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, A.G.Gilman, T.W. Rall, A.S. Nies, and P. Taylor (eds.), (New York:Pergammon Press, 1990). Kalant, H., "The Nature ofAddiction: An Analysis of the Problem," Molecular andCellular Aspects of the Drug Addictions, A. Goldstein, (ed).,(New York, NY: Springer Verlag, 1989). _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-32IA031-000652-B047-105http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132121 text/html 43656HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:45 GMTContent-length: 43438 CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY TECHNOLOGIES FORUNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION USGovernment Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY Availability is a precondition for drug abuse and dependency.A person cannot become a drug abuser unless a drug is availableto be used. Drug availability is often thought of as mere physicalpresence of an abusable substance. In addition, however,availability is affected by social norms (social availability),prices (economic availability), and personal values (subjectiveavailability) (see table 4-1). Marketing techniques for bothlicit and illicit drugs can alter social, economic, andsubjective availability, and thus are addressed in this chapter(see box 4-1). A substantial body of literature addressing the relationshipbetween drug availability and drug demand does exist. However,most of this information addresses tobacco and alcohol, ratherthan illicit drugs. In addition to conducting a literature search(primarily of mass media), the Office of Technology Assessment(OTA) contracted with the National Center for Juvenile Justice(NCJJ) to conduct a survey of juvenile probation officers on theperceived availability of drugs and to conduct a workshop onavailability issues (see appendix F for a list of participants). AVAILABILITY Availability is a concept usually reserved for the supply-side of the substance abuse policy equation (i.e., making drugsavailable to supply an already existing demand). However, theproximity of drugs and drug dealers to potential users, and theease with which these substances can be purchased or otherwiseobtained can affect demand, use, and abuse. This is especiallytrue when one considers aggressive marketing efforts bysuppliers, who seek to create or expand the demand for drugs byconvincing potential consumers of the benefits, acceptability,and availability of these substances. While availability is aconcept that applies to the whole range of drugs, most of what weknow about its role in drug use and abuse comes from research inthe arena of alcohol and tobacco abuse (1,9,10,14) (see box 4-2and figure 4-1). Research has shown that when alcohol is more available, theprevalence of drinking, the amount of alcohol consumed, and theheavy use of alcohol all increase (5). Alternatively, theliterature also suggests that physical conditions that restrictalcohol availability reduce rates of alcohol consumption (1). Areview of alcohol-related literature reveals that availabilitycan be conceptualized in four different, yet related categories. Physical Availability Physical availability refers to a basic element--theproximity and accessibility of an abusable substance. Simplelogic dictates that if a substance is absent, it cannot be used.Government interdiction and law enforcement policies target thephysical availability of illicit drugs. Other policies, such aslimitations on the point-of-sale, hours, or age of purchasers,target the physical availability of other abusable drugs, such astobacco and alcohol products. Responses to the OTA survey of juvenile probationadministrators indicated that respondents perceived two ways inwhich physical availability is increased: through contaminationby outsiders (e.g., youth gangs, tourists, foreigners) bringingdrugs into the community, and through proximity to a source ofdrugs or alcohol. Gangs and organized drug trafficking were mentioned often byrespondents as reasons for increases in the availability ofdrugs. Respondents from all over the country, representing bothrural and urban areas, registered concerns about gangs and theirrole in marketing and trafficking drugs. A respondent fromCanton, Mississippi, for example, attributed the increase in drugavailability simply to "gang leaders from California."A respondent from Waterbury, Connecticut, was more explicit aboutthe age and ethnicity of the gang influences, attributing theobserved increase in drugs to the "emergence of gangactivity for the 12-to-15-year-old age group, particularly in theHispanic and black ethnic groupings." A respondent fromPaducah, Kentucky, said that the "increase in drugs has beenfrom gangs entering the community from Memphis, Tennessee,Arkansas, and Chicago, Illinois." The respondent fromDavenport, Iowa, attributed the increase to attempts by"Chicago gang members to establish crack markets in QuadCities--lots of arrests of Chicago residents includingjuveniles." Even cities with an established history of youthgangs identified gangs as being responsible for increases indrugs. For example, a respondent from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,attributed the observed increase to the fact that "gangparticipation has become increasingly sophisticated." However, gangs were not the only phenomena associated withincreasing the physical availability of drugs and alcohol. Manyrespondents were concerned with the potential for contaminationdue to proximity to areas thought to be established drug marketsor through proximity to the means for widespread drugdistribution (e.g., major highways and roads, prisons). Physical availability is necessary but not solely responsiblefor drug use. For example, drugs often are physically availablebut are not always used. Also, seeking to prevent or reduce druguse solely by eliminating or reducing physical availability maybe doomed to failure, since it has proven to be very difficult tokeep drugs out of communities. So although the concept ofphysical availability is important, it is limited, both as acause and a cure to drug use and abuse. Economic Availability Economic availability may be increased when a person hasaccess to surplus income or the costs of drugs are low, illegaldrug sales are a key component of the local economy, or the priceper unit of a drug or drugs in general is reduced. In describingthe difference between "private" and"flagrant" drug markets, one article specified some ofthe dimensions of the changing economics of addiction: If cigarettes were sold only by the carton and whiskey onlyby the case, the effect would be to decrease the totalconsumption of tobacco and whiskey. Presumably, few people wouldstart smoking cigarettes if the first experimental purchase werea $20 carton rather than a $1 pack. Similarly, fewer poor peoplewould drink if they were required to buy whiskey by the case. Asimilar effect would, in all likelihood, hold true if open airand flagrant drug markets were eliminated (3). In addition to overall conditions, economic availability ofall substances can be affected by the pricing of products. Forlicit products such as alcohol and tobacco, economic availabilityis also affected by taxes levied by federal, state, and localauthorities. In 1989, federal excise taxes on tobacco, alcoholicbeverages, and motor fuels raised $24.4 billion in revenue--about 2.5 percent of total federal revenues (11). Excisetaxes--taxes on specific products--while representing a smallpart of total taxes, are an important consideration in theeconomic availability of licit substances. Excise taxes are seen by many as having three impacts: o to raise revenue for government programs; o to make certain harmful substances less affordable and,hence, less used and abused; and o to cover societal costs that accrue from the use of varioussubstances (e.g., environmental costs from the use of gasoline,health costs resulting from smoking and drinking). Whether taxation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco productsis an appropriate means of reducing societal costs caused bytheir use is a continuing public debate. Some argue that thepublic health costs and other external costs are so significantas to justify substantial excise taxes. Others counter that suchtaxes are regressive--impacting the poor more than the rich--andreduce the satisfaction experienced by millions of sensibledrinkers without necessarily reducing the harm caused byexcessive drinkers (8). Social Availability Social availability refers to those factors within thecommunity conducive to drug use. One study explored alternativeexplanations for reported declines in cocaine use among highschool seniors, using questionnaire data from annual nationwidesurveys conducted from 1976 to 1988 (2). Results of this analysisindicated that although lifestyle factors showed strong linkswith the use of marijuana and cocaine, these factors had notdeveloped trends in ways that could account for declines in theuse of either drug. Reported physical availability of either drughad not been reduced. Instead, increases in perceived risks anddisapproval appear to have contributed substantially to therecent declines in the use of marijuana and cocaine. The studyconcluded that it was important to lower demand by reducingsocial availability, as opposed to trying to reduce supply byreducing physical availability. Increasingly, grass roots community action groups are workingto diminish both the subjective and social domains ofavailability. These efforts usually entail developing andpresenting public awareness and fact-based education to consumersand potential consumers, decreasing community tolerance for druguse while increasing collective pride in the community, anddeveloping or otherwise demonstrating alternatives to substanceuse and abuse. Subjective Availability Subjective availability encompasses individual differences inhow people perceive their access to substances. For example, anindividual may choose to use one type of abusable substance, butnot another. Or, an individual may choose to use a drug (e.g.,cocaine), but only in certain forms (i.e., a person may choose tosnort a line of cocaine but refuse to smoke or inject it). Theperson who refuses to use illicit drugs has interjected his orher personal values in a way to make illicit drugs unavailable,even if they are physically and economically available. One reviewer identified four components of subjectiveavailability as it relates to alcohol: 1) willingness to go outof one's way to purchase alcohol, 2) perceived convenience ofbuying alcohol, 3) discomfort about buying alcohol, and4)?importance of the price of alcohol. Subjective and socialavailability were demonstrated to have direct influences onalcohol consumption, and subjective and social aspects ofavailability can mediate and outweigh the influence of physicalavailability (1). Subjective availability is likely to increase when anindividual holds attitudes or values favorable toward use; livesin a community that condones, or even celebrates, drug use; andhas ready access to drugs that are highly valued, particularly ifthose agents are addictive. ARE DRUGS READILY AVAILABLE? A number of surveys exists for measuring drug use (seechapter 2). In addressing the question of whether drugs arereadily available, several measures exist (e.g., marketingfigures related to alcohol and tobacco sales, tallies of illegaldrugs seized by law enforcement authorities). In addition toquantitative measures of drug use, many people perceive variousdrugs to be widely available. In an attempt to measure theseanecdotal perceptions, OTA surveyed juvenile probationadministrators randomly selected from a database maintained byNCJJ. The purpose of the survey was to identify communities thathave experienced a sudden, observable change in the abuse ofdrugs or alcohol in the past 12 months and to collect preliminarydata about the events and circumstances leading to the change inabuse. Such anecdotal evidence could be gathered from a number ofgroups; OTA chose to survey juvenile justice officials because oftheir involvement in drug issues and the availability of anationwide database of such officials who could be accessed. Responses were received from 246 juvenile justiceadministrators across 38 States. The data provide a glimpse atsome of the drug and alcohol availability issues being addressedby juvenile courts and probation departments across the UnitedStates. Seven findings resulted from the survey: o Most respondents consider substance abuse to be a seriousproblem in their communities. Using a scale of 1 (not serious) to10 (very serious), the respondents, on average, rated the problemof substance abuse among juveniles in their communities at 7.4.In addition, 85.8 percent of the respondents rated substanceabuse seriousness at six or above. o Almost half of the respondents indicated a dramaticincrease in availability of drugs and/or alcohol in theircommunities. A total of 46.7 percent of the survey respondentsreported a dramatic increase in the availability of drugs and/oralcohol in their communities. Some 50.8 percent of therespondents indicated "no dramatic changes" inperceived availability of drugs and/or alcohol. Only 2.4 percentindicated a dramatic decrease in availability. o Factors affecting physical availability (i.e., sales and/ordistribution of drugs) were selected most often and were ratedhighest in terms of increasing availability of drugs. Given anopportunity to select and rate commonly cited reasons forincreased availability of drugs and alcohol, the respondentsselected items that were strongly associated with the sales anddistribution of drugs and alcohol (see table 4-2). o Crack cocaine and cocaine were much more likely than otherdrugs to show dramatic increases in availability. Respondentswere given an opportunity to report whether they had noticed achange (ranging from a dramatic decrease to a dramatic increase)in the availability of a range of drugs, including alcohol. Crack(24.5 percent) and cocaine (17.8 percent) had the highestpercentage of respondents indicating a "dramaticincrease" in availability. The next closest were inhalantsat 14.6 percent (see table 4-3). o Economic conditions and the perceived lack of realopportunities for many youths were frequently cited as factorscontributing to the increased availability of drugs in manycommunities (see box 4-3). o Survey respondents listed several factors contributing to asense of social availability, including lack of parental/guardiansupervision, consequences for alcohol and drug offenses,alternative activities, as well as portrayals of alcohol and druguse by the mass media as a glamorous and healthy activity (seebox 4-4). o Substance abuse prevention and early intervention effortswere rated highest as important community responses to increasesin the availability of drugs and alcohol. Over 80 percent ofrespondents agreed that an increase in prevention andintervention efforts was an important response to an increase inthe availability of drugs. Trailing behind prevention and earlyintervention were increased law enforcement (68.4 percent),increased treatment (68.2 percent), and stiffer judicialpenalties (68.0 percent). Respondents were also asked to rate therelative effectiveness of the listed responses to availability ona scale of 1 (not effective) to 10 (very effective). Preventionand early intervention (6.4 percent) was rated the highest interms of perceived effectiveness, but not much higher than lawenforcement (6.2 percent), increased treatment (6.0 percent), andstiffer judicial penalties (6.2 percent) (see table 4-4). MARKETING Standard marketing strategies used to increase consumption oflegal goods are used in equally effective ways to increaseconsumption of illicit drugs. Marketing refers to efforts byindividuals interested in the sale or trade of a product tomaintain or increase sales by maintaining market shares andopening new markets. Marketing includes efforts to increase theperceived availability of a product or products by enhancing thesense of both subjective and social availability in prospectiveconsumers. To the extent that those efforts are successful, thenpurveyors of consumer products will attempt to make the supplymatch the demand (physical availability) at a cost that maximizesboth sales to consumers (economic availability) and profits tothe sellers. Illegal Drugs Illegal drugs are marketed aggressively in the United States.Some of the strategies for marketing illicit drugs are verysimilar to those strategies for marketing licit products.Sometimes the distinction between licit and illicit products isdifficult to determine. Take, for example, the case of so-calledhead shops. Drug paraphernalia are items sold specifically topromote the preparation, manufacture, or marketing of drugs. Headshops may sell a wide variety of products that are oftenassociated with specific drugs, for example: o Stash cases, rolling machines, pipes, bongs (marijuana). o Bottles, concert kits, brass straws, spoons (cocaine). o Glass pipes, vials, stems, screens, shaker bottles (crackcocaine). o Testing kits, scales, adulterants (heroin). o Canisters, balloons, tanks (inhalants). Head shops represent the most shrewd form of pro-drugmarketing by targeting mostly young customers and providing thetechnology and products required to increase the ability of usersto procure, prepare, hide, and ingest drugs. Despite Federallegislation prohibiting the sale of drug paraphernalia (18 USCAp4), heads shops continue to flourish. These shops can avoid theintention of the law because the definition of what constitutesdrug paraphernalia is ambiguous and open to interpretation. Headshop owners will simply emphasize the legitimate use of theirproducts. For example, they may sell a scale designed to weighdrugs as a product to weigh food for dieting purposes.Specifically, head shops contribute to the drug abuse problem by: o sending a double message--if drugs are so bad, why is drugparaphernalia sold openly? o operating, in some cases, in the guise of candy stores,exposing children to drug paraphernalia and stimulating curiosityabout drugs; o serving to facilitate the use, marketing, and sale ofdrugs; o selling items designed as conversation pieces which serveto glamorize drug use; and o becoming hubs for drug abusers, indirectly serving toincrease crime in the neighborhoods in which they operate. Another example of a marketing strategy used for licitsubstances and now being adapted for illicit substances is totalmarketing, which consists of four basic strategies-- promotion,product, price, and place--to maximize theexposure of a productin a positive light to the most likely consumer groups (4). A key component of total marketing is promotion, oradvertising particular product lines to appeal to particularsubpopulations of the consuming public. Promotion is a standardpractice in the marketing of legitimate products-- it is also avery powerful force for manipulating consumer habits. Promotion includes activities like advertising andsponsorship of sporting and entertainment events (7). For illicitdrugs, promotional activities may include sponsoring a party inwhich the illegal drug is dispensed free or at a dramaticdiscount along with other attractions (e.g., sex, drugparaphernalia) (15). Total marketing also entails the development of a productline that can be targeted to subpopulations within the largerconsumer community. For example, alcohol and tobaccomanufacturers will produce an array of products targeted atseveral consumer groups--premium beers for one group, winecoolers for another, rugged masculine cigarettes for one group,thin feminine cigarettes for another. Similarly, purveyors ofillegal drugs have begun to develop product lines--powderedcocaine for one group, crack cocaine for another. The use ofbrand names is one technique used by marketers to establish aniche in the larger market, which is one reason people becomeunwilling participants in the marketing wars between Coke andPepsi or Visa and American Express or even Bud and Bud Light. A great deal of uniformity exists in the price, quantity, andquality of drugs sold in the same city, especially in the sameneighborhood or street market. As a result, a dealer willoccasionally try to capture a larger share of the market byincreasing the weight or strength of the product and applying abrand name for recognition (3). In Washington, DC, for example, brand name heroin is soldunder the name of "Smurf," "Mr. T,""Brown Wrapper," and "Black Poison."Phencyclidine (PCP) is occasionally sold under the brand name"Hinkley" (after John Hinkley, the man who shot RonaldReagan), "Gofer" (a reference to a television characteron the "Love Boat," which is a popular street name forPCP), and "Keys to St. E's" (a reference to a localmental institution). Crack cocaine is sometimes hawked under thebrand names of "Conan," "007," and"Baseball." Pricing is the process of assigning a retail cost to eachitem in a given product-line that matches the ability of thetargeted subgroup to pay. By producing a line of products at awide range of prices, the purveyor of the goods can maximize theconsumer population. For example, whether a consumer of tobaccoproducts is smoking low-priced generic cigarettes from thesupermarket or high-priced cigarettes from the tobacconist, thatindividual is included in the range of consumers. Illegal drugsellers also price their particular products to move. Forexample, while powdered cocaine may be too expensive for someeconomically disadvantaged consumers to purchase regularly,almost everyone can afford a $5 vial of crack cocaine. Drugdealers also manipulate the cost for their goods to attractcustomers. Once a product has been developed, promoted, and priced tomove, a place must be found to most effectively sell the product.Legal nonmedical drugs are packaged and made available at retailoutlets in such a way as to make their purchase as convenient aspossible. Wine coolers, for example, are a type of beverage aimedparticularly at women and young people. With its sweet, lighttaste, low prices, and convenient packaging, the wine coolercompetes with beer and soft drinks for occasions such as picnicsand sports events, where traditional wine products are unlikelyto be consumed. Wine cooler ads promote just these types of uses.Packaging has taken on a beer or soft drink look, and theindustry is successfully obtaining access to convenience storesand supermarket outlets to make purchases easier (6). Illicit drugs can also be packaged and made available at"retail" outlets where purchasers can convenientlyobtain the product(s) of their choice. One news account suggeststhat "mass marketing that would have made McDonald'sproud" is responsible for the evolution of crack cocainefrom a drug derided as "garbage rock" just a few yearsago into a national craze. Crack was not invented, it was created by a sharp crowd ofsinister geniuses who took a simple production technique to makea packaged, ready to consume form of the product with low unitprice to entice massive numbers of consumers. Cocaine powderrequired an investment of nearly $75 for a gram, but a hit ofcrack costs as little as $5. Equally alluring was crack'sincredible "high"--an instantaneous euphoria because itwas smoked--that could create addicts in weeks (16). Two kinds of retail drug markets exist in the United States:the private market place and the open-air or flagrant drugmarkets (3). The private drug market involves transactions thatoccur between people who are known to one another or are referredby a trusted acquaintance. Referrals in the private marketplaceare usually not very far removed from the original connection;they may be classmates in college, business associates,relatives, or persons belonging to the same club. The familiarity of the parties in the private drug marketusually means that there is a reduced level of public exposureand violence. The desire to keep the flow of traffic to the siteof transactions at a minimum means that sales in the privatemarketplace tend to be of larger quantities of drugs than thosein street transactions. Because most of the transactions takeplace "behind closed doors" or in some otherclandestine fashion, a high degree of impermeability exists inthe dealer-customer relationship (3). Examples of private drugmarkets include "speak easies" during prohibition andthe "traditional" (i.e., before crack) cocaine markets. Another aspect of the private drug market is the ritualisticaspect of procuring the product. Consider, for example, theritual associated with purchasing cocaine. One author describes"a day in the office" of a street-level cocainedistribution network. The office itself is a highly structuredoperation, complete with receptionists to screen potentialcustomers, guards, a "catcher"--held on retainer toretrieve cocaine thrown out of a window during a bust-- and themerchant who sets prices, arranges to barter goods and services,gives credit, and makes day-to-day decisions regarding sales(15). A typical transaction involves a positive identification ofthe buyer, a greeting and brief social contact (e.g., handshake,hug, kiss) between the merchant and the buyer, a formal requestfor an amount of cocaine, and a discussion of method of payment(e.g., cash, barter). Sometimes the transaction involves a briefdiscussion of the relative quality of the drugs in the street, asample of the drug available from this particular merchant, andpossibly some haggling over price. The public weighing andpackaging of the cocaine is central to this type of transaction.The scale, in fact, becomes a central point of power andauthority in the business; only those with the highest level oftrust and respect can operate the scale (15). Open air and flagrant drug markets, on the other hand, tendto be far more impersonal and much less ritualistic than theprivate marketplace. Many of the concepts used by mass marketersof licit products are used in the flagrant marketplace--targetedconsumer groups, small and widely affordable units of sale,prepackaged goods with fixed prices, convenient retail outlets.One research team describes the mechanics of a typical open-airdrug market transaction: A car drives down a residential street with enormousapartment buildings on either side. Young men wave to the car; afew of the more aggressive dealers step into traffic to signalautos to stop. Even before the wheels have stopped rolling,several young men are at the window; "You looking?"says one. "Smoke, smoke. I've got crack. Whatever youwant" says the other peering over his shoulder. The answerfrom the driver is simple and short: "Two dimes." Twosmall brown glass vials are exchanged for a 20 dollar bill andthe transaction is over in a matter of seconds (3). Although the exact method for conducting a transaction mayvary slightly from place to place around the country, the essenceof the transaction is remarkably similar across the UnitedStates. Flagrant or open-air drug markets have many of the samestructural characteristics as legal marketplaces: demographic andproduct segmentation, brand loyalty, cartel pricing, aggressivesalesmen working on commission, and careful recruitment of loyaland productive employees (3). Alcohol and Tobacco The marketing of legal yet addictive substances, especiallytobacco and alcohol, has become controversial in recent years.Issues stemming from the marketing of licit substances includeadvertising, taxation, and labeling. Advertising Alcohol and tobacco products have long been advertised in theUnited States. In the 1950s and 1960s, these products wereadvertised with minimal restrictions. Following the SurgeonGeneral's report on the hazards of smoking in 1964 (13), publicsentiment against cigarette advertising increased. The mostfamous example of Federal regulation is the ban on broadcastcigarette advertising in January 1971 resulting from the passageby Congress of the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1969(Public Law 91-222). In recent years, attention has focused onlegislative proposals to ban all forms of cigarette advertising,and to control the advertising of alcoholic products. Taxation The federal government currently levies excise taxes onalcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on alltypes of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their currentlevels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack 12-ounce cans)carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of winecarries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettescarries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. A number of studies in the 1980s focused on the impact offederal excise taxes on cigarette consumption. A 1986 studyconcluded that an 8- to 16-cent increase in the federal cigaretteexcise tax would encourage from 1 to 2 million young persons and8,000 to 1.5 million adults to quit smoking or not to start.Thus, a tax increase could prevent hundreds of thousands ofpremature smoking-related deaths, while a tax decrease wouldcontribute to the disease burden of tobacco (14). The GeneralAccounting Office, in a review of the literature on teenagesmoking and excise taxes, concluded that an increase in thecigarette excise tax would be an effective way to reduce teenagesmoking (12). Labeling Federal law addresses the labeling of both cigarettes andalcoholic beverages. In both cases, Congress declared that thepurpose of such labeling is to make sure the American public isinformed about the potential health hazards that may result fromconsumption (36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213). Manufacturers ofcigarettes must use one of four rotating warnings on eachpackage, while manufacturers of alcoholic beverages must post aprescribed warning (see box 4-5). Proponents of labeling havestated that such warnings do not create legal restrictions, butonly help to inform the consumer about possible health risks.Opponents of labeling have argued that no scientific proof existsto link labeling with reduced use or improved health. SUMMARY The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependencyincludes availability and marketing. A person cannot become adrug abuser unless a drug is physically available to be used. Inaddition, however, availability is affected by social norms(e.g., factors within the community conducive to drug use,including level of parental or guardian supervision, lack ofconsequences for alcohol and drug offenses, lack of alternativeactivities, portrayals of alcohol and other drug use by friendsand the media as a glamorous and healthy activity), prices(economic availability), and personal values (subjectiveavailability). The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attackthe physical availability of illicit drugs through lawenforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increaseddrug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federalinmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugsare still widely available. Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs canalter social, economic, and subjective availability. Keycomponents of marketing include the promotion and advertising ofparticular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulationsof the consuming public; development of a product line that canbe targeted to subpopulations within the larger community ofconsumers; pricing strategies to attract new buyers; andidentification of retail outlets for sales. Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusablesubstances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs byplacing a variety of restrictions on how such products may bemarketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as towhether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. BOX 4-1: What Is Marketing? Marketing includes any activity involved in moving goods fromproducer to consumer. In the context of drugs, marketing includesa variety of activities covering a wide range of licit andillicit substances. For licit substances, such as alcohol, tobacco, andinhalants, it includes market research, advertising, pricing, andtaxation. A number of government policies in the marketingarena--taxes, advertising restrictions, point- of-sale controls,and age restrictions on certain products-- directly affects theavailability of licit, yet abusable, substances. For illicit drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, andhallucinogens, marketing techniques can include street markets,gang activity, and private, closely controlled distribution andsales systems. Government control in this area--prohibiting thepossession, use, and sale of such substances--likewise affectsthe availability of these substances. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. Box 4-2: Availability and Tobacco The evolution of tobacco from a relatively rare productrequiring preparation, thought, and ritual to a product that isubiquitous, prepackaged, and consumed without much fanfareprovides a graphic illustration of how increased physicalavailability of a product can dramatically increase drug use,abuse, and addiction. Three major developments in the history oftobacco use paved the way for making this drug imminentlyavailable for use by consumers: the invention of the cigarettemanufacturing machine, the invention and perfection of matches,and the proliferation of the use of vending machines to selltobacco products. The first successful cigarette manufacturing machine wasdeveloped in 1881 by James A. Bonsack. This machine had thecapacity to produce more than 200 cigarettes per minute. Prior tothe advent of this machine, smokers had to roll each cigarette byhand, a time-consuming and often ritualistic process. Once rolled, a cigarette must be lit to be consumed. This wasno easy task prior to the introduction of the safety match, firstinvented in 1896 but not perfected until 1912. Without matches,smokers were required to enter cigar stores to light cigarettesfrom gas or oil lamps provided specifically for the purpose oflighting tobacco products. These developments changed forever theway that cigarettes were consumed by making them readilyavailable for consumption at any moment during the day. Insteadof a thoughtful, often ritualistic exercise, cigaretteconsumption has evolved for some into an almost unconscioushabit. Following the invention of the manufacturing machine andthe safety match, the rate of cigarette consumption soared duringthe late 19th and early 20th century. The use of vending machines may be the most revolutionaryaspect of tobacco availability. First introduced in 1926, vendingmachines require no sales person, are not restricted by selectedhours of operation, and are not concerned with the age orlegality of the purchaser. Vending machines make cigarettesavailable almost anywhere, appearing in bars, hotels, train andbus stations, airports, hotels, and restaurants. By 1953, nearlyhalf a million cigarette machines existed and were responsiblefor sales of more than 3 billion packs of cigarettes a year. Theupward trend in sales from cigarette machines continued throughthe mid- 1970s: by 1973 more than 900,000 vending machines werein operation, selling almost 5 billion packs per year. Some earlyresearch indicated that the existence of vending machinesthroughout the physical environment is a major inducement toimpulse smoking. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994, based on J.Mosher, "The Environmental Approach to Prevention," TheCalifornia Prevention Network Journal 3, 42-44 (1990); R. Tenant,The American Cigarette Industry: A Study in Economic Analysis andPublic Policy (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950); R.Sobel, They Satisfy: The Cigarette in American life (Garden City,NJ: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978); Marshall, M.V., AutomaticMerchandising; A Study of the Problems and Limitations of Vending(Cambridge, MA: The Riverside Press, 1954). BOX 4-3: Survey Comments, Economic Availability Economic factors impact on perceptions of availability in anumber of ways. For example, because Sioux Falls, South Dakota,was experiencing a "strong economy . . . juveniles have hadan abundance of cash available for alcohol/drug usage." Morefrequent, however, were comments stating the opinion that a pooreconomy increased the economic availability of drugs and alcohol: Frankfort, Kentucky: "Profit motive due to nationaleconomy and lack of job training/jobs. Lack of hope andopportunity for some causes increased sale of drugs due to highprofit." Barbourville, Kentucky: "Drug dealers that cannot makeit flipping hamburgers, but are successful at selling drugs andhave a lot of material evidence of their success. Law enforcementneeds to confiscate these material items in prosecution of case.Also, involvement of drug dealing by law enforcement andpoliticians is a problem. " Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: "Teenaged drug dealers havestatus, money, jewelry, cars, designer clothes, etc., which manyof their peers cannot afford." Fort Worth, Texas: "Depressed economic conditions--Lackof legitimate means to obtain income. It's easy money withminimal consequences for conviction." SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 4-4: Survey Comments, Social Availability Conway, New Hampshire: "Our law enforcers are known andmake little inroads towards prosecuting drug traffickers orsellers. Many young adults supply liquor and drugs to underagekids in our area." Mount Holly, New Jersey: "The legal system does notfairly prosecute offenders. It gives some juveniles the messagethat depending upon your circumstances it is OK to use and selldrugs." Muskogee, Oklahoma: "The lack of prosecutive vigor inalcohol-related offenses (Minor in possession, publicintoxication, D.U.I.). District attorney does not vigorouslypursue and law enforcement treats D.U.I. as publicintoxication." Prineville, Oregon: "This community is basically a bluecollar community. There is an attitude of acceptance of juvenilesusing alcohol. Kind of a boys will be boys attitude." South Bend, Indiana: "We have seen an increase inalcohol consumption that appears to be tolerated or evenencouraged by adults (primarily parents)." Hillsboro, Illinois: "Lack of education, interest,cooperation of parents. Not enough interest with higher officials(e.g., school teachers, church members, government officials,businesses, and senior citizens)." Baraboo, Michigan: "Lack of appropriate teen activities.Lack of parental interest." Jacksonville, Illinois: "Decrease in the ability andwillingness of individual family units to educate, instruct, andmonitor juvenile behaviors." Nicholasville, Kentucky: "Alcohol is supplied willinglyto juveniles by a large number of adults. Inhalants are availableat any department store." Brownstown, Indiana: "Children, mostly high school age,come in contact with adults, ages 18-23, who are very willing tobuy alcohol or sell drugs to their younger friends. In addition,these children who do not have money on hand are likely to stealitems and trade them for drugs or cash to buy alcohol anddrugs." SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 4-5: Cigarette and Alcoholic Beverage Warnings It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, orimport for sale or distribution within the United States anycigarettes the package of which fails to bear one of thefollowing labels: SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, HeartDisease, Emphysema, And May Complicate Pregnancy. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now GreatlyReduces Serious Risks to Your Health. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking By Pregnant Women MayResult in Fetal Injury, Premature Birth, And Low Birth Weight. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains CarbonMonoxide. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, import, orbottle for sale or distribution in the United States anyalcoholic beverage unless the container of such beverage bearsthe following statement: GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General,women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancybecause of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption ofalcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car oroperate machinery, and may cause health problems. SOURCE: 36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-33IA031-000652-B047-136http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132133 text/html 35176HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:34 GMTContent-length: 34958 SUBSTANCE USE AND TRANSITIONS TO ABUSE AND ADDICTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 5 SUBSTANCE USE AND TRANSITIONS TO ABUSE AND ADDICTION Substance use is another precondition and contributor toaddiction, since one cannot become dependent on a substancewithout first using it, continuing its use, and passing throughstages of progressively more serious use. Patterns of progression from use to addiction are not,however, consistent or predictable for all individuals. They canvary widely, depending on numerous individual and contextualfactors and on characteristics of the use itself, such as age ofonset and the type, frequency, and quantity of substance used.While other chapters in this report focus on individual andcontextual factors, this chapter focuses only on thecharacteristics of drug use itself that can contribute to theprogression to abuse and addiction. Researchers have failed to identify specific levels ofsubstance use or of substance-related problems that clearlydistinguish use from abuse (16). This is the case, in part,because substances can differ greatly in their abuse liabilityand, in part, because the same levels of use of a particularsubstance can affect the functioning of various individualsdifferently. For example, for some individuals, the initial useof certain substances may constitute substance abuse, because ofthe severe adverse consequences of the initial use itself.(Although abuse is usually associated with large quantities ofsubstance use per occasion, resulting in either the risk of harmto others (e.g., drunk driving) or to self (e.g., blackouts),some in the prevention field define any initial use of an illicitsubstance as substance abuse, because the substance being used isillicit and should not be used.) Although the distinction between use and abuse is unclear,the causes of substance use--especially initial or casualuse--are thought to differ in many cases from the causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction. Some researchers have assertedthat substance use results primarily from social influences(e.g., peer pressure), while abuse results more from internalpsychological and physiological processes (13). Others havereported, based on longitudinal data, that current substance usewas related more to the early modeling of use by adults and toone's own prior use, whereas problem use was related more toearly rebelliousness (22). A review of prevention programs alsosupports the conclusion that the factors associated with theinitiation of use differ from the factors associated withescalation to abuse (23). SUBSTANCE USE Because substance use is necessary as a precondition to abuseand addiction, prevention efforts can be directed at initial use,continuing use, or progression in use to block the laterdevelopment of addiction. Possible goals are: o Prevent initial use. One way to prevent substance abuse andaddiction is to prevent any initial use. The surest way tosucceed would be to keep abusable substances out of thecommunity, since, if they are unavailable, they cannot be used.However, once the substances are available in a community, otherpreventive approaches can be tried, including scare tactics (aswith a policy of zero tolerance, backed up by stern parental,school, and legal penalties for use), educational efforts(through media campaigns or prevention curricula in the schools),training in refusal skills, and promotion of safenonsubstance-using activities. The lack of clear standards andpenalties, credible information, and alternative activities maycertainly increase the vulnerability of youth to the appeals ofabusable substances, but the presence of such efforts has notguaranteed success in preventing initial use among all youth. o Delay initial use. Another goal is to delay initial use aslong as possible, thus delaying the point at which anyprogression from use to abuse to addiction can begin. Such anapproach can provide at least some protection for somechil-dren--i.e., those who might otherwise initiate use atearlier ages and then more rapidly progress to abuse and possiblyaddiction. Early onset of substance use is often more severe thanlate onset and, as is discussed later in this chapter, early useof substances is one of the better predictors of subsequentproblems. Thus, a delay in initial use may offer significantprotection even if substances are used later on. o Prevent, reduce, or control continued use. Another approachis to try to prevent current users from continuing or escalatingtheir use of one substance or moving on to other substances withgreater abuse liability. Many youth experiment with cigarettes,alcohol, and marijuana, but do not progress to problematic use ofthese or other substances. Others, however, do progress. Effortsto reduce, prevent, or control continued and progressive use, ifsuccessful, can protect individuals from the problems of abuseand addiction. Preventing, delaying, reducing, or controlling the use ofsubstances can help prevent abuse and addiction. Because of theirdirectness and apparent simplicity, these goals can be veryappealing. Detracting from their appeal, however, is that theycan be difficult to achieve, especially for multiproblemindividuals in communities where abusable substances are widelyavailable and aggressively marketed, and for individuals who maybe physiologically predisposed to the continued and escalatinguse of substances. In addition to being a precondition (without which abuse andaddiction become impossible), substance use can also be animportant contributor to later abuse and addiction, by affectingindividuals physiologically, psychologically, andsocioculturally. Physiological Effects Addictive substances affect processes in the brain, some ofthem operating through reward systems, and can produce drugtolerance and dependence. Tolerance manifests itself when, toproduce a given response (e.g., a high), an individual mustingest more of a substance. Physiological drug dependence has atleast two defining characteristics: the development of toleranceto the effects of the drug and the manifestation of symptoms ofwithdrawal on abrupt discontinuation or reduction in dosage. Thedevelopment of physiological tolerance and dependence cancontribute to the progression from use to abuse and addiction: astolerance to a substance increases, an individual must ingestmore of the substance to continue to obtain a given desiredresponse; as dependency develops, an individual must continue toingest the substance to avoid the unpleasant experience ofwithdrawal. Psychological Effects Substance use may contribute to further use and abuse throughpsychological means as well. For example, an initial successfulexperience of use may reduce an individual's fear about thesubstance, thus opening the way to continued use that can lead togrowing tolerance and dependence. Changes in expectations about the consequences of alcohol usehave also been associated with increases in behavioral tolerance.Specifically, less impairment from drinking alcohol occurredwhen, after the ingestion, successfully performing certain taskswas rewarded, while all other variables that increase tolerancewere controlled. Several recent studies and a literature reviewhave found that the ingestion of alcohol increased when therewards for alternative behaviors were constrained (24). Also,social drinkers who expect the effects of alcohol to be betterthan the outcomes of other activities may well be more likely tomake the transition to abusive drinking. Such a hypothesis issupported by several studies that found that alcohol abusersidentify a greater number of favorable conseqences of alcoholconsumption than do nonabusers (24). Continued use of substances can also impair the learning ofskills, especially among the young, and the ability to rememberlessons once learned. Developmental processes may be slowed,which may hamper decisionmaking, in general, and about the use ofsubstances, in particular. However, the progression from use toabuse may also, in many cases, not be simply linear, as whenindividuals move in and out of substance abusing patterns,depending on the developmental stages and social and culturalsituations and contexts that may be affecting them. Sociocultural Effects Sociocultural factors, triggered by substance use, can alsocontribute to progression in use. An individual who initiatesuse, for example, may begin to participate in a subgroup thatencourages use, such as the patrons of crack houses, groups ofheroin users, members of substance-using motorcycle gangs,adolescent peer groups, cocktail party groups, after-work beergroups, and groupies who follow certain rock bands. (In somecases, too, such groups and subcultures may provide the impetusfor the initiation of use as well.) Such social and culturalenvironments encourage, reinforce, maintain, and increasesubstance use and abuse--all of which can develop after theinitiation of use outside the group. Conversely, the lack ofrewarding, substance-free alternative groups and activities mayrender individuals more vulnerable to the appeals of substance-using groups and subcultures. STAGES IN THE INITIATION OF USE Do individuals first use one substance (e.g., alcohol ortobacco) and only later use another (e.g., cocaine or heroin)?Are stages in the first use of different substances similaracross cultures? Does the use of one substance (e.g., marijuana)directly increase the likelihood of later use of anothersubstance (e.g., heroin)? Or is progression in use caused more byother mediating factors, such as multiple behavior problems? Ifso, might these other problems contribute to later use of certainsubstances even in the absence of the use of other substancesearlier on? The basic question about whether there are stages in theinitiation of the use of different substances has been studied inthe United States (9,11,12,21,27) and in Israel and France (1).While study results vary somewhat, the sequence most oftenreported is that alcohol and cigarette use come first, followedby marijuana use and then by the use of other illicit substances.Some variations in this sequence have been found for individualsof different sexes, racial and ethnic groups, and cultures. Theidea that the use of some substances increases the likelihood ofthe use of other substances has led to several hypotheses. The Stepping Stone Hypothesis In its strongest form, the so-called "steppingstone" hypothesis asserted that the use of marijuana oftenor almost always led to violent crime and to the use of otherillicit substances (28). This hypothesis has never been proved.An even earlier version of the stepping stone hypothesis goesback to the beginning of the 20th century, when the presumedprogression from tobacco to alcohol to morphine use was presentedas an argument for prohibiting both alcohol and tobacco. Oneobserver commented that there was no strong evidence that the useof these substances causes progression from one to another;rather, some individuals are more prone to the use of multiplesubstances. Also, the criminalization of marijuana may havecaused some marijuana users to move on to other illicitsubstances through contact with the subculture of illicit users(14). The Gateway Hypothesis More recently, a more moderate hypothesis, the gatewayhypothesis, has been put forward. It asserts that use of certainsubstances increases somewhat the chances of progression to theuse of other substances. For example, in one longitudinal study,men who had used both alcohol and cigarettes by age 15 had a 52percent greater chance of using marijuana, compared to men whohad never used alcohol or cigarettes by age 25 (26). For women,the increased chance of marijuana use among alcohol and cigaretteusers was 46 percent. Similarly, for the next stage, men who hadused marijuana by age 15 had a 68 percent greater chance ofinitiating the use of other illicit substances, compared withthose who had never used marijuana. For women, the increasedprobability was 53 percent. Early and Frequent Use A still more constrained version, but one that may be morepredictive, suggests that early and frequent use increases theprobability of movement to later levels in the sequence (12). Forexample, researchers have reported that early use of substancesis associated with later problematic use (7,20). Nonuse of a Substance at an Earlier Stage Another hypothesis proposes that the nonuse of a substance atan earlier age reduces the chances of later use of othersubstances. A longitudinal study has found that the chance thatan individual who had never used marijuana would move up a levelto use other illicit substances was very low (26). This findingcorroborated conclusions reached earlier based on across-sectional study (18). Because of variations among communities and cultures, thesearch for a universally applicable sequence in the initiation ofthe use of different substances may be less fruitful than thestudy of why there may be somewhat different sequences, dependingon factors such as availability and social norms. The relativeease of availability of some substances (e.g., cigarettes, beer,wine) may well account for their frequent appearance at an earlystage in the sequence of use. However, this may vary amongcultures. In France, for example, wine is widely available andused both at an early age and at an early stage in the sequence.In other cultures, where wine is less available but inhalants arewidely available and inexpensive, inhalants are used at an earlyage and early in the sequence. Use at a young age may be amarker, at least in some cultures, for other risk factors, suchas parental substance abuse and other family problems, which cancontribute to later substance abuse problems, independently ofearly and frequent use. For example, one study found that,irrespective of the age of onset of use, individuals whoexhibited numerous behavioral problems in their youth moved on toproblem substance use, no matter how early or late in their youththey began to use substances (20). Limitations in the Research Research into stages in the initiation of the use ofdifferent substances has itself evolved through stages. A numberof issues, which have not been thoroughly addressed, remain: o The identification of stages in the progression from use toabuse and addiction is more a description of the stages someindividuals move through than a prediction of necessary stagesfor most individuals, since the majority of substance users donot move on to abuse. Reasonable questions are: What preventssome individuals from progressing from initial use to abuse andaddiction? Are the obstacles primarily due to the absence ofpreconditions, such as biological and pharmacologicalpreconditions or availability and marketing. Studying thoseindividuals who do not progress from use to addiction may provideinsights and lessons about how to prevent progression among thosewho do progress. Of particular importance are studies of thechanging vulnerabilities and resiliencies of individuals indifferent developmental stages from childhood throughadolescence, young adulthood, and adulthood. o What is the role of substance use in progression to abuseand addiction? The initiation of use of a particular substancemay often not be the most important contributor to the use of asubstance higher in the sequence. Other factors directly relatedto use may play a larger role. For example, age of onset,quantity, frequency, techniques, and purposes of the substanceuse may be more salient. Longitudinal risk factor and expectancystudies have begun to look at the role of these other elements. o Are some individuals more predisposed to use and abusesubstances than others? Individual biological and psychologicalfactors may also strongly influence which individuals progressfrom use to abuse. o What environmental factors contribute to substance use andabuse? Availability, marketing, social norms, peer groups,subcultures, and settings that encourage substance use may alsobe key in determining which individuals progress. Despite the need for greater understanding about the issuesabove, already completed research into stages in substance usehas been influential in providing the basis for policy andprogram recommendations. The gateway hypothesis has encouragedsome prevention advocates and program planners to focus onpreventing or delaying the use of gateway substances (e.g.,alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana) as a possibly effective way toprevent later use of illicit substances. Longitudinal studieshave found that the use of cigarettes by youth can be a strongpredictor of later problems with substances (17). STAGES IN THE CYCLE OF USE, ABUSE, AND ADDICTION One approach to the study of stages in substance use focusesnot just on the initiation of use; but also on the continuationof use, maintenance and progression of use within a class ofsubstances; progression across classes; and regression,cessation, and relapse cycles in use and abuse (2). Initiation of Use Initiation is clearly a key first step in the progression tomore serious levels of use. Because substance use is ofteninitiated during adolescence, most substance use research hasfocused on initiation of use among adolescents. However, mostindividuals who initiate substance use do not progress to harmfuluse. Also, the factors associated with such progression may oftendiffer from the factors associated with initiation. Thus, thefocus on the initiation of use during adolescence is notsufficient for an understanding of the progression from use toabuse and addiction. Continuation of Use After trying a substance for the first time, one person maysay, "I won't be trying that again," while another maysay, "That's for me." Although only limited researchhas been conducted on risk and protective factors associated withthe transition from experimentation to continued use, thecontinuation of use can apparently be influenced by thepharmacology of the substance (e.g., whether it produces desiredor pleasant experiences), the biology of the individual (e.g.,whether specific individuals have genetic or acquired biologicalpredispositions or intolerances to the use of specificsubstances), the availability and marketing of the substance(e.g., whether a substance is widely available, used, andaccepted for use), other characteristics of the individual (e.g.,at what developmental stage one is, and whether one has mental oremotional problems, which may be ameliorated at least temporarilyby substances), and community contexts (e.g., substance-usingsubcultures or settings that strongly encourage and reinforce acontinued use of substances). Maintenance and Progression of Use Within a Class of Drugs Maintenance and progression may include conformity with normsof consumption--for example, initial and continued heavy use ofalcohol in a college fraternity. Progressionwith cocaine couldentail movement from snorting to smoking or injection. Collegestudents in some fraternities and sororities with drinkingtraditions may be at higher risk for heavy substance use,especially of alcohol. But very little research has beenconducted on the risk factors for maintenance of high levels ofuse or for progression within classes of substances to excessiveuse among this age group. Progression in Use Across Classes of Substances At this stage, an individual may try different substances fordifferent, and often compensating, effects. For example, theantiemetic properties of tetrahydracannabinol in cannabis can beused to facilitate greater use of alcohol, alcohol or marijuanacan be used to smooth out the aftermath of snorting cocaine, andheroin can be used for similar purposes after a binge with crack. Regression, Cessation, and Relapse Cycles The transition away from abuse may occur a number of timesbefore an individual succeeds in getting off a substance or,failing that, remains dependent. It may also be influenced by thesame factors, or kinds of factors, that contributed to thesubstance abuse problem in the first place, including the fullrange of biological and pharmacological factors, availability andmarketing, individual emotional needs, or contextual factors. STAGES IN PROBLEM BEHAVIORS Does substance use itself contribute to conduct disorders,delinquency, and other problem behaviors? Do these behaviorsthen, in turn, contribute to the progression to more use and toabuse and addiction? Adolescents who use substances, especially those that areillegal, are more likely than nonusers to exhibit various problembehaviors, including: early sexual experimentation, delinquentactivities, eating problems, and psychological or psychiatricproblems, including suicide and suicidal thoughts (10). Less isknown, however, about the sequencing of these behaviors. Theinterrelations among the factors is likely to vary widely amongindividuals, but some sequences may predominate. Several suchsequences have been proposed. One suggested developmentalsequence, for example, includes six stages: oppositional(characterized by disobedience at home); offensive (includingdisobedience in school, fighting, lying); aggressive (physicalattacks on others, theft at home); minor delinquency (shopliftingand status offenses, such as alcohol use, truancy, running away);major delinquency (break-in and entry, car theft, substanceabuse, robbery, drug dealing); and violence (assault, rape,homicide) (15). One of the few studies of problem behavior sequences lookedat the order of initiation of four different substances,delinquency, and sexual activity, among a sample of blackadolescents (3). For males, it found involvement proceededgenerally from beer use to cigarette use, then to delinquency,sexual activity, marijuana use, and the use of hard liquor. Forfemales, the progression was generally from cigarette use, todelinquency, beer use, sexual activity, marijuana, and hardliquor. For both sexes, delinquency and youthful sexual activitytended to precede the use of marijuana and hard liquor. While a high correlation among problem behaviors has beenfrequently found, the sequencing of those behaviors is lessclear. The early use of so-called gateway drugs, such as beer andcigarettes, may contribute to later problem behaviors, while thelater use of marijuana, hard liquor, and other illicit substancesmay be more the result of extended participation in problembehaviors. More research is needed in this area if thesehypotheses are to be better understood and tested. KEY ASPECTS OF USE Some research has focused on characteristics of substance usethat can strongly influence the progression from use to abuse andaddiction. In addition to the age of first use, thesecharacteristics include the frequency, quantity, and type ofsubstance used, and the technologies and purposes andexpectations of use. Age of First Use Initiation into substance use at a young age is one of themost striking and often-found predictors of later problems,including abuse. For example, in one large community epidemiologystudy, men who first used substances before age 15 developedmental and behavioral problems in 51 percent of the cases,compared with 16 percent among those who began at age 18 orlater. For women, the comparable figures are 39 and 12 percent,respectively. Other studies have also found problems later onassociated with the earlier introduction to alcohol or other druguse (19). This pattern seems to hold specifically for later substanceuse and abuse as well. Early use of substances was found to beassociated with later problematic use (7,20). Another studyestimated that, of the men who had initiated the use of marijuanaby the age of 14, 71 percent would be expected to initiate theuse of other illicit substances by age 25, compared with 9percent of those who first started at age 21 (12). One report asserted that frequency of use was the mechanismthrough which early onset probably operates (12). However,another study concludes that preexisting conduct problems are abetter predictor of later substance abuse problems than is earlyuse (19). It found that, in individuals with many conductproblems, any use of a substance, no matter how late in youth,was followed by abuse. Frequency and Quantity of Substance Used When addiction occurs, it usually results from a period ofincreasing intensity and frequency of use (5,6). Althoughfrequency has often been employed as a measure of problematicuse, one study found that quantity of substance used, rather thanfrequency of use, was a more powerful predictor of disruptive andproblematic use (21). Quantity and frequency are often related,but they are not identical. An infrequent user could go on abinge, where large quantities are consumed, that could beextremely harmful. By contrast, a frequent user, such as someonewho drinks alcohol every day but in strict moderation, may notencounter substance-related problems (although a maintenancealcoholic may drink daily with no apparent intoxication, but withthe later development of associated health problems). Thequantity and frequency of substance use can be strongly affectedby the availability and marketing of the substance and by thetechniques or technologies for administering the drug. Type of Substance Used The type of substance used can also influence the chances oflater substance problems. More addictive substances--those withgreater abuse liability--will make restraint from continued andpossibly escalating use more difficult. Cigarettes provide anexample experienced by many individuals: nicotine is extremelyaddictive, and only a minority of those who try cigarettes andcontinue to smoke them will be able to control or easily cut backon their use. Techniques of Use Techniques of administration can also influence theprogression of substance use. The introduction of prewrapped,prepackaged cigarettes, together with widely distributed matches,was followed by the rapid escalation of cigarette use, andpresumably addiction to nicotine, in the United States in thelate 1800s and early 1900s. Similarly, the introduction ofsmokable free-base and crack cocaine, the administration of whichis much more efficient than the snorting of powdered cocaine, ledto an explosion of cocaine abuse and addiction. The Bahamas, forexample, experienced a hundredfold increase in cocaine-relatedhospital emergency room admissions following the introduction ofcrack and free-base cocaine in the 1980s (8). Expectations and Effects of Use The expectations and effects of use can also reinforce useand influence progression from use to abuse and addiction.Research reviews have discussed some examples of the expectationsand effects of using illicit substances that can reinforce theiruse and may increase the likelihood of progression to abuse andaddiction (13,25). These purposes include: o The reduction of negative feelings, including the use ofstimulants to alleviate depression and weakness; psychedelics tocombat boredom and disillusionment; alcohol to assuage feelingsof guilt, loneliness, and anxiety; and tranquilizers,amphetamines, and sedatives to reduce painful feelings. o The reduction of self-rejection. Some researchers havefound an association between substance use and indices ofinsecurity, dis-satisfaction with self, desire to change oneself,defensiveness, low self-esteem, and low self- confidence. o The increase in potency. Increases in physical and sexualpotency, daring, and toughness can be achieved by using specificsubstances in certain situations. This can be especiallyappealing to youth, who may be wrestling with feelings ofpowerlessness, dissatisfaction, and frustration. o The expression of anger. Substances can heightenexpressions of anger (e.g., in opposition to mainstream norms) orcan medicate away anger and rage. Narcotics and hypnotics mayhelp reduce rage, shame, jealousy, and impulses toward extremeaggressiveness. o The achievement of peer acceptance. Peers often play thelargest role in endorsing and encouraging substance use, and insupplying substances. The initiation, continuation, andprogression of use can be important ways for individuals to gainacceptance into peer groups. This can be true in school (e.g., ina fraternity), at work (e.g., in a sales force that demands thatone be able to "hold one's liquor"), in substance-usinggangs, and among certain groups of artists (e.g., somecontemporary painters and musicians). o The seeking of euphoria. Many substance users, especiallyaddicts, report favorably on drug-induced euphoria. Indeed, theprospect of euphoria may be the initial attraction of thesubstance. It can also encourage continued use, even to the pointof addiction and negative consequences. o The coping with problems. For some users, substancestemporarily alleviate problems they have been unable to resolvein other ways. While the problems may be causing emotional pain,the use of substances, especially for the young, can inhibit thedevelopment of other problem-solving skills and may alleviatesymptoms only in the short-run, since the underlying causes ofthe problems are likely to remain unresolved. o The reduction of overwhelming trauma. Post-traumatic stress(e.g., after a war, or after physical or sexual abuse) can resultin the use of addictive substances, since use may temporarilyreduce fears, flashbacks, and other negative feelings. o The suppression of appetite or hunger. Another function ofusing some psychoactive substances is appetite suppression. Anextensive literature exists on the use of nicotine, fromcigarette smoking, to control appetite and weight. Thisphenomenon often manifests itself in the negative: for example,current smokers (especially women) are reluctant to stop smokingfor fear they will gain weight (4). o The seeking of stimulus. Individuals who seek higher levelsof external stimulation can also turn to substances, for a high,for hallucinations, for unpredictable effects. o The regulation of affective and behavioral impairments.Those with mood disorders, such as depression, and behavioralimpairments may find that some substances alter moods and allowthem to modify behaviors. The above expectations and effects might well be expected tocontribute to more continued and progressively heavier substanceuse than would more casual purposes such as curiosity,experimentation, or recreational use. The more"serious" the expectations, effects, and functions ofsubstance use, the greater the likelihood of continued use andabuse may be. As noted earlier, the use of substances, especiallyby the young, to address problems or to achieve feelings mayimpede the development of skills for managing feelings andbehaviors and for solving problems, and thus may result indeficiencies in handling problems in life later on. Indeed, theuse of substances at very young ages may even contribute topermanent changes in the brain that may contribute to further useand abuse. More research is needed to clarify the connectionsbetween the expectations and effects of use and the progressionto heavier and more problematic use and abuse. SUMMARY Substance use, including the progression to heavier and moreharmful use, is a precondition and contributor to abuse andaddiction. Researchers have focused on stages in the progressionof substance use in several ways. They have studied stages in theinitiation of the use of different substances, finding a sequencethat moves from the use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to theuse of marijuana, then hard liquor, and finally other illicitsubstances. Because many individuals who use substances do not goon to substance abuse, and because use at one level does notguarantee use at a higher level, these stages are descriptive butnot predictive. In addition to the biologically and pharmacologicallyreinforcing properties of addictive substances that can lead totolerance and dependence, key aspects of substance use thatcontribute to abuse and addiction include age of first use, thefrequency, quantity, and type of substance used, and thetechniques and expectations and effects of use. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B32-34IA031-000652-B047-161http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132142 text/html 127567HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:25 GMTContent-length: 127348 CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS No single or generic set of variables explains the misuse ofsubstances for every individual. Depending on an individual'sbiological makeup, developmental stage, and interaction withvarious environmental forces, individual risk, vulnerability, andresilience to substance abuse and addiction will vary fordifferent factors at different times (3). Much of the research on substance abuse has focused onidentifying factors for drug and alcohol use (see table 6- 1),specifically among adolescents and young adults. Risk factors forsubstance abuse have been identified as those cognitive,psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,physiological, and developmental characteristics that fosterinitiation of drug and alcohol use and abuse by an individual.There is some consensus in the field of risk factor research thatprobably two fairly distinct sets of risk factors affectindividuals differently. Social, situational, and environmentalfactors are likely to be more influential in initial or low-levelsubstance use, while individuals who progress from use to abuseor addiction are influenced to a greater extent by biological,psychological, and psychiatric factors (27). This distinctionbetween risk factors is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 5.Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the riskof substance abuse and addiction and promote positive developmentsuch as, appropriate role models, involvement in positive peergroups, and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. This chapter focuses on a select group of individual factorsthat has been combined under the three headings: Demographics, Economics, and Psychosocial/Behavioral. Factors not directlydiscussed in this chapter are reviewed in either Part I or III ofthe report. These factors may not appear in every individual withsubstance abuse and addiction problems, nor will all individualsexposed to these factors use or abuse drugs. In addition,unanimous agreement is lacking within the field of substanceabuse and addiction on the importance, number, order ofappearance, or interactive effects of many of these factors. Where applicable, each of the factors has been reviewed inthe following manner: historical perspectives; currentprevalence; psychosocial and cultural antecedents; biological andgenetic antecedents; relevant prevention programs; and areas forfuture research. DEMOGRAPHICS Age The preponderance of substance abuse research points to thefact that children who use drugs and alcohol before the age of 15have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol and otherdrug users, versus those youth who begin use at a later age (28). Highlights from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse(NHSDA) provide a somber picture of substance use among theNation's children (77). Lifetime and past month substance use,rates for continued substance use, as well as differences inracial and ethnic substance use (see box 6-1) are reviewed inthis section. As part of NHSDA, data on lifetime use of alcohol andcigarettes (whose use is illicit for minors) has been collectedfor youth aged 12 to 17 since 1974; data collection on otherillicit drug use began in 1979 (see figure 6-1). The lifetime usefindings include: o Rates in 1991 for lifetime use of alcohol, cigarettes, orother illicit drugs were the lowest recorded since the surveyseries began 17 years ago. The highest rates for any substanceuse appeared in the late 1970s. o In 1979, 70 percent of youth aged 12 to 17 reported somelifetime use of alcohol compared to 46 percent in 1991. Since1979, lifetime cigarette use has dropped from 54 percent to 38percent. o Since 1979, the use of other illicit substances(methaqualone, inhalants, heroin, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP),crack, tranquilizers, stimulants, other opiates, barbiturates,nitrites, lysergic acid diethylamide, hallucinogens, andmarijuana) has followed a similar trend with rates decreasingfrom a high of 34 percent to the 1991 rate of 20 percent. A complementary study of adolescents shows 1991 data forsubstance use within the past 30 days among a sample ofapproximately 17,500 eighth graders, 14,800 tenth graders, and15,000 twelfth graders (75). o Any alcohol use within the past 30 days was reported by 25percent of the eighth graders, 43 percent of the tenth graders,and 54 percent of the twelfth graders. Having had more than fivedrinks in the last two weeks was reported by 13 percent of theeighth graders, 23 percent of the tenth graders, and 30 percentof the twelfth graders. o Fourteen percent of the eighth graders, 21 percent of thetenth graders, and 28 percent of the twelfth graders reportedsmoking cigarettes within the past month. Those who smoked morethan one-half pack per day included 3 percent of the eighthgraders, 7 percent of the tenth graders, and 11 percent of thetwelfth graders. o The other most commonly used substance for eighth and tenthgraders was smokeless tobacco with 7 and 10 percent reported,respectively. Eighth graders had the highest percentage of pastmonth inhalant use (4 percent), and of those individuals,approximately 1 percent reported using inhalants on 3 to 5occasions within the past month. o For tenth and twelfth graders, the other most commonly usedsubstance was marijuana and/or hashish with 9 percent of thetenth graders and 14 percent of the twelfth graders reportingpast 30-day use. Of those individuals, approximately 2 and 3percent, respectively, had used marijuana and/or hashish on threeto five occasions. Another important indicator of potential substance abuseproblems among adolescents is the noncontinuation rate for theuse of certain substances. This is an indication of the extent towhich people who try a drug do not continue to use it, and isbased on the number of individuals who reported ever using a drugdivided by the those who have not used the drug in the past 12months (75). Among a sample of twelfth graders in 1991, the data show thatnoncontinuation rates vary widely among the different drugs, withthe highest rates observed for methaqualone and inhalants (62percent). As mentioned previously, inhalant use is higher amongyounger individuals. The noncontinuation of methaqualone may bedue, in part, to the decrease in its availability. A highnoncontinuation rate is also seen for heroin (56 percent),cocaine (55 percent), PCP (52 percent), and crack (52 percent).Marijuana has one of the lowest noncontinuation rates (35percent) in the senior year of any of the illicit drugs;primarily because a relatively high proportion of seniorscontinue to use it at some level over an extended period of time. Additionally, the noncontinuation rates for alcohol andcigarettes are extremely low. In other words, 88 percent of theseniors reported some lifetime use of alcohol, and of thoseindividuals, 78 percent have continued to use it within the pastyear, thus only 12 percent of the seniors reported no alcohol usein the preceding 12 months. Cigarette noncontinuation was definedsomewhat differently, as the percentage of those who said theyhad ever smoked "regularly" and who also reported notsmoking at all during the past month. Of the regular smokers,only 17 percent stopped smoking within the past month. An obvious drawback to these data is the fact that only thoseindividuals who have not dropped out of school are included inthe survey. It is not unrealistic to assume that those studentswith serious drug problems may well have left school before thetwelfth grade. More specific discussion of the factors thatinfluence the risk of adolescent substance abuse, as well asprevention programs targeting youth, are thoroughly reviewed inchapter 8. While the majority of attention is focused on adolescentsubstance use and abuse, young adults and older adults also showsignificant levels of substance use and abuse. The 1991statistics from the NHSDA reveal that heavy drinking (defined asdrinking five or more drinks per occasion on 5 or more days inthe past month) was reported by 2 percent of 12 to 17 year olds,11 percent of 18 to 25 year olds, 7 percent of 26 to 34 yearolds, and 4 percent of those 35 and older (77). For those sameage categories, smoking a pack or more of cigarettes per day wasreported by 1, 13, 17, and 17 percent, respectively. The illicitsubstances reported being used most often in the past month amongall age groups were marijuana and hashish. Individuals 18 to 25had the highest percentage (13 percent) and those 26 to 34 thenext highest percentage (7 percent). The second most commonlyreported illicit substance was the nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics, which was again highest among 18 to 25 yearolds (3 percent) followed by those 26 to 34 (2 percent); allother age groups reported less than 2 percent. Clearly then, the heavy use of some substances is notexclusive to adolescents. Young- to middle-aged and older adultscan also be exposed to stressful risk factors, such as loss of ajob, divorce, or death of a child, which could contribute toalcohol or drug problems. The adult population presents uniqueand often overlooked challenges for the planning andimplementation of substance abuse prevention programs. Gender Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioralsubstance abuse studies were conducted on male participants,although that has begun to change. A distorted picture emerged,in which women were assumed to misuse the same substances, andfor the same reasons, as their male counterparts. It has onlybeen within the past 10 to 20 years that separate research hasbeen conducted on the causes and consequences of alcohol and drugproblems among women. Women have not been immune to the harmful effects of alcoholand other drugs. In the late 1800s twice as many women wereaddicted to narcotics as men. The majority of these women werewhite, middle-aged, and of upper-middle class status. Some hadbecome addicted through the prescription of narcotics for a hostof so-called female problems, while others knowingly misusedopium, heroin, morphine, and cocaine (53). The number of women drinking alcohol and experiencingalcohol-related problems has risen steadily since World War II.At least one-third of the estimated 18 million alcoholics andproblem drinkers in the United States are thought to be women.These figures, which many consider to be conservative, wouldsuggest that close to 6 million women are currently dealing withthe medical, legal, and social problems of alcohol misuse (53). Overall, men report more frequent use of alcohol, cigarettes,and all illicit substances (except nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics) than women (79,77). However, this does notmean that there is not substantial alcohol and drug use amongwomen (see table 6-2). Additionally, some gender and ethnicdifferences may be attributable to failure to survey hiddenpopulations. The risk status of women who are not in theworkforce, do not receive prenatal care, and are not visiblethrough arrest, is less reliably known. Neither men, nor women, should be considered homogeneous. Forexample, alcohol use and its misuse can vary widely betweendifferent racial and ethnic groups. Among men, Hispanics (60percent) were slightly more likely to have used alcohol withinthe past month than whites (59 percent) or blacks (52 percent)(77). In general, white women drink more frequently than otherwomen. Large numbers of Native American, Hispanic, black, andAsian women do not drink at all (70). Additionally, poor andminority women appear to come under closer scrutiny for alcoholand drug abuse than do financially secure or white women (see box6-2). These racial and ethnic differences are more fullydiscussed in the following section. Do men and women cite different reasons for the misuse ofalcohol and other drugs? Over the last several decades within theUnited States, the socially defined roles for men and women haveundergone substantial changes. When given a choice, many womenhave opted for the traditional role of a stay-at-home mother andhomemaker, while other women have pursued career paths that mayor may not include marriage and children, and still others haveattempted to combine the two. These fairly recent changes havebrought pressures and risks many women had not been subjected topreviously. Women in the workplace are more likely to encounter drinkingopportunities such as business lunches and office celebrations,where they may feel encouraged or even pressured to drink (53).Women have also been recently targeted by the beer, tobacco, andliquor industries, as well as by small-scale marketing bynightclubs and bars in the form of ladies' nights. In the early 1970s, researcher Sharon Wilsnack postulatedthat some women may abuse alcohol to submerge those aspects ofthemselves that did not conform to the traditional female sexrole, thereby allowing them to feel more acceptably feminine(53). More recently, several studies on female alcoholics haveshown that women, more frequently than men, can pinpoint aspecific traumatic life event that they believe precipitatedtheir problem drinking. The crises identified most often by womenincluded a partner's infidelity, the death of a family member, achild leaving home, postpartum depression, divorce or separation,infertility, gynecological problems, and menopause (39,53). A similar study focused on the impact of various life eventson alcoholic men and women. Alcoholic men placed significantimportance on work-related events, marriage issues, sexualdifficulties, and arguments with spouses. In addition to thoseevents cited by the men, alcoholic women focused on socialactivities, family troubles, stillbirth and adoption, and deathof a close relative (40). While much of the substance abuse research has focused onalcohol issues, various researchers have examined the differencesbetween men and women in their use of illicit substances with orwithout the presence of alcohol. For men and women cocaineaddicts in treatment, the following significant differences werenoted (40,41,35): o Women had started to use cocaine at a younger age than men,conversely to what is generally found among opiate users andalcoholics. o Women had a significantly lower level of social adjustmentthan male patients. o Women patients were less likely to be employed, to holdhigh status jobs, to be self-supporting, and to be financingtheir own drug use. o Women were more likely than men to cite specific reasonsfor their drug use: depression, feeling unsociable, family andjob pressures, and health problems; whereas men more often citedthe intoxicating effects of cocaine as a reason for their druguse. o Men reported experiencing more guilt (47 vs. 23 percent),whereas women noted that one of the desirable effects of cocaineuse was a reduction in their feelings of guilt. o Women were more often diagnosed with depression than men,and their depression took longer to treat, while men were moreoften diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder. o Most men and women reported that they used cocaine to bemore sociable. o Women demonstrated a slower recovery than men, and had moreresidual problems. Gender differences among opiate addicts have also beenexplored. Researchers have shown that female addicts are morelikely than male addicts to have first been introduced to heroinby family members or others close to them, and to haveexperienced severe family disruption (36). The development of thewomen's opiate dependence is also more likely to be linked to thefamily's approval of use or the absence of clear disapproval ofuse, in combination with easy access to the drug (35). Differences in marijuana smoking may also be partiallyattributable to gender. In a recent review, it was shown thatmen's marijuana smoking was tied more to the availability of thedrug, while women's smoking was affected to a greater degree bysocial influences, such as weekday versus weekend smoking, andthe smoking of their male partners. Women have also been shown toincrease their marijuana smoking during periods of anger andother unpleasant dispositions (41). In addition to discovering some socioculturaldissimilarities, gender differences in biological and geneticsusceptibility to substance abuse have been examined. The role ofheritability and genetics in influencing individualsusceptibility is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 3, thusthe discussion in this section will concentrate on biologicaldifferences. Again, a large portion of these studies hasconcentrated on alcohol and its effects. In the late 1970s it was reported that when men and women ofcomparable body weight were given equivalent doses of alcohol,women achieved higher blood alcohol levels. However, thesefindings have been challenged, as more recent studies have shownthat if the blood alcohol level is based on total body waterrather than weight, the difference in levels between men andwomen is insignificant (65). Another avenue that has been explored in explaining thegender difference in blood alcohol levels has to do with themetabolism of alcohol. Based on findings from animal research,Mario Frezza et al. (25) investigated differences in the"first-pass metabolism" between men and women. Datafrom animal studies reveal that a significant amount of ingestedethanol does not enter the circulatory system, but rather isneutralized in the stomach by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase.Using a small study sample (6 alcoholic and 14 nonalcoholic men,6 alcoholic and 17 nonalcoholic women) Frezza et al. investigatedwhether the first-pass metabolism and enzyme activity levelvaried between men and women, and alcoholic and nonalcoholicindividuals. They discovered that both gender and chronic alcoholabuse had statistically significant effects on the first-passmetabolism of alcohol, specifically, the first-pass metabolismwas considerably lower among alcoholic women compared toalcoholic men, which in turn was lower than nonalcoholic men.Similar findings were reported for the alcohol dehydrogenaseactivity level; with the highest activity levels (70 to 80percent) found in the nonalcoholic men and women, less activityamong the alcoholic men (37 to 46 percent), and the smallestactivity level among alcoholic women (11 to 20 percent). Tosummarize, the women in general had lower rates of first- passmetabolism and lower levels of alcohol dehydrogenase activity,which both lead to an increase in the amount of ethanol in thecirculatory system. The levels of enzyme activity furtherdecreased among the alcoholic women and the first-pass metabolismwas essentially nonexistent, indicating little neutralization bythe stomach. Researchers have also been studying the effect of hormonalchanges during the menstrual cycle on alcohol absorption rates.Alcohol absorption has been reported to vary during a woman'scycle--specifically, the rate of alcohol absorption increasespremenstrually. However, data from other clinicaland animaltrials have disputed these findings (65). What is clear from this type of biological research is thatfew firm conclusions can be made about gender differences inresponse to alcohol ingestion, and even fewer still aboutbiological responses to drugs other than alcohol. Nevertheless, the psychosocial differences that have beenidentified between the sexes could assist practitioners in thedevelopment of more gender specific substance abuse preventionprograms. For example, because many women can pinpoint specificevents in their lives that they believe contributed to theirheavy alcohol or drug use, it would behoove professionals workingwith women to be cognizant of these factors. General inquirescould be made at yearly physical or gynecological exams, whichcould also serve as informational sessions on the dangers ofalcohol and drug use (39). In addition, special attention shouldbe paid toward adolescent girls whose first experience withalcohol and drugs is often through a male family member orboyfriend. Broadly speaking, there are basic gaps in knowledgeconcerning gender differences and substance use within virtuallyall the parts identified in this report: Part I- necessarypreconditions; Part II-individual factors; and Part III-activitysettings. Until these gaps are addressed, the practice oftransferring data garnered from studies specific for one gender,to the other gender, is inaccurate and misleading. Race and Ethnicity Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linkedwith, and often blamed for, many of the drug problems within theUnited States. Throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s, thegeneral public associated the growth in opium addicts with thearrival of Chinese immigrants; although numerous physicians hadbeen freely prescribing narcotic preparations to their patients,many of whom were middle- to upper-class whites. The drug cocainehas long been associated with blacks. A popular image during thistime was one of cocaine-crazed blacks, although use of cocainewas widespread among whites as well (86). Throughout this sameperiod, marijuana was thought to have been brought into thecountry and promoted by Mexican immigrants and later picked up bythe subculture of black jazz musicians. Due in part to publicparanoia, the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which was a directattempt to control marijuana use, was born (45). In the minds of many individuals, this derogatory linkbetween minority populations and rampant drug abuse hascontinued. Certainly, many urban areas have high concentrationsof minorities, and within these areas the prevalence of alcoholand drug abuse may be high. Often over-looked, however, is theexistence of alcohol and drug problems in suburban and ruralareas throughout the United States, which have varyingpercentages of minorities. Prevalence rates for past month use of an illicit substancein 1992 (see figure 6-2) are not drastically different betweenwhites, blacks, and Hispanics, although it should be kept in mindthat this statistic does not accurately reflect abuse oraddiction. Even though the prevalence of illicit substance usewas highest among blacks, over three-fourths (76 percent) of thepast month illicit substance users were white. In other words,there were approximately 8.7 million whites, 1.5 million blacks,885,000 Hispanics, and 315,000 individuals of other racial andethnic groups who reported past month use of an illicit substancein 1992 (79). Also for 1992 among individuals aged 12 and older, whitesreported the highest percentage of alcohol use within the pastweek (21 percent), followed by blacks (19 percent), and Hispanics(18 percent) (79). The rates for heavy drinking were notstatistically different by race or ethnicity (5 percent forwhites and blacks, and 6 percent for Hispanics) (78). Until fairly recently, much of the analysis of substance usedata has concentrated on the correlations between the use of asubstance and one or two variables such as race and ethnicityand/or educational level. Often a positive association was foundbetween minority populations and the use of certain substances.While statistically correct, these analyses can be simplistic andmisleading (see box 6- 3). Clearly many risk and protectivefactors interact to produce substance use and abuse. If themajority of these variables are excluded from the analysis, askewed picture may arise as to the importance of certainvariables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethniccategories are often broad. The most popular groupings areblacks, white non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. Though each ofthese categories contains many distinct cultures, grossgeneralizations are commonly made within each category. In recent years, there has been a shift toward analyzing morecarefully the complex relationship between cigarette, alcohol andillicit drug use, and socioeconomic and demographic variables.The previous research had drawn on relatively small databases.However, in 1992, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)critically analyzed the national drug use data collected in its1988 and 1990 NHSDA. Predictors of drug and alcohol use includedan extensive array of both individual variables (e.g., age,educational level, marital status) and aggregate variables basedon the attributes of the census block, community, or region inwhich the respondent lived (see table 6-3 for a complete list). The effect of select variables such as race and ethnicitywere measured, while simultaneously controlling for all othervariables (e.g., age, educational level, employment status).Individuals of racial and ethnic minorities were found to be nomore likely than whites to use alcohol heavily (defined as havingfive or more drinks on five or more days in the past month) or touse marijuana, cocaine, or psychotherapeutic drugs (inclusion ofcrack or heroin in the analysis was impossible due to the smallnumber of respondents reporting use). In fact, when socioeconomicstatus was controlled for, both blacks and Hispanics had asubstantially lower likelihood of heavy alcohol use than whites(76). A reanalysis of the 1988 NHSDA data was accomplished by anindependent group of researchers who clustered the respondentdata into neighborhood risk sets. The original analysis on the1988 data revealed that for all ages, blacks and Hispanics weretwice as likely to have ever used crack cocaine than were whites.Once neighborhood clusters were established, the data revealedthat given similar social and environmental conditions, crack usedid not differ significantly for blacks or Hispanics comparedwith whites (9). However, the number of reported crack users inthe study was relatively small (138), and neighborhoods wereidentified as crack neighborhoods with as few as one reportedcrack user, thus the research findings should not be generalized. The new research hypothesized that the previous racialdifferences found in the prevalence of crack cocaine smoking mayhave been due to macrosocial environmental risk factorsincluding: differences in the availability of crack; employmentrates; premature death rates; community contact with the criminaljustice system; socially acceptable mechanisms for coping withlife stressors; distribution of wealth; and access to socialresources. While both studies had specific limitations, the importanceof these types of analyses cannot be understated. Focus should beplaced on the interaction between communities and individuals andthe relative influence on subsequent drug and alcohol use, ratherthan a person's race or ethnicity. Race or ethnicity has not been shown to be either abiological or genetic risk factor for substance use or abuse. Todate, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused onracial and ethnic differences in response specifically toalcohol. Virtually no study has been completed on differences inracial and ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicitdrugs. Individual metabolism of alcohol is essentially controlled bytwo enzymes, aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase. Ifthe enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase is inactive for any reason,ingestion of even a small amount of alcohol can cause rapid andprominent facial flushing. Continued drinking leads to nausea,dizziness, palpitations, and faintness. This reaction is seenamong many Asians (84,16). A mutant form of alcohol dehydrogenase will effect theefficiency of alcohol metabolism as well. Altered forms of thealcohol dehydrogenase enzyme have also been reported in severalAsian populations. The two enzymes, aldehyde and alcohol dehydrogenase, probablyinteract in some individuals to amplify the adverse reaction toalcohol consumption (57). Since this reaction discourages heavydrinking, the observation that it commonly occurs in somepopulations where alcoholism is relatively rare suggests thatalcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase mutations might be a majordeterminant of alcohol consumption, abuse, and dependence. Thiswould seem to hold true for Taiwan and Japan where the reactionoccurs in 30 to 50 percent of individuals. Research on these twoenzymes among other racial and ethnic groups is scanty andinconclusive. The role genetics plays in the heritability of alcohol andother drug problems has been studied for the past 30 years. Whilethis topic is more thoroughly addressed in chapter 3, one pointis worth mentioning here. Of the more than 30 family, twin, andadoption studies that have been completed, the vast majority haveused white males as study subjects. Clearly, among differentracial and ethnic groups the relationship between geneticheritability and increased susceptibility to alcohol and otherdrug problems is an area that deserves further study. While race and ethnicity in and of themselves are notpredictive risk factors for future substance abuse, by reviewingwhen, how, and why certain substances became problematic withindifferent racial and ethnic groups, insight can be gained intothe generational impact drugs have had on these populations. Fourbroad racial and ethnic groups (and one multiracial and ethnicgroup, see box 6-4) are discussed below in the following manner:historical perspectives; prevalence statistics; psychosocial andcultural antecedents; and selected prevention programs. Aseparate section on areas for future research is also included. Native American Indians/Alaska Natives There are more than 1.5 million Americans Indians and AlaskanNatives throughout the United States, with vastly differentlanguages and cultural beliefs. Even within the same tribe theremay be a good deal of cultural diversity, since differences existbetween reservation and rural tribal members, and those residingin urban settings. While urban dwelling American Indians mayconstitute more than 50 percent of the total Indian population,little is known concerning their health status (59). The American Indians' introduction to alcohol dates back tothe early 1600s and their initial interactions with Europeantrappers and settlers. Much of the early trading between theEuropeans and American Indians involved an exchange of alcohol.It was not long before alcohol became a considerable problem formany American Indian tribes. Some researchers speculate thatbecause American Indians lacked a prior drinking history, or rolemodel for moderate drinking practices, many tribes adopted aquick and copious style of drinking, consistently drinking to thepoint of intoxication. However, in other tribes, it is appearsthat being intoxicated was deemed unacceptable, and over timethese tribes developed a "social" drinking style (35). Prevalence statistics Studies among American Indian adolescents have shown thatprevalence rates for licit and illicit drug use varyinsignificantly between tribes (5,4). However, compared tonon-Indian youth, Indian adolescents consistently begin usingalcohol, illicit substances, cigarettes, and inhalants at ayounger age, at higher rates, and in combination with each other(10,60,69). With regard to alcohol, there is often a great dealof peer pressure to drink as the Indian thing to do (42). Studieshave shown that Indian youth are three times more likely to beinvolved in alcohol-related offenses than their white or Hispaniccounterparts. A 1982 study indicated that alcohol was involved inas many as 58 percent of Indian juvenile arrests (63 percent formales, 37 percent for females)(60). In some tribes, up to 30 percent of American Indianadolescents have used inhalants, most notably, gasoline and glue.The age group with the highest rate of inhalant use was 11- to13-year-olds. Contrary to the popular belief that inhalant abuseoccurs primarily among boys, research among American Indiansrevealed that eighth grade girls and boys were equally likely tohave inhaled volatile substances. While the rate for Indianinhalant use decreases substantially among high school age youth(down to 4 percent), it is still 2.5 times greater than the ratefor non-Indian youth of that age. Interestingly, while the rateof inhalant use has remained relatively stable among Indian youthsince 1984, there has been a steady rise of reported use amongnon-Indian adolescents (66). While there is no substantial difference in alcohol use amongvarious tribal adolescents, rates do differ between the drinkingpatterns of tribal adults. Contrary to the still pervasivedrunken Indian stereotype, many tribes have levels of adultalcohol use below the national average (42). Consistent with theU.S. population as a whole, American Indian males are more likelyto drink than females (42,35). In some tribes it is permissiblefor adolescent females to experiment with alcohol, with theunderstanding that when adulthood is reached they are expected toabstain or drink only rarely. As is true for adolescents, adult Indians encounter anincreased rate of legal complications due to alcohol and druguse. Data on urban American Indians has shown that while underthe influence of alcohol and/or other drugs, they are arrested atfour times the rate for blacks and 10 times the rate for whites(44). Few statistics exist to quantify illicit substance use amongthe adult American Indian population. While alcohol is clearly amajor problem for some tribes, future research efforts shouldinclude data on the use of illicit substances. Psychosocial/cultural antecedents The relationship between the majority of American Indians andthe early settlers was suffused with violence, distrust, deceit,and perhaps more than anything, forcible and abrupt change. Thefood American Indians ate, how they dressed, where and how theylived, what language they spoke, tribal governing structures, andhow they worshiped were, for the most part, forcibly altered toconform with the newly dominant society's cultural and moralviews. While these involuntary changes occurred severalgenerations ago, their impact on the American Indian cultureshould not be underestimated. In some instances, tribal traditions, languages, and methodsof worship were lost. Thousands of American Indian children, someas young as 3 years old, were removed from their families andplaced in federally funded and run boarding schools, wherephysical, verbal, and sexual abuse were common. Nuclear andextended families were dispersed, and with them, a vital socialsupport system. Acculturation issues abounded. Children returnedhome from boarding schools unable to speak their native language,or understand the importance of their cultural traditions. Thesecultural problems are multigenerational, and current studiesreveal that American Indian children report more emotionalproblems, mental health problems, and low self-esteem thannon-Indian children (60). While the relationship between many ofthese psychosocial/cultural antecedents and increased substanceabuse levels has yet to be formally evaluated, clearly theAmerican Indian people have been, and in some may continue to be,subjected to cultural disruption. Prevention programs For substance abuse prevention programs to be effectivewithin the American Indian population it is important to realizethe diversity that exists between tribes and villages. Forexample, a specific program tailored to New Mexico Navajos livingon the Navajo reservation may be culturally unacceptable toWinnebago Indians living in urban Minneapolis, MN. However,several fairly universal themes permeate American Indian culture:the importance of tribal identity, which is an individual'smembership or affiliation with specific tribe(s); a belief thateach human is a multidimensional being made up of a body, mind,and spirit, and that the spirit world coexists and intermingleswith the physical world; the importance of sharing andgenerosity, allegiance to one's family and community, respect forelders, noninterference, orientation to present time, and harmonywith nature; the importance of an oral tradition as a primarymethod of teaching values, attitudes, legends, and stories; anemphasis on observant, reflective, and integrative skills whichlead to communication patterns that give virtue to silence,listening, nonverbal cues, and learning by example; and thepresence of rituals and symbols that are acknowledged for theirunderlying significance, which is expected to emerge as time andexperience go on (72). One example that assists communities in the development ofculturally sensitive programs is an instructional publicationcompiled by The Four Worlds Development Project in Alberta,Canada. Information has been collected on health promotion andprevention efforts by various indigenous people from around theworld. The text assists American Indian communities in tailoringprogram planning, training, and implementation techniques withtheir culture beliefs and specific needs (24). Blacks A great deal of diversity exists within the black community.One reflection of that diversity is the use of the terms AfricanAmerican and black. Some researchers use African American todefine black persons who are direct descendants of men and womenbrought to the United States as slaves, whereas blacks is used todefine all people and cultures of African descent, includingblack people from the West Indies, Africa, and the Americas. Attimes, the two terms are used interchangeably (72). For thissection, both terms will be utilized where appropriate. Historically Many of the first blacks to arrive in the United States didso as slaves. Plantation owners were responsible for regulatingmuch of their slaves' alcohol consumption. During holidays,alcohol was routinely distributed to the slaves in reward fortheir loyalty and hard work, and the subsequent drunken revelrieswere tolerated. This controlled permissiveness began to change inthe early 1800s, as clandestine groups of black slaves begantheir quest for freedom. It was at this point that blacks wereprohibited from owning stills, or even being in possession ofalcoholic beverages. These laws persisted after the Civil War,when technically, blacks had been granted citizenship (14). Spanning the late 1800s through the late 1960s, hundreds ofthousands of blacks left the South and, looking for work, headedfor northern cities. This period was later described as the"Great Migration," with a total outmigration estimatedat 4.3 million individuals (72,14). This outmigration contributedsubstantially to defining the large number of blacks currentlyfound in many of the northern urban areas. Unfortunately, many ofthose seeking work did not find it, nor did they find that theywere free from racism, discrimination, and oppression. Slowly,the numbersleaving the South decreased, and by the 1970s therewas actually some migration back into the southern states by bothnorthern-born blacks and individuals returning home afterunsuccessful moves to the North. Prevalence statistics Differences in adolescent drug use among high school seniorsby race and ethnicity were discussed earlier in this chapter (seebox 6-A). Among this group, alcohol, cigarette, and illicit druguse was lowest among black and Asian youth, even after inclusionof background and lifestyle factors. Obviously, a drawback tothis type of survey is that high school dropouts are not includedin the analyses. The 1991 event dropout rate (which measures theproportion of individuals who dropped out of school over aspecified time period) for grades 10 to 12, ages 15 to 24, revealdropout percentages of 3.2 for whites, 6.0 for blacks, and 7.3for Hispanics (63). While the event dropout rate for blacks isdouble that of white students, low alcohol and drug usage rateshave also been found among black eighth and tenth graders, so thelow rate of substance use among black twelfth graders cannot bedue entirely to dropout rates (75). While use of alcohol, cigarettes, and illicit drugs isrelatively low among blacks, data on heavy or frequent use ofsuch substances differs. The 1991 NHSDA data for individuals aged12 to 20 found that 7.3 percent of whites reported heavy alcoholuse (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5 ormore days in the past 30 days), Hispanics reported 3.9 percent,and blacks reported 2.7 percent. However, for those individualsaged 21 or older, heavy alcohol use did not differ significantlybetween whites and blacks (5.0 vs. 6.0 percent), but wassignificantly higher among Hispanics (6.6 percent) (77). Otherstudies on heavy alcohol use, by gender, have shown that whitemen aged 18 to 29 report the highest prevalence of heavydrinking, which then declined in subsequent age groups.Conversely, the abstention rate for black males was highest amongthose aged 18 to 29, while subsequent age groups showedsignificantly increased levels of heavy drinking--among whom halfreport either frequent heavy or frequent high maximum drinking(70). Similarly, white women in the 18 to 29 age group weresignificantly more likely to drink, and to drink heavily, thanwere young black women (67). Past-month use (which does not necessarily constitute abuse)of an illicit substance by race and ethnicity was discussed atthe beginning of this section (see figure 6-2). However, the 1992NHSDA also contains more specific data for some of the mostcommonly used substances such as marijuana and cocaine. Of theblacks age 12 and older surveyed, 3.2 reported using marijuanaonce a week or more compared to 2.5 percent for whites andHispanics. Blacks also had the highest reported weekly use ofcocaine (0.5 percent) compared to Hispanic and white percentages(0.4 and 0.3, respectively) (78). Persistence of drug use has also been used as anotherindicator of substance use severity and is measured by percent ofmonthly users divided by percent of lifetime users. It has beenshown that blacks and Hispanics have a different pattern of drugpersistence from that of whites. Data on cocaine use analyzedfrom the 1990 NHSDA showed that the persistence rate for blacksage 18 to 25 was almost three times that of whites (.29 vs.. 09),and among those aged 26 to 34, the rate for blacks was four timeshigher than that for whites (.21 vs.. 05). In both age groups,the persistence rates for Hispanics were between those of blacksand whites. It is important to note that the differences inpersistence did not appear to extend to alcohol and marijuana(32). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents At least initially, many blacks did not arrive in the UnitedStates voluntarily. The legacy of slavery has shaped much ofblack culture. Black slaves struggled with many of the sameissues as American Indians: loss of languages, traditions, andreligious beliefs; assimilation and acculturation issues; and thebreakup of nuclear and extended families. Not allowed to expresstheir original languages, cultures, and beliefs, blacks attemptedto establish new cultural identities amidst oppression,segregation, and racism. Hypotheses concerning alcoholism among black males have beenproposed by several studies. Some researchers believe that theincrease in the number of heavy drinkers among black males intheir thirties may be due to feelings of frustration and failureconcerning career expectations. A complementary view points tothe combination of high unemployment rates among black malescoupled with the large numbers of liquor stores found in manyurban black neighborhoods, as having contributed to the alcoholproblems faced by black men (14,82). Prevention programs With respect to the use of alcohol and other drugs, commonthemes link blacks. In general, social stratification, church andcommunity involvement, and racial identity are thought to beimportant variables in attitudes toward alcohol and drug use(72,14). The level of importance will vary between individualsand groups depending on environmental factors. One program citedas exemplary by the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP)is called Super II, and targets primarily at risk, blackinner-city youths 11 to 17 and their parents. The design andimplementation of the program emphasizes holism and culturalcompetence, viewing them as crucial in reducing the strength ofrisk factors and increasing the strength of resiliency factors.The program takes place through already established agencies inthe communities (Boys Clubs and Girls Clubs) and incorporates thechildrens' caregivers, youth and recreational workers, policeofficials, local corporations, and a variety of social serviceagencies. The first-year evaluation report found reductions infour of five major categories of alcohol- and drug- relatedbehavior. These included frequency of use and amount of use,number of modalities of use, alcohol- and drug-related behaviorproblems, and media influenceability (71). Another antidrug abuse campaign is being waged by theCongress of National Black Churches, Inc. (CNBC), a nationalnonprofit religious organization comprised of a variety ofdenominations. Through a variety of programs, the CNBC clergy aremobilizing, creating, and coordinating groups of individualsinterested in bringing about positive change in theircommunities. Program strategies are implemented in partnershipwith the police, criminal justice agencies, school systems,social service agencies, private organization and businesses, andinformal community networks to reduce the supply of and demandfor drugs. Hispanics Historically The term Hispanic was first used by the U.S. Census Bureau in1980 to designate those individuals who resided in the UnitedStates and whose cultural origins were in Mexico, Puerto Rico,Cuba, Central America, and other Latin American countries. Notall members of this group accept the term and prefer to usephrases such as Latino or la raza (literally, "therace"). Data from the 1990 census reveal an Hispanicpopulation of more than 20 million, and projections indicate thatHispanics will be the largest minority group in the United Statessometime between the years 2000 and 2010. Hispanics of Mexicanorigin, by far the largest Hispanic group (63 percent), areclustered in the southwest, particularly California and Texas.Puerto Ricans, excluding those living on the island of PuertoRico, are the second largest subgroup (12 percent) and liveprimarily in the Northeast, especially in and around New YorkCity, New York. Cubans (5 percent) live primarily around theirport of entry, Miami, Florida, though large numbers are found inNew Jersey and New York. Dominicans, who reside primarily in theNortheastern Atlantic States, are also beginning to grow innumber. In the past 10 years, there has been a large immigrationof Central Americans to the United States. These individuals havecome primarily from civil war-plagued countries includingGuatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. It is highly possible thatmany of the problems faced by newly arrived Hispanic immigrantsmay be exacerbated among this population who have left theircountries involuntarily. Refugees escaping political turmoil oropen warfare often show signs of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder(72). Prevalence statistics NIDA data collected from 1975 to 1991 on drug use amongtwelfth graders, as well as data from 1991 for eighth and tenthgraders, reveal the following for Hispanic students: as a group,Hispanic youth had the highest lifetime and annual prevalencerates in the senior year for PCP, cocaine, crack, heroin, ice,and steroids, compared to whites and blacks, and the rates forcrack and steroid use were particularly high; among eighthgraders, Hispanics had higher rates of past month use forvirtually all the drugs surveyed including, cocaine, heroin,inhalants, alcohol, marijuana, hallucinogens, and cigarettes. Inother words, in eighth grade, before a considerable number ofstudents has dropped out, Hispanic youth have the highestprevalence of nearly all drug use, but by twelfth grade, whiteshave the highest usage rates. The researchers suggest twopossible explanations, which are not necessarily exclusive. Thefirst being that the high dropout rate for Hispanics in latergrades (in some areas as high as 40 percent) is causing a shiftin the rates, and the second is that while Hispanic youth beginexperimenting earlier, white youth catch up by the later grades(75). National statistics for 1992 of past-month use of any illicitsubstance indicated that rates for Hispanics and whites were notsignificantly different, and were slightly lower than those forblacks (see figure 6-2). The same database also revealed that forthe illicit substances measured, Hispanic rates either fellbetween black and white rates, or were the lowest rates reportedby an ethnic group. The only exception would be the heavy alcoholuse data (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5or more days within the past 30 days) for 1991 (1992 data not yetavailable) which showed that Hispanics aged 21 or older reportedsignificantly more heavy alcohol use within the past month ascompared to whites and blacks (77). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents Dignidad, respeto, confianza--dignity, respect, and trust--are important elements in the Hispanic culture. Like manyimmigrants to the United States, Hispanics deal with language,cultural, racial, and economic barriers. These barriers and howthey are handled within the Hispanic culture have a great deal todo with subsequent alcohol and drug problems. To a large extent,drinking (at times heavily) among Hispanic males is not onlyexpected, but encouraged. Much of the research literature hastherefore centered around alcohol and its misuse. To be able todrink heavily and maintain "control" is a valuedcharacteristic among most Hispanic men (38). Personal identitiesfor a vast majority of Hispanic men are intricately entwined withthe notion of machismo, which generally connotes strength,masculinity, independence, and responsibility (1). The man of thefamily is expected to provide for and take care of his wife andchildren. For those who may be unable to fulfill this role, dueto difficulties learning English and/or procuring employment, thesocial drinking pattern can change from one of low frequency andhigh quantity, to high frequency and high quantity (38,1). Thisdrinking pattern varies between Hispanic groups, however. A studycompleted in 1981 found that drinking levels among newly arrivedDominicans, Guatemalans, and Puerto Ricans, when compared topreimmigration levels, decreased, increased, and remained thesame, respectively (1). As is relatively true for other cultures, heavy drinking isnot condoned for Hispanic women. This is not to say that it doesnot exist. While the majority of first generation Hispanic womengenerally abstain or drink very little, changes in drinkingpatterns among the following generations have been observed. Tothe distress of many first generational Hispanic families, astheir daughters and granddaughters become increasinglyacculturated, the drinking patterns and alcohol problems moreclosely mirror those found in the general population (26).Another change observed among more acculturated Hispanic women isthe diminishment of marianismo, which is the female complement tomachismo, and encompasses such behaviors as submissiveness,humility, tolerance, virtuosity, and devotion to the male(whether father, husband, or first son). Prevention programs Important intergroup differences need to be understood forthe planning, implementation, and evaluation of substance abuseprevention programs. For example, while two immigrants, oneMexican and the other El Salvadorian, may both speak Spanish andmay both be experiencing many of the same difficulties inadjusting to life in the United States, they are very likely tohave had vastly different lifetime and cultural experiences (72). Funds from CSAP as well as the National Institute on AlcoholAbuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) have been distributed to severaldemonstration projects throughout the United States and PuertoRico that target high-risk Hispanic youth and their families.Many of these programs are similar to others previously outlinedin this report in their attempt to be as comprehensive aspossible through the coordination of families, schools, lawenforcement, and local social services and businesses. Several ofthe programs are creating their own audiovisual and writtenmaterials in Spanish, others are utilizing activities such asEnglish courses, puppet shows, and live theater performances,while others employ peer group counseling and mentoring programs(69). Asian and Pacific Island Americans Historically According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Asian and Pacific IslandAmericans are the fastest growing population in the UnitedStates. Between 1980 and 1988, the number of Asian and PacificIsland Americans increased by 76 percent compared with anincrease of 36 percent within the Hispanic population. Similar tothe other racial and ethnic categories, the term Asian andPacific Island American gives one the impression of homogeneity,while in reality, over 60 different racial and ethnic groups arelumped in this bracket. Some of the diverse populations includedin this group are Hawaiians, Guamanians, Filipinos, Thais,Bengalis, and Sri Lankans. Beside the obvious differences inlanguage, and cultural norms and beliefs, is the degree to whichdifferent subpopulations have acculturated and/or assimilated tothe dominant culture. Many Chinese and Japanese families havebeen in the United States for three generations or more, which isin sharp contrast to the majority of first-generation Vietnamese,Koreans, Asian Indians, and Filipinos (72,85). Prevalence statistics Research on substance use and abuse within the Asian andPacific Island American population appears to be sporadic, andoften limited to alcohol. While the three national surveys NHSDA,the National Adolescent School Health Survey, and the High SchoolSenior Survey, all collect separate data for Asian and PacificIsland Americans, only the High School Senior Survey routinelyanalyzes the data separately. Due to small sample sizes, theremaining two surveys included Asian and Pacific Islanders underthe racial and ethnic category of "other." Research on alcohol consumption patterns among adult Asianand Pacific Island Americans consistently shows that thispopulation drinks substantially less than whites and Hispanics,and slightly less than blacks. Though subgroup variation doesexist, as data reveal, native Hawaiians drink at levelscomparable to those of whites, among mainland Asian Americans,Japanese Americans drink the most, followed by Koreans andChinese Americans. However, Japanese, Korean, and Filipino menall have roughly the same percentage of heavy drinkers at 28percent. This style of heavy drinking is typically associatedwith business entertainment and after work socializing (68).Among Asian and Pacific Island American women, four-fifths ofKorean and Filipino women were reported to be abstainers, as weretwo-thirds of Chinese women, and one-third of Japanese women.Among women who drank, the percentage who did so heavily varied:12 percent for Japanese women; less than 4 percent for Filipinowomen; and virtually none for Chinese and Korean women (68). Asimilar statistic for white women showed 14.5 percent reporteddrinking heavily (73). Evidence suggests, however, that theprevalence of drinking may be on the rise among both men andwomen Asian and Pacific Island Americans, although the exactreasons for this remain unclear. Some researchers have suggestedthat paralleling other immigrant populations, the moreacculturated and assimilated generations will tend to adopt thedrinking patterns of the dominant culture. Yet other researcherspoint to the fact that a significant number of second and thirdgeneration Asian and Pacific Island Americans have not adopted amore copious style of drinking. For adolescent Asian Americans, the majority of the studiesmirrors the findings for the adults--this group consistently hasthe lowest prevalence of alcohol and other drug use for allracial and ethnic groups with the possible exception of blackyouth. Although, a prospective study conducted in North Carolinafound an alarming increase in reported alcohol and other drug useamong Asian Americans over a three-year period in the late 1980s.The reason for this increase at a time when prevalence rates forother races and ethnicities was decreasing remains unknown (72).Another study on youth in California reported that ChineseAmerican youth used quaaludes twice as often as white andHispanic youth, and five times as often as black youth (68).Drinking statistics for Asian American youth are again similar tothose reported by the adult population, that is, their overallprevalence rate is one of the lowest, but statistics for heavydrinking are similar to those found among white youth (72). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents Why does this population have such low overall rates ofalcohol and other drug use? The diversity present within theAsian and Pacific Island American group makes it impossible tolist all the different cultural factors that could influencealcohol and drug use patterns. However, among many of thesubpopulations, anthropologists and substance abuse experts havefound the existence of the following philosophies: moderation,family reputation, humility, keeping a low profile, negativecommunity sanctions on excessive drinking and behavior, and theimpact of parental drinking practices (83). Among Chinesespecifically, alcohol is in an important part of many religiousand celebratory ceremonies, yet excessive use is stronglydiscouraged. One study in California uncovered additional behavioralfactors that influenced drinking patterns among some AsianAmerican men. Japanese respondents were heavily influenced bytheir friends' drinking; among Chinese men, those with moreeducation were more likely to drink; and Korean men were stronglyinfluenced by their parents' drinking habits (68). Few researchers have examined psychosocial influences onAsian and Pacific Island American adolescent drinking or otherdrug use. One factor which has been mentioned, though, is thepressure Asian American youth, in particular, are under tosucceed, especially academically. Thirty-four percent of AsianAmericans are college educated, more than twice that of theUnited States population as a whole. Those with the least amountof college education were American Indians (7.7 percent) andPacific Islanders (9.3 percent). Asian parents are similar toparents, in general, in their hopes for their children's success.However, among some subpopulations (notably Japanese, Korean, andChinese) the feelings for their children are often tied to thechild's academic achievement. When their children perform poorlyin school, some parents respond with strongcriticism,disapproval, and shame. This can understandably add asubstantial amount of stress to an adolescent who may already becoping with language and cultural differences (72). Prevention programs Mainstream culture in the United States, to a great degree,emphasizes individuality, competitiveness, and monetary success.Conversely, for many Asian and Pacific Island Americans thequalities most stressed are the needs of the family, sharing andgenerosity, and a belief in who you are rather than what you own.Because the extended family is so important in many of thecultures, it is often the first group that an individual withproblems will turn to versus an "outsider" or socialservice agency. Substance abuse prevention practitioners need tobe aware of the strong resistance within many Asian and PacificIsland Americans to seek outside assistance. One innovative substance abuse program entitled Na Keiki OKa`Aina (Children of the Land) is being implemented in Oahu,Hawaii. Children attending the local Makaha elementary schoolwork several hours a week on a farm where they learn to care forthe land, their environment, and themselves as alternatives tolifestyles that rely on alcohol and other drugs. The program usesthe cultural values of native Hawaiians, which emphasize"warm, open friendship and love," love of the earth,and other spiritual values. Since the program's inception, classbehavior has noticeably improved, English scores have increased,and a survey measuring drug use in the district schools showedthat Makaha school was the only school that reported a decrease(74). Areas for Future Research Among Different Racial and EthnicGroups While this section of the report has reiterated the need toview racial and ethnic groups as heterogeneous, the majority ofsubstance abuse data is not collected or examined in this way. Todate, a variety of distinct cultures are usually grouped underone classification, and generalizations are made concerning thisgroup's drug use. While substance abuse prevention programs areoften better tailored to specific subpopulations and cultures, itis virtually impossible to adequately evaluate these programswhen little baseline substance abuse data exists for specificsubpopulations. There is therefore room for improvement in thecollection of prevalence data on alcohol and other drug use andabuse among distinct racial and ethnic groups. Furthermore, long-term prospective studies, which are essential for understandingrisk and protective factors specific to different groups, areextremely scarce. Biomedical research on different racial and ethnic groups hasalso been inconclusive and scanty (with the possible exception ofalcohol research and Asians). ECONOMICS Economics can be viewed as a factor in individual substanceabuse in two ways. In areas where substance abuse is already wellestablished and viable employment opportunities are scarce,selling illicit substances can seem very appealing. Severalquestions arise from this scenario. Are individuals lured intothe world of illegal drug sales by income potential? And, aredrug dealers more likely to become drug abusers because they aredealers? Both of these questions have been addressed under thefirst section. A parallel issue is that of poverty and the daily stressesencountered by individuals living in chronically poor areas. Doindividuals living in these poor areas abuse substances ingreater numbers or are fewer social services available in theseareas, and thus the consequences from substance abuse are moreacutely felt and visible? Generated Income While few studies have attempted to ascertain the individualincomes of drug dealers, two studies have concentrated on thestreet sale of illicit drugs by urban youth (21,52). The researchrevealed that individual dealers reported mean gross monthlyincomes of $3,558 to $5,934. Even if these self-reported earningswere exaggerated, this sum of money is clearly more than manyurban youth could hope to obtain in legitimate jobs at a medianof $7 per hour. This earning potential may be a serious obstacle toprevention, intervention, and treatment programs targeted towardurban adolescents. The staff at an innovative treatment programfor drug dealers in Baltimore, Maryland, has discovered thedifficulties former dealers have in giving up the fast lifestylesthey once led. Most dealers say they do it because of the money," saysa staff counselor. "They can't see working at McDonald's forminimum wage when they're making $500 to $1,000 per day," headds. Counselors try to help clients think beyond the idea ofmaking fast money to the moral, social and legal issuesassociated with drug dealing. They find, however, that the moralissue is not always clear-cut. In many cases, clients aresupporting their families and it is hard for them to see they aredoing something wrong when they are paying the bills. Overall, counselors say their clients are addicted to themoney. "What we do is help them see what is all around them,what they're doing to themselves and their community by sellingdrugs (48). The potential for monetary gain may be especially true withinthe crack trade. A young black male from San Francisco,California, explained his preference for the immediate rewards ofselling crack over the seemingly meaningless rituals of school: Forget about school. I'd rather have a life of selling drugs.?.?. When you go to school, you do nothing. You sit around, havebooks in your backpack, take`em home, do your homework, come backto school, get some grade. When you sell drugs, see, I hadsatisfaction of seeing my work, getting some money for it (22). It would appear then that for many urban youth, sellingillicit drugs supplies purpose, companionship, and income withoutcompromising dignity. More money can be gained from the sale ofillicit drugs than through petty crimes, and certainly more thanthrough minimum wage jobs. Another issue to be addressed is the dealer-turned-client.From the two previously cited studies, dealers were estimated tospend between 59 and 71 percent of their income each month on thepurchase of illicit drugs. For example, out of $3,558 gross permonth, $1,226 was spent purchasing additional drugs for business,$883 was spent on drugs for personal consumption, and anadditional $533 on expenses associated with drug dealing. The Urban Institute has also reviewed the relationshipbetween using and selling drugs. Its study population wascomposed of 387 inner-city adolescent males of ninth- and tenth-grade age. Of this sample, 79.6 percent reported that theyneither used nor sold drugs within the past year. Of theremainder, 19.0 percent reported both using and selling drugs,44.3 percent reported selling only, and 36.7 percent reportedusing only. They also discovered that the greater the level ofinvolvement in either using or selling, the higher the likelihoodof doing both (13). In summary, the research completed thus far neither confirmsnor negates the possible influence income potential has on luringindividuals into drug dealing. Nor can one conclude that drugdealers are more likely to become substance abusers thannondealers. Poverty Alcohol and drug problems are present not only among thepoor, but are poor individuals at greater risk for developingthese problems? While a relatively straight forward question, notonly is poverty difficult to define, but drawing conclusionsconcerning an individual's potential for future substance abusebased on one or two variables, such as family income oreducational level, is overly simplistic and deceptive. Toadequately review this question, a milieu of both individual andaggregate measures should be present in any analysis done. In recent years, great attention has been paid to the plightof the urban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- citycommunities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. Forindividuals living in these localities, the consequences of theseproblems are serious and far reaching. Yet according to the 1980census only 9 percent of all the poor, and 21 percent of all thepoor blacks, lived in these types of areas. To define the problems of the urban poor as predominantly"black problems" does a disservice to the two-thirds ofAfrican Americans who are not poor, as well as to the two- thirdsof the poor in our central cities who are not black (8). Poverty within rural communities, while lacking much of theviolence and crime of urban areas, is no less oppressive. In1987, compared with the general population, rural residents wereless likely to be employed and to have completed high school.They had lower average incomes and higher poverty rates than didurban residents, and one out of every six rural families lived inpoverty (compared with one in eight urban families). This ratioapproached one out of two for black rural families. Areas ofchronic poverty were concentrated in the South, where 25 millionof the Nation's 57 million rural residents live (48 percent), andwhere four out of every ten rural residents were poor, elderly,or both (61). To assess poverty and its relationship to alcohol and drugabuse problems, one must find appropriate measures. Someresearchers have utilized the Federal guidelines for poverty,while others employ measures of Socioeconomic Status (SES), suchas educational level and household income. To date, the largestand most comprehensive analysis of SES variables and substanceuse has been accomplished by NIDA (76). Both bivariate andmultivariate analyses were completed on data collected in 1988and 1990 from NHSDA (see box 6-C). The NIDA report has two major limitations. First, theanalysis focused on indicators of drug and alcohol use, ratherthan indicators of problem use or hard-core use. While the reporthas categories for frequent/heavy use and recent use, it cannotbe assumed that individuals who reported such use had alcohol ordrug problems. Secondly, the report lacks data for transient,homeless, or institutionalized individuals, many of whom haveserious alcohol and/or drug problems. Table 6-3 presents the findings from the multivariateanalysis of the NHSDA data. The SES variables pertinent to apossible link between poverty and substance use are educationallevel, occupation of chief wage earner, employment status, numberof jobs held in past 5 years, median housing value, and percentof housing that is owned. Neither personal income nor householdincome were included in the analysis, as personal income was mostmeaningful only for persons who worked and household income datawere not available in the 1988 survey. Alcohol consumption within the past month was measured onthree levels: abstinence; nonheavy use; and heavy use. Marijuanause was measured by any past-month use and cocaine use wasmeasured by any past-year use (both categories could includefrequent as well as casual users). Major findings from theanalysis include: o SES variables associated with poverty and predictive ofpast month abstinence from alcohol were: not having worked in thepast 5 years and having lived in a census block with a highpercentage of owner occupancy. For users, versus abstainers, SESattributes predictive of nonheavy alcohol use included havingattended college (regardless of completion) and living in censusareas with high housing values. Significant for heavy alcohol usewas not having completed high school, holding three or more jobsin the past 5 years, and living in a census area with low housingvalues. No employment status or occupational categories werefound to be independently predictive of heavy alcohol use. o For any past-month marijuana use the independent SESpredictors associated with poverty were being unemployed andhaving held three or more jobs in the past 5 years. Individualswho reported no marijuana use in the past month were more likelyto have had some degree of college participation. o Many of the SES predictors for cocaine use in the past yearwere similar to those identified for marijuana use: beingunemployed and having worked three or more jobs in the past 5years. SES characteristics predictive of no reported cocaine usein the past year were being a college graduate and having apart-time job. This type of analysis is an exercise in inclusion andexclusion. A myriad of individual and aggregate characteristicsare initially considered in the equation and, depending on theoutcome of interest, whether it be heavy alcohol use or marijuanause in the past month, different variables will show themselvesto be either predictive or not predictive of the outcome. Becausepersonal income and household income were not included in themultivariate analysis, but are often used as SES measures forpoverty, tables 6-4 and 6-5 depict the bivariate analysis done byNIDA (76). Again, this analysis reveals associations, notcausality. Personal income (which is highly correlated with anindividual's age and sex) was examined only for respondents whoreported working full time during the year prior to the survey.Associations between personal income and drug use weresignificant for most drugs. For every drug use measure (exceptpast-month use of alcohol), plus heavy use of alcohol, thepercentage of users declined as the income level rose.Differences between income levels for frequent use of marijuanaand cocaine, concurrent heavy use of alcohol with marijuana, anduse of psychotherapeutics, hallucinogens, inhalants, and crackwere all statistically significant and more than twice as commonin the lowest income group as in the highest. Low income was alsoassociated with higher rates of abstinence from alcohol as wellas higher rates of heavy drinking. The associations between household income (which is lessaffected by age and sex) and drug and alcohol use wereconsiderably weaker than those observed for personal income. Theonly statistically significant associations were for alcohol use,concurrent heavy alcohol use with marijuana, and use ofhallucinogens. Those with household incomes of $40,000 or higherwere about twice as likely as those with incomes of less than$12,000 to have used any amount of alcohol in the past month.However, the rates of heavy drinking differed little across theincome levels. Other categories of drug use appear to be slightlyless common among the wealthiest households, but, in general,drug use was not strongly related to household income. From these types of analyses, a straightforward "yes orno" response to the initial question, which linked povertyto increased individual risk for drug abuse, is clearlyimpossible. The NIDA analyses demonstrated that the type andquantity of an individual's substance use is correlated with avariety of both individual as well as geographic characteristics.Furthermore, while the NIDA report was the largest and mostcomprehensive to date, some segments of the population, many ofwhom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded fromthe survey. As one economist noted, "There is much we still need tolearn about poverty. Much of the past research has focusedprimarily on economic questions, reflecting the extensiveinvolvement by economists in this work. Research is much morelimited on topics such as the causes of changing familystructures, the impacts of neighborhoods and family structure onchildren's opportunities in life, personal and family copingstrategies among the poor, how expectations about futureopportunities are formed, and how these expectations influencebehavior" (8). PSYCHOSOCIAL/BEHAVIORAL Aggressiveness In much of the research literature the term aggression isused almost exclusively when referring to young children andadolescents between the ages of 13 and 15. Shortly after this agea divergence appears within this identified aggressive group. Thevast majority of children "outgrow" their aggressivebehavior, while a smaller percentage progress into or alsoexhibit, among other things, conduct disorders, antisocialbehavior, delinquency, and violence. Discussing each of theseareas is beyond the scope of this report. However, it should benoted that as is true for many individual risk factors, a numberof these behaviors are intricately meshed. Definitions for the term aggression vary considerably and mayinclude tardiness, breaking rules, fighting, vandalism, crueltyto animals, and verbal abuse of other children. Many studiessimply fail to define it. Wherever possible, study definitions ofaggression will be outlined. The children in the various studies on aggressiveness andsubsequent drug abuse ranged in age from 5 to 20 years old.Aggressive behavior in the majority of the studies was exhibitedalmost exclusively by boys. While girls were included in thestudy populations, the number exhibiting aggressive behavior wasvery small. However, the presence of aggressive behavior amongsome young girls has not been shown to be predictive of lateradolescent delinquency or substance use (49). This disparitybetween the sexes has not been addressed at any length. Of the preadolescent boys who exhibited aggressive behavior,30 to 40 percent maintained this behavior into adolescence. Thiscontinued aggression has been shown to be a strong predictor ofsubsequent alcohol and drug problems (28,33, 51). Interestingly,the combination of shy and aggressive behavior has also beencorrelated with later substance use problems. It has beenpostulated that aggressive boys may be more likely to be shunnedby conventional peer groups, but accepted by other aggressivechildren who could encourage drug and alcohol use. Anothertheory, while not confirmed, suggests that young childrenrejected by conventional peer groups gravitate toward each otherand that these groups of former so-called loners may fosterdelinquent behavior in later adolescence (28). Conversely, boys(but not girls) exhibiting shy behavior have been shown as lesslikely to partake in alcohol and drug using activities as theygrew older (28,33,51). Where does this aggressive behavior originate? Some studieshave shown that young children exhibiting sociable, spontaneous,and fearless behavior are at greater risk for future aggressiveand violent conduct. Factors that seem to be protective include ashy temperament, being first born, having a small and stablefamily characterized by low discord (i.e., effective familymanagement), and having parents who regularly attend religiousservices (51). Current psychological perspectives emphasize that aggressiveand violent behaviors are "learned" responses tofrustration, that they can also be learned as instruments forachieving goals, and that the learning occurs by observing modelsof such behavior. Such models may be observed in the family,among peers, elsewhere in the neighborhood, and through the massmedia (51). This observation could, in part, explain why so few younggirls are identified as aggressive. While socially defined rolesfor adults have changed considerably in the last several decades,the socialization of children's behavior to a large extent hasnot. Certain behaviors by boys are still classified by manyadults under the "boys-will-be-boys" axiom, while thesame behaviors by girls are oftenconsidered inappropriate. Biological and genetic precursors to aggressiveness have alsobeen explored. Events associated with brain dysfunction thatappear to increase an individual's potential for aggressioninclude: brain injuries; in vitro exposure to opiates, cocaine,alcohol, and tobacco; and early environmental exposure to lead(e.g., air contaminated by leaded fuels, lead-based paint, waterfrom older plumbing systems) (51). No genetic studies specific to aggressive behavior have beenconducted. Several Scandinavian countries have researched theassociation between genetics and violence, obtaining mixedresults. No such studies have been attempted in the United States(51). By understanding the antecedents of aggressive behavior,prevention programs targeted at reducing such behavior are muchmore likely to succeed. It has been asserted thatmultidimensional programs are more effective than those thatfocus on one or two components of aggressiveness. ResearcherKaren Dodge submits: Most intervention approaches are implemented without regardfor the type of aggressive behavior under scrutiny, and thatdifferent types of aggression are likely to respond differentlyto different types of intervention. Reactive aggressive childrenwho overly attribute hostility to others in provocativesituations may respond best to treatment aimed at training themto understand better others' thoughts and feelings. Proactivelyaggressive children may respond more favorably to consistentpunishment of aggressive behavior and reinforcement ofnonaggressive responses; this latter group many also have abetter prognosis than the former group. Three interventionprograms cited as being particularly suitable for differentialimplementation with these two types of aggressive childreninclude social problem-solving skills training, anger-controltraining, and parent training (17). Several unanswered questions point to areas for futureresearch. Why do boys disproportionately exhibit aggressivebehavior? Are specific aggressive behaviors unique to certainsubpopulations? What are the differences between thoseindividuals who "grow out of" their aggressive behaviorand those who do not? Answers to these questions and others will allow for moredetailed understanding of aggressive behavior and its connectionto alcohol and drug abuse, which could in turn provide for animproved structure for the planning of appropriate preventionprograms. Delinquency and Crime Similar to aggression research, studies define and collectdata on delinquency and crime differently. Some studies use thetwo terms interchangeably, while others define delinquent acts asthose less serious versus acts such as rape, armed robbery, andmanslaughter, which are clearly illegal. Self-reported data arerelied on by some studies, while others utilize only arrestrecords. These differences must be considered when attempting togeneralize delinquent behavior to subsequent misuse of alcoholand drugs. As is true for aggressiveness, males are at greater risk fordeveloping delinquent and criminal behavior. Delinquent behaviorfor most youths appears to peak between the ages of 15 to 17,while alcohol and drug use are on the rise. However, only a smallpercentage (2 to 6 percent) of these adolescents become youngadults who continue to engage in serious criminal activitycoupled with frequent drug use. Statistics reveal that manyarrests for property and violent crimes can be attributed to thissmall group of individuals (29). Several researchers have linked delinquent and criminalbehavior to alcohol and drug abuse and have concluded theseactivities precede the use and abuse of certain substances(28,29,13,56). One such study conducted on adolescents examined therelationship between later drug use and earlier individualdelinquent behavior and delinquent peer group bonding (DPGB).Females were found less likely to engage in individual delinquentbehavior before but not after participating in a delinquent peergroup. Additionally, minority students doing well in school hadlower rates of delinquent problems than did nonminority youth whowere also doing well in school. Strong positive belief systems(beliefs that committing illegal or rule-violating acts aremorally wrong) also decreased the potential for future use ofalcohol, marijuana, and other drugs. Conversely, thoseadolescents who had high DPGB levels had increased rates ofalcohol, marijuana, and polydrug use (20). A separate study of male and female cocaine addicts analyzedthe psychosocial factors present among individuals whosubstantially increased their cocaine use from adolescence toyoung adulthood. Those who progressed to heavier use displayed asignificant lack of law abidance or social conformity (46). Several points have come to light from studies on heroinaddicts. Studies conducted in the late 1970s found that whiledelinquency preceded illicit drug use, use of alcohol and firstalcohol intoxication took place before delinquency. In fact, anaverage of two years lapsed between first alcohol intoxicationand first criminal activity for both males and females who laterbecame heroin addicts (64). A further study on male heroinaddicts that grouped participants into low-crime versushigh-crime categories found that men who had been placed in thehigh-crime group admitted significantly more contact with thecriminal justice system before becoming addicted than did thosein the low-crime group. Also, the high-crime group showed earlierand more frequent use of substances, as well as use of a widervariety of narcotic and nonnarcotic substances (47). While a relatively small number of individuals who exhibitdelinquent behavior progress to serious alcohol and drugproblems, understanding the cause(s) of the delinquent behaviormay help to decrease this number further. Psychosocial elementsthat have been associated with later delinquent behavior include: o low parent-child attachment o family conflict o family social deprivation o school failure o parental and sibling drug use and criminal behavior o poor and inconsistent family management practices (e.g.,harsh or lax discipline, lack of supervision) o attitudes and beliefs o lack of neighborhood attachment and communitydisorganization o family mobility. Neurophysiological and cognitive dimensions have also beenexamined for serious delinquents, adult criminals, and childrenwith conduct disorders. However, the findings were scanty andinconclusive (29,37). When discussing prevention programs for these children, thereis the hazard of labeling them predelinquent. This concern couldbe applied equally to most risk factors linked to future alcoholand drug problems. Labeling children as aggressive, high risk,delinquent, or developmentally slow may be a self-fulfillingprophecy. Some researchers have suggested that broad,encompassing programs should be implemented in targeted areaswhere groups exhibit a number of the risk factors previouslydescribed. This type of approach would not single out individualsbut rather would assist communities, schools, and families (29). Physical and Sexual Abuse Researchers and clinicians have increasingly addressed thepossibility that physical and sexual abuse, especially inchildhood, may be associated with an increased likelihood oflater substance abuse and addiction. Although there are many gapsin this literature, and substantive and methodological issuesthat remain to be addressed, findings from several studies thathave measured the prevalence of substance abuse strongly suggestthat additional research and the evaluation of targeted clinicalinterventions are warranted. This section highlights selectedresearch findings on the relationship of physical and sexualabuse to later substance abuse. One review article on physical abuse found that childrensubjected to physical abuse had higher levels of later substanceabuse compared to children not physically victimized. The reviewalso cited another study which found that 84 percent of thefemales in treatment for alcohol or drug addiction reported ahistory of childhood abuse (18). Childhood sexual abuse appears to be rising. The NationalIncidence Study reported in 1988 that approximately 156,000children had been recognized by public agencies (such as childprotective service agencies, mental health agencies, and theschools) as being sexually abused each year, for an annual rateof about 0.3 percent (58). This is an increase in recognizedcases of child sexual abuse of more than 300 percent between 1980and 1988, and due to the sensitive nature of the topic, isprobably a gross underestimation of the actual numbers of cases. Prevalence statistics on childhood sexual assault specific towomen range from 6 to 62 percent, depending on the definitions,methodology, and study populations used (54). One study thatrelied on a random sampling method discovered that of the 391women who agreed to participate in the study, almost 34 percentreported being sexually assaulted by age 18, which provides alifetime prevalence rate of one out of every three women. Of therespondents, over 24 percent reported an experience such as rape,15 percent had been victims of molestation, and 10 percentreported some type of noncontact sexual assault (e.g., voyeurism,verbal threats of sexual assault, being forced to watchpornography) (54). Other researchers, measuring childhoodmolestation histories among women psychiatric outpatients, havecited figures of 50 to 70 percent, versus 20 to 30 percentreported by women in nonclinical populations (12). While causality has not been established between childhoodsexual abuse and later substance abuse problems, an associationbetween the two variables has been shown. Several review articleshave summarized the findings from researchers who consistentlyreport that children exposed to sexual abuse present with agreater number of symptoms and problems compared to children whoare not victimized (12,34,55). While substance abuse problems arenot measured in all the studies, where it is measured,individuals who have been sexually abused show a much higherincidence of later substance abuse than their study counterparts(55). For example, 60 to 80 percent of individuals in substanceabuse treatment programs report having been sexual abused (12).Other researchers have classified common symptoms by age group,discovering that among adolescents who had been sexually abusedat some time in their lives, 53 percent reported abusing somesubstance (34). Studies on sexually abused women have demonstrated similarlyhigh rates. One study of women requesting appointments at acrisis counseling unit of a community health center found that 44percent of the women walk-in clients reported a history of sexualabuse as children. The sexually abused women differed from thenonabused women in many ways, but they differed most in theirsubstance abuse. The abused women were about 10 times more likelythan the nonabused women in this population to report a historyof drug abuse (21.1 percent vs. 2.3 percent) and more than twiceas likely to report a history of alcoholism (26.9 percent vs.10.5 percent) (11). A review of four separate studies on women seeking treatmentfor alcoholism shows 34 to 85 percent of the women report ahistory of sexual abuse (30); and among recovering chemicallydependent women, the topics discussed most often are sexual childabuse, incest, and rape. Uncovering the memories of these earlychildhood experiences is thought to be a contributing factor indrug relapse for some women (31). Thus, early experiences ofabuse, especially sexual abuse, may require attention intreatment programs, since they may have been important precursorsand contributors to the substance abuse and addiction, and may bemajor obstacles to successful treatment and the prevention ofrelapse. Clearly, physical and sexual abuse are not uncommonphenomena. While this section has focused on the associationbetween abusive experiences and subsequent substance abuse, thereare many other psychopathologies that also arise from sexual andphysical abuse. The research question need not be whetherphysical and sexual abuse "cause" the later substanceabuse and addiction. Clearly, many factors interact, especiallyin the home, school, and peer settings of children as they growup. However, the consistent finding of higher levels of physicaland sexual abuse among substance abusers warrants furtherresearch to disentangle the many factors that are at work. Unlikerace, ethnicity, and poverty (which are not by themselvesstrongly and independently associated with substance abuse andaddiction, but must be understood in the context of subculturesand the availability and marketing of drugs in neighborhoods andcommunities), physical and sexual abuse may more directlycontribute to later behavioral problems, including substanceabuse. Mental Disorders The sheer number of Americans with mental disorderstransforms personal tragedy into a widespread public healthproblem. Nearly one in three American adults will experience amental disorder during his or her lifetime. Moreover,approximately 1.7 to 2.4 million Americans currently suffer froma persistent and severely disabling mental disorder, such asschizophrenia or bipolar disorder (commonly known as manicdepression) (62). There exists a wide array of behaviors classified assymptomatic of mental disorders, ranging from premenstrualsyndrome, hostility toward others, and other maladaptivepersonality traits, to full-blown psychosis (2). It can at timesbe difficult to delineate where mental health ends and mentalillness begins. While many alcohol and drug problems may not be attributableprimarily to mental disorders, they can certainly be exacerbatedby these disorders. One comprehensive study found a highprevalence of comorbid (i.e., occurring at the same time) mentaldisorders and alcohol or other drug disorders--including bothabuse and dependence syndromes as defined in the DSM-III-R. Usingdata from NIMH's Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) survey of20,291 adults (aged 18 and older) in communities and in variousinstitutional settings (prisons, mental hospitals, nursing homes,and specialized treatment centers), they assessed the prevalenceof comorbid alcohol, other drug, and mental disorders.Schizophrenia, mood disorders, and anxiety disorders were amongthose studied. Specific drugs studied, in addition to alcohol,included marijuana, cocaine, opiates, barbiturates, amphetamines,and hallucinogens (50). Alcohol Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis An estimated 13.5 percent of all adults in the United Stateswill have a lifetime diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence(see figure 6-3). For these individuals, the rate of mentaldisorder was almost double that of persons with no history of analcohol disorder, and the rate of another drug disorder wasalmost six times greater. Specific comorbid mental disordersfound in people with alcohol abuse- dependence disorder includeanxiety disorders (19.4 percent), mood disorders (13.4 percent),and schizophrenia (3.8 percent). Drug Disorder (Other than Alcohol) as the Primary Diagnosis Some 6.1 percent of the total adult population will have hada primary diagnosis of drug abuse or dependency at some time intheir lives. Over half of these individuals have also beendiagnosed with a comorbid mental disorder such as anxietydisorder (28.3 percent), mood disorder (26.4 percent), orschizophrenia (6.8 percent). Compared to those persons without adrug disorder, these individuals are at more than four times therisk of having some type of mental disorder. Additionally, theseindividuals are also seven times more likely to be addicted toalcohol. Mental Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis In contrast, at some time in their lives nearly one-quarterof all adults in the United States will have had a primarydiagnosis of mental disorder. Compared with individuals having nohistory of mental disorder, people with a mental disorder facetwice the odds of having alcohol abuse- dependence and over fourtimes the odds of drug abuse dependence. Comorbid alcohol and other drug abuse or dependence disordersoccur frequently in people with the specific subtypes of mentaldisorders included in the study: o Of those who develop schizophrenia and related disordersduring their lifetimes (approximately 1.5 percent of the U.S.population), nearly half will abuse or be dependent on alcohol orother drugs, or both. o Thirty-two percent of people with mood disorders (8.3percent of the total adult population) will abuse or becomedependent on alcohol, other drugs, or both. o The anxiety disorders, as a group, occur at sometime in thelives of 14.6 percent of the population and are highly likely tobe associated with an alcohol or other drug abuse or dependencedisorder. For example, 35.8 percent of people with panicdisorder, and 32.8 percent of people with obsessive-compulsivedisorder will have some form of alcohol or other drug abuse ordependence disorder. People with both mental disorders and alcohol or other drugdisorders are likely to suffer more severe psychiatric symptoms,disruptive behaviors, aggression, and criminal behaviors. Theimportance of early detection for mental disorders is clear ifsubsequent alcohol and drug abuse problems are to be avoided. Inother cases, an individual's drug and/or alcohol problems mayprecede his or her mental disorder. In whatever order thesecomplications are distinguished, it is essential to remember thatmillions of men and women suffer through not one, but twoillnesses (62). Resiliency The majority of funding and research has been devoted tounderstanding and identifying those elements that appear to placeindividuals at a greater risk for substance abuse. However, manyof these same factors can, to some degree, be protective. Forexample, the vast majority of adolescents who have used alcohol,cigarettes, and other drugs do not grow up to become substanceabusing adults. The process of aging and successfully passingthrough various developmental stages is in itself protective. Inother cases, the lack of a particular factor is protective. Thisis true for many of the psychosocial factors such asaggressivity, delinquency, mental disorders, and physical andsexual abuse. But what about those individuals who live in stressful andchaotic conditions--who are constantly exposed to many of theserisk factors--yet who do not develop substance abuse problems.How do these individuals emerge relatively unscathed, while manyof their immediate family succumb to substance abuse? Thissection addresses a complimentary set of protective attributes,characteristics identified inindividuals who display resiliencyto the effects of various risk factors. The term resiliency can be described as the ability torecover from or adjust easily to misfortune or change. A 1991conference sponsored by the Children of Alcoholics Foundationreleased a report in which resiliency was conceptualized in thefollowing manner (15): o Resiliency is a dynamic process, not a static condition. o Resiliency is contextual; adaptive behavior in one contextmay be maladaptive in another. o Resiliency is the result of inherent personalitycharacteristics interacting with environmental factors. o Resiliency is more complex in multiple-risk situations. o Resiliency can be learned. For the most part, social science research on resiliency inchildren has not specifically addressed environmental substanceabuse, and where it has, the research has focused to a largeextent on alcoholism within the family. However, in general,resiliency studies have examined high-risk children from avariety of families and communities, of which many had substanceabuse problems. One of the largest longitudinal studies spanned a period of30 years and was completed by Emmy Werner on the Hawaiian islandof Kauai (80,81). An entire multiracial cohort of children wasfollowed from the prenatal period to young adulthood, revealinginvaluable information on resiliency in the presence of certainrisk factors. Of the 700 children originally included in thestudy, 200 were identified as at- risk for later problems basedon perinatal stress, poverty, family instability, and parentswith mental health problems. Through the children's first decadeof life, approximately 25 percent had at least one parent with aserious alcohol problem. Of these children, 41 percent laterdeveloped serious learning and behavioral problems by age 18,while the rest did not. All the children of alcoholic mothersdeveloped problems, with the exception of one. Conversely,children of alcoholic fathers "were represented in roughlyequal proportions among those who did and those who did notdevelop serious coping problems by age 18" (80). More general findings from the study highlighted thedifference between the prevalence of serious physical, learning,and behavior problems among girls and boys. Up to age 10, whenconfronted with a variety of risk factors, boys weresignificantly more likely to display a greater number ofchildhood problems requiring some type of social service and/ormedical intervention. However, this ratio changed markedly by thesecond decade (ages 10 to 18). While high- risk boys were stillthree times more likely than girls to have records of seriousdelinquency (77 vs. 26 percent), by age 18 more than twice asmany high-risk girls reported serious mental health problems.Additionally, of those children in the first decade identifiedwith serious learning and/or behavioral problems, a greaternumber of boys than girls had improved by age 18. Interestingly, the researchers also showed that some of theresilience factors identified differed between the sexes. Forexample among young girls, experiences that tended to fostergreater maturity and independence, such as absence of a father,responsibility for younger siblings, and maternal employmentoutside the home, also appeared to bolster resiliency andcompetence. On the other hand, resiliency among young boys wascorrelated with the presence of the father, little family discordor crowding, and the existence of adequate structure andsupervision. However, overall, a greater number of high-riskgirls than high-risk boys grew into resilient young adults. Several other studies have also identified factors associatedwith resiliency in children (6,19,23). One such factor isdescribed as adaptive distancing whereby the child accomplishestwo things: the child emotionally and psychologically detachesfrom the chaos of the family and resumes more "customarypursuits" in the outside world of school and friends, andthe child does not allow the caregiver's drug or alcohol problemto be the central focus of his or her world. These behaviors havebeen observed in children as young as 3 years old. A sense of purpose and future have also been identified withresiliency. Clinicians have observed very young childrenattempting to make sense of their situation upon experiencing anarray of hardships such as chronic poverty or familial substanceabuse. Resilient children display such attributes as hopefulness,hardiness, motivation, and a belief in a bright future even whenfaced with challenges and adversity. Researchers have also found that the ability to developcompetency skills was associated with resiliency. Competenceincludes "the qualities of responsiveness, flexibility,empathy and caring, communication skills, a sense of humor, andany other prosocial behavior" (6). Researchers haveconsistently documented the presence of these characteristicsamong resilient individuals, and equally important, have notedthe lack of these characteristics among individuals with severebehavioral, criminal, and mental health problems. Another element that has been associated with resiliency isthe ability to use support systems effectively. Those childrenwho tapped into school activities, spoke with counselors,actively sought an alternative parent figure or role model, andconfided in others were much more likely to be resilient thanthose children not involved in these supportive networks. Much of a person's resiliency depends on a variety ofelements including the individual's developmental stage, culturalperceptions, and "the acuteness or chronicity of the adversecircumstances" (19). Nonetheless, many men and women whohave gone on to lead productive and fulfilling lives, often didso in spite of their circumstances. By understanding how this wasachieved, prevention programs can incorporate activities tobolster the protective factors in the lives of all children. Spirituality/Religiosity The terms religiosity and spirituality are neither mutuallyexclusive nor inclusive. Both terms encompass an enormous arrayof fellowships and individual values, including institutionalizedreligion, new age religion or quasi- religious groups,traditional beliefs, and nonreligious persons. Within the drug and alcohol abuse research field, studieshave focused almost exclusively on the relationship betweeninstitutionalized Christian religions (with the exception of ahandful of studies on Judaism) and its effect on substance useamong adolescents and young adults. Virtually no data areavailable on other methods of worship, or discussion of theeffect spiritualism/religiosity may have on the progression fromadolescent alcohol and drug use to problem use and addiction. A succinct and thorough review of recent literature onreligion and substance use was completed by social psychologistPeter Benson (7). With rare exceptions, religiousness, in varyingdegrees, has been associated with decreased levels of substanceuse. The substances studied included alcohol, cigarettes, andnumerous illicit drugs. This protective factor held true for menand women across the four U.S. census regions, and to some extentamong blacks and Hispanics (although only a few studies analyzedrace and ethnicity). The most widely used measures of religiositywere church attendance, church affiliation versus nonaffiliation,and religious importance; yet it also appeared that such indirectassociations as parents' religiousness and belief in life afterdeath were correlated with decreased substance use. Multivariateanalysis was employed to examine the relative importance ofreligiousness by controlling for other demographic and socialvariables. In most instances the protective effect ofreligiousness was relatively small, but it did appear to be morepredictive than several personal factors (e.g., self-esteem,purpose in life, locus of control) and less predictive whencompared to social variables such as parental standards, peerpressure, and social tolerance. Benson puts forth severalexplanations for this apparent protective element, most of whichcenter around the idea that organized religion fosters andmaintains a certain set of morals and values. Depending on thereligion, deviating from these norms can be somewhat toleratedor, at the other extreme, considered a profound sin. For countless individuals, spirituality, while a morenebulous concept than religion, is intricately tied to emotional,psychological, and physical well-being. A practitioner of Zen(Buddhist) meditation and various New Age spiritualities stated: I think of health at every level: a healthy mind, a healthyspirit, as well as a healthy body. So that a person would have tohave energy, alertness, enthusiasm, a love of life, a love ofpeople, a love of themselves (43). Many traditional cultures think of illness and disease asindicators of personal spiritual discord. For example, theAmerican Indian Navajos strive for a state of personal wholeness,beauty, and well-being. The Blessingway rite, composed of sacredsongs and prayers, is often used to restore an individual'sharmony with those around him or her, the environment, and, in alarger sense, the universe. By ignoring different racial and ethnic religious andspiritual beliefs, their importance is minimized and/ortrivialized (perhaps inadvertently) by more dominant religions.From a drug and alcohol prevention point of view, it would seemboth cost-effective and relatively simple to encourage andcelebrate religious and spiritual differences among individualsand communities; and acknowledge the protective benefits thesefactors provide for many people. SUMMARY No single or generic set of variables explains the harmfuluse of alcohol and drugs for every individual. While this chapterreviewed a number of selected individual and protective factors,this information should be viewed in a broader context. To gain acomplete understanding of the complexity of the substance abuseissue, the information presented before and after this chaptermust be incorporated in any argument concerning factors that insome way effect an individuals potential for substance use andabuse. By reviewing the individual risk factors under the threebroad headings of Demographics, Economics, andPsychosocial/Behavioral, certain gaps in the literature appeared.Within the demographics section, the vast majority of theresearch to date has focused on identifying psychological as wellas social characteristics that place preadolescent and adolescentchildren at greater risk for the initiation and continuation ofdrug use. While the benefits of this type of research areobvious, the majority of data point to the fact that alcohol,tobacco, and illicit drug use are highest among those aged 18 to25 and 26 to 34. However, few research studies have been devotedto these age groups. Also, under the demographic section therewas a general paucity of data on risk factors that may be uniqueto racial and ethnic minority populations and to some extentwomen (although this continues to change). Within the economics section, while there may be quotes inthe general media of tremendous financial earnings by drugdealers, research substantiating these figures is scanty. Thereis also little known about whether those individuals dealingdrugs are at an increased risk for becoming drug abusers. Many of the psychosocial/behavioral factors reviewed in thechapter have been extensively studied, and their associations toalcohol and drug use documented. However, one of the sectionsthat has fairly recently been scientifically studied is that ofphysical and/or sexual abuse. Those studies that have beenrigorously conducted are beginning to yield data that positivelylinks childhood abuse to later alcohol and drug problems. Futureresearch in this area is probably warranted. Also included in thesection were select studies on resiliency and/or protectivefactors. While research has been conducted in this area for quitesome time, much of the literature is not specific to alcohol anddrug use situations, but rather, encompasses a wide array ofvariables that place individuals at a greater risk forbehavioral, developmental, and learning problems. BOX 6-1: Racial and Ethnic Differences in Adolescent Drug UseAmong High School Seniors Research on adolescent substance usehas documentedsubstantial racial and ethnic differences in useamong highschool seniors. On average, alcohol, cigarette, andotherillicit drug use is highest among American Indianyouth,somewhat lower among white and Hispanic youth,substantiallylower among black youth, and lowest among Asianyouth.Additional research explored the hypothesis thatthesedissimilarities could be partially attributed todifferencesin background (e.g., urban versus rural, familystructure,parental education) and lifestyle factors (e.g.,grades,truancy, evenings out, religious commitment).The findingsindicated that controlling for backgroundfactors alone did notaccount for most racial and ethnicdifferences in drug use, but itdid reduce American Indians'relatively high levels of use, whichsuggests that their usemay in part be related to disadvantagedsocioeconomicstatus. When both background and lifestyle factorswereincluded in the analysis, the racial and ethnicdifferenceswere substantially reduced. Educational valuesandbehaviors, religious commitment, and amount of time spentinpeer-oriented activities were particularly importantexplanatoryvariables.Racial and ethnic differences were also found in astudy ondrug-related attitudes and perceptions. Perceived riskofusing drugs, disapproval of drug use, and perceptionsofdisapproval of drug use by friends were typically highestamongblack seniors, at intermediate levels among Hispanicseniors, andlowest among white and American Indian seniors.Conversely,perceived peer use of drugs and exposure topersons using variousdrugs for "kicks" were generallylowest among black andAsian seniors, at intermediate levelsamong Hispanic seniors, andhighest among white and AmericanIndian seniors.While thesefindings are not applicable for thoseadolescents who drop out ofschool, researchers areconfident that the results are valid forthe majority ofadolescents who remain enrolled through the senioryear ofhigh school.SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, PublicHealth Service, National Institutes of Health,Smoking,Drinking, and Illicit Drug Use Among AmericanSecondarySchool Students, College Students, and Young Adults,1975-1991, NIH Pub. No. 93-3480 (Rockville, MD: 1992). BOX 6-2: Racial, Ethnic, and Socioeconomic Discrepancies inMandatory Alcohol and Drug Use Reporting Practices for PregnantWomen In one county of Florida, anonymous alcohol and drugtestswere conducted on urine samples obtained from allpregnantwomen seeking prenatal care from both public healthclinicsas well as private obstetrical offices. White andblackwomen were discovered to have insignificantlydifferentprevalence rates for alcohol or illicit drug useduringpregnancy. While black women used cocaine morefrequentlythan white women (7.5 percent versus 1.8 percent),whitewomen had higher rates of marijuana usage (14.4percentversus 6 percent). The relative similarities betweenalcoholand drug use also held true for poor versusmiddle-classwomen. However, the study also documented thatafterdelivery, black women were 10 times more likely to havebeenreported to the health authorities for substance useduringpregnancy than were white women. Poor women also hadagreater chance of being reported than middle-class women.Thisstudy reflects a discrepancy in reporting practicesamong staff atsome public clinics and private obstetricaloffices, which appearsto be influenced by an individual'ssocial status as well asrace.SOURCE: I.J. Chasnoff, H.J. Landress, and M.E. Barrett,"ThePrevalence of Illicit-Drug or Alcohol Use DuringPregnancyand Discrepancies in Mandatory Reporting in PinellasCounty,Florida," The New England Journal of Medicine322(17): 1202-1206, 1990. BOX 6-3: Bivariate Versus MultivariateAnalysis Bivariate analysis is the process of taking onevariablesuch as employment status and testing its correlationandstatistical significance to reported alcohol or drug use.Amajor drawback to this type of analysis is itsrelativesimplicity; it does not control for the potential effectsofother variables. For example, if a relationship betweenbeingunemployed and heavy alcohol use was shown to bestatisticallysignificant, one could not be certain of thenature of therelationship. Perhaps the individual wasunemployed due to his orher heavy drinking. Alternatively,a person's unemployment couldhave caused his or her heavydrinking. Furthermore, if moresophisticated analyses usingadditional variables were completed,the originalassociation between being unemployed and heavydrinkingcould disappear altogether.Multivariate analysis, whilehaving its own limitations, isa much more comprehensive way inwhich to study therelationships between several variables andalcohol and drugconsumption. The multivariate analysis used bythe NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse systematically incorporatedavariety of individual variables such as educationallevel,employment status, race and ethnicity, and sex, inadditionto certain aggregate variables including region(South,Northeast, North Central, West), metropolitan status,andracial and ethnic composition of census blocks. Each oneofthese variables was then separately analyzed for itspotentialpredictive value for alcohol and drug use, whilethe othercontributing variables were also taken intoaccount. Whilemultivariate analyses fall short ofdemonstrating causality,because additional variables areused to control for plausiblealternative explanations, moreconfidence can be placed in thesignificant correlationsfound.SOURCE: Office of TechnologyAssessment, 1994. BOX 6-4: A Population at Risk--Migrant and SeasonalFarmworkers Migrant and seasonal farmworkers (M/SFWs) areindividuals"whose principal employment is in agriculture ona seasonalbasis [and who have] been so employed within the last24months" (Public Law 100-386). Migratory workers arethose"who establish ... for the purposes of such employmentatemporary abode," while seasonal workers are those whomeetthe seasonal definition but are not migrant workers(PublicLaw 100-386). While seasonal is not explicitly definedinthe public law, the Department of Agriculture defines aseasonalfarmworker as one who performs 25 to 149 days offarm wage work inone year, and does not migrate.Due to the transitory nature ofthe job and the employees,obtaining a precise estimate on thenumber of farmworkers isdifficult. State data suggest thatupwards of 4 millionfarmworkers are in the United States andPuerto Rico, and ifratios from the late 1970s hold true,approximately 30percent (or 1.2 million) of these aremigrants.The racial and ethnic background of the farmworkersvarieswith the so-called "stream." The East Coaststream isprobably the most diverse with American blacks,Haitians,Jamaicans, Dominicans, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans,anincreasing number of Central American Indians, and asmallpercentage of whites. In the Midwest and West, thegreatmajority of migrant farmworkers are of Mexicandescent,although increasingly, Asian immigrants are making theirwayinto the stream. American Indians make up asubstantialproportion of the farmworker population in the WestandSouthwest.Farmworkers are most often hired through amiddle-person or"crewleader" who is usually in chargeof negotiating lengthof employment, transportation, wages,housing, and meals. Itis not uncommon for migrant farmworkers tomove anywherefrom two to eleven times in a year. Besides thephysicallytaxing nature of the work, numerous environmentalstressors(some unique to this population) increase the likelihoodforalcohol and drug abuse. Some of these stressorsincludephysically and socially isolated camp locations;unsanitary,overcrowded, and unsafe camp conditions; towns whichoftendo not welcome the presence of farmworkers; long periodsofseparation from family members; feelings of boredom,isolation,and powerlessness; and language and culturaldifferences.The job'shigh mobility requirements hamper the collectionof health data onthis population. Anecdotal informationfrom health care providerslocated at Migrant/CommunityHealth Centers (M/CHCs) and localhealth departments citealcohol and drug abuse problems as some ofthe mostsignificant health issues faced by M/SFWs, followedbyanxiety and depression (McCaw 1991). However, fewquantitativeor qualitative studies have documentedsubstance abuse within thispopulation. One study of blackand Haitian farmworkers in upstateNew York found that themajority of the heavy drinking on themigrant camps was doneby older, single, black males, and that thedrinkingpatterns of the study participants who traveled withtheirfamilies differed little from individuals in thegeneralpopulation. To a large extent, this was attributed tothesocial controls family members exerted on one another(Matteraet al. 1983). This is an important point, as thegreatermechanization of farmwork has reduced the need formanual labor,and many of the farmworkers who previouslytraveled with theirfamilies can no longer afford to do so.Anecdotal evidencesuggests that the composition of themigrant workforce has beenshifting toward one of singlemales, rather than families. Withthis shift, a generaldecrease in social control among the migrantcamps is likelyto occur, and a greater number of alcohol and drugproblemsmay begin to appear.Providing substance abuse preventionprograms to M/SFWs is achallenge. Few M/CHCs have the financialor personnelcapabilities to implement substance abusepreventionprograms. Many farmworkers simply do not stay inonelocation long enough. Language and cultural differencesarevast, not to mention the geographical distancessometimesrequired to reach the camps, which often are located 20to30 miles away from the nearest social service and/or eachother.Two organizations (BOCES Geneseo Migrant Center inNew York, NY,and Tri-County Community Health Center inNewton Grove, NC) havesuccessfully implemented similartypes of programs based on thepremise of providing weekendactivities as an alternative todrinking and drug use. Full-day programs are normally held awayfrom the camps, andinclude educational, creative, athletic, andculturalactivities. The activities are free and transportationisoften provided. However, farmworkers can attend only iftheyhave not been drinking or using drugs.Clearly, greaterresearch is necessary to adequatelydocument the prevalence ofalcohol and drug use within themigrant streams, as well as thechanging composition of thestreams, and how this may affectsubstance use. Little isknown about the differences in substanceuse between thevarying racial and ethnic groups within thestreams, and howthe growing number of immigrants from war-torncountrieswill affect the health problems seen within thestreams.SOURCES: U.S. Congress, Office of TechnologyAssessment,Health Care in Rural America, OTA-H-434 (Washington,DC:U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1990). K.McCaw,"Migrant Workers," Clinical Manual of SubstanceAbuse, J.Kinney (ed.)(St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book, Inc.,1991). G.Mattera, J. Watson, S. Kunitz, et al., "Alcohol UseAmongMigrant Laborers," unpublished report for the New YorkStateHealth Research Council, Albany, NY, 1983. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page