WT01-B33-1IA031-000652-B047-185http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132154 text/html 47174HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:59 GMTContent-length: 46956 CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study howenvironmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, andbehaviors of individuals and groups. Historically, ethnographyhas roots in both anthropology and sociology (see box 7-1). ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG USE Since the 1960s the number of drug ethnographies has grownsteadily. Many of the nation's social issues were in one way oranother associated with drug use: poverty, urban unrest amongminorities, counter culture, failure of social programs, AIDStransmission, and urban violence. Research conducted byanthropologists and qualitative sociologists was an importantpart of understanding new drug-related social problems andtrends. By the mid-1970s, "street ethnography" orsimply "ethnography" were the terms commonly used todescribe the drug research they were conducting in the UnitedStates (60). Alcohol Nineteenth century and early twentieth centuryanthropologists conducted comprehensive community studies innonindustrial societies in which they recorded ritual and socialuses of alcohol. This extensive but generally unfocuseddocumentation provided data for later cross- cultural analysesrelating alcohol use patterns to other cultural variables. The contribution of ethnographic studies conducted outsidethe United States was to provide data on the social conditioningof alcohol's effects. The findings from one such study conductedin Bolivia during 1958, alerted the alcohol research communityto the existence of culturally accepted alcohol use patternsquite different from those customarily encountered in the UnitedStates. For example, "virtually all of the Camba (of easternBolivia) drink to the point of passing out, at least twice amonth." Although the beverage they drink is stronger inalcoholic concentration than that customarily drunk by otherpopulations, there appeared to be no major health or socialproblems associated with their drinking (35). These data along with findings from research on four othersocieties (the Aritama of Colombia, the Ifaluk of Micronesia, theTakashima of Japan, and the town of Juxtlahuaca in Oaxaca,Mexico), support the view that the experiential effect of alcoholis socially conditioned (37). Each of these societies possesseddistinct messages regarding the use of alcohol, which were clearand consistent. In contrast, individuals in modern societies areinfluenced by overlapping, and sometimes contradictory, socialmessages based on religious, ethnic, occupational, generational,regional, and class differences. Drinking habits and behaviorswithin the United States vary enormously. Since the 1970s, ethnographic research on alcohol use in theUnited States has concentrated on specifying and explaining thevariations in American drinking patterns. Some ethnographers havefocused on specific subcultures defined by their problematicalcohol use (53). Other ethnographers have focused on alcoholbeliefs and behaviors in ethnically, religiously, andprofessionally constituted subcultures-- usually exploring theadaptation of culturally sanctioned drinking patterns, passed onthrough family and community modeling, to changing socialcontexts (5). Heroin The majority of ethnography studies conducted in the 1960sfocused on heroin use. Several of these studies challenged theaccepted perception "that heroin provides an escape for theuser from his psychological problems and from theresponsibilities of social and personal relationships--in short,an escape from life" (47). Researchers documented drug useas a way of life, rather than just as an escape from life. Twosuch articles, based on three years of field work in Oakland,California, detailed several distinct patterns or styles amongheroin users. Varying levels of prestige were associated withthese different styles, and heroin users at the top of thehierarchy were observed to work hard to maintain their lifestyles(54,55). Another study in New York City, New York, in the late 1960s,asked why heroin use periodically mushroomed, in epidemicproportions, in lower class communities. The data revealed that,regardless of ethnic background, in poor neighborhoods"there are pressures on adolescent boys to live up to theideals of toughness, strength, daring, and the willingness tochallenge the bleak fate of being poor." Simply put,"movement into heroin use was one route to becoming a`somebody' in the eyes of the important people who comprised theslum social network" (20). Later articles elaborated on theidea of so-called street status. Based on 4 years of research, ahierarchy of illicit drugs was defined by perceived riskcomponents, such as physical harm, addiction potential, parentaldiscovery, police, and intragroup dangers. The use of drugsperceived by the group to be risky, increased a user's personalstatus within that group. The researcher concluded that relianceon legal sanctions and scare tactics to reduce the use of certaindrugs will only make the use of these drugs appear more daringand hence to some, more attractive (21,23). Cocaine and Crack Although ethnographers noted that cocaine use was on the riseamong some middle-class professionals and drug experimenters bythe mid 1970s, it was not until the 1980s that extensive studieson cocaine users were begun. While some of these early users, many of whom were white,progressed from experimental use of cocaine to heavy use withsubsequent biological and behavioral problems, many others didnot (57,58). Several years later, though, middle- class userswith cocaine-related problems were becoming more common,prompting many would-be experimenters to steer clear of the drug.During this same time period, cocaine smuggling escalated,resulting in increased availability, lower prices, and higherquality. Within low-income, minority communities, cocainesmoking, first as free-base and then as crack, grew soprecipitously that it was commonly called an epidemic. In NewYork City, ethnographers provided complementary perspectives onthe rapidly changing crack culture. In a series of ethno-historical articles, Ansley Hamiddocumented the history of cocaine smoking as it evolved in lowerincome minority neighborhoods in New York City. Among theelements identified as central to the widespread diffusion ofcrack smoking was the interest shown by heroin injectors withcollapsed veins in the concentrated high of smoked cocaine; theentry of Rastafarian marijuana distributors into the cocainetrade; the emergence of young, nonusing street distributors ableto sell unit doses in vials at relatively low prices; and therise in crack prices due to increased demand combined withsuppliers who had greater control over the market. Hamid believesthe rise and fall of cocaine smoking to have followed adevelopmental cycle similar to that of heroin use between 1964and 1972 and marijuana use in the 1960s and 1970s (31,32,33,34). A 1992 study of crack use focused on the children of crackusers. It found that the extended family networks in the AfricanAmerican community, a major source of stability and support, werebeing overwhelmed by the drug crisis as the number of childrenwhose mothers were no longer able to care for them because ofincreased drug use. Further, children exposed to drug-takingbehavior by adults may be more likely to display similarbehavior. In one family headed by a 60- year-old woman, an adultson was a crack dealer and a daughter was a crack-abusingprostitute (18). Hallucinogens Most ethnographic studies of hallucinogens and mind-alteringdrugs (e.g., peyote, mescaline, mushrooms) have focused on tribalsocieties. Anthropologists have uniformly found that the use ofhallucinogens was socially approved and integrated into thereligious and social life of the community. If one defines abuseas use of a drug in such a way that it interferes with physical,economic, or social functions, then little if any evidence pointsto drug abuse among tribally organized peoples (1,27,15,42). Other than scattered studies of hallucinogenic drug use amonghippies (12,14,45,46), few ethnographic studies have beencompleted on use of hallucinogenic substances in Americansociety. However, the persistent use of lysergic aciddiethylamide (LSD) by some young people, and concerns that itsuse may be increasing, have sparked new interest amongethnographers (30,38). Marijuana As with hallucinogens, most of the ethnographic research onmarijuana use has been conducted outside the United States. Muchof it was initiated in the 1960s and 1970s, when increasing useof marijuana among American youth led researchers to question thesocial and medical consequences of marijuana use, especiallylong-term use. Research was conducted in countries in whichmarijuana use was long standing and widespread, such as Brazil,Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Jamaica, Mexico, Rwanda, and SouthAfrica (11,16,17, 51). In Jamaica, for example, anthropologists Vera Rubin andLambros Comitas directed a research team of 45 social scientistsand medical professionals to conduct original ethnographicresearch at several field sites, in addition to medical,psychological, and psychiatric testing in hospitals and clinics.Their controversial findings were that none of the deleterioussocial or medical consequences believed by many to be associatedwith the drug in the United States could be found among Jamaicanusers: .?.?. There is no evidence of any causal relationship betweencannabis use and mental deterioration, insanity, violence orpoverty; or that widespread cannabis use in Jamaica produces anapathetic, indolent class of people. In fact, the ganja complexprovides an adaptive mechanism by which many Jamaicans cope withlimited life chances in a harsh environment (52). Other than a few studies of middle-class users (10,39) andyoung African American dealers (24,25), substantial U.S.ethnographic research on marijuana use in the United States hasbeen generally lacking, despite the fact that marijuana has beenthe most commonly used illicit substance for decades. Phencyclidine (PCP) An ethnographic study in 1979 of PCP users is frequentlycited for its substantive findings and methodologicalcontribution as the first multisite ethnographic drug study.Initiating the study when PCP use was believed to be spreadingamong white working-class and middle-class young people, theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) contracted for afour-city ethnographic study of PCP users not in treatment. After3 months of working in Miami, Florida, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania, Chicago, Illinois, and Seattle, Washington,ethnographers documented groups of users and the underlyingsocial processes. They found that it was relatively rare for ayoung person to use PCP exclusively. Use occurred mainly withinsocially distinctive groups of young people who displayed "akind of restlessness, an orientation for action, and a sense thatlife generally was boring, uninteresting, and lacked recreationalactivities" (22). The young people studied were very knowledgeable about drugeffects and understood that the PCP drug experience varieddramatically with dosage. Low doses of the drug were reported bydifferent user groups to be mildly euphoric and hallucinogeniclike LSD, or sedating like barbiturates. What concerned regularPCP users was not the acute adverse effects reported in the media(e.g., psychotic episodes, assaultive outburst, irreparableharm), but rather "burning out"--a "spacey"state accompanied by incoherent thoughts, forgetfulness, andmemory loss. As burnout became apparent, individual users andgroups of users consciously cut back their PCP use. Within thisgroup, violent episodes were found to be rare, mainly involvingefforts by law enforcement or hospital treatment staff torestrain users, thereby seeming to set off panic reactions andstruggle. The study suggested that a significant gap existed betweenofficial agencies responsible for drug education and preventionand street drug users. When PCP use increased dramatically in themid 1970s, there were no official responses because quantitativenational data sources, such as surveys of high school studentsand hospital emergency reports, failed to include PCP as aseparate drug. When the official agencies recognized thewidespread use of PCP, their prevention efforts were viewed byusers as distorted and were discounted. Ethnographers attributethe eventual decline in PCP use to "the general consensusamong users themselves on the negative features of its long-termeffects rather than the kind of expert opinion that accompanieslegitimate efforts at prevention" (22). SOCIAL CONTEXT OF DRUG USE Specificity in Drug Abuse Research As more questions are asked about alcohol and other drug use,it becomes clear that drug use is not one phenomenon, but many.There is no generic pattern of drug use; rather, there is use ofspecific drugs in specific situations. Quantitative researchers frequently use ethnic categories toincrease study specificity. While studies on different ethnicgroups are useful, often the definitions of ethnicity vary andthe concept is employed uncritically. Moreover, most of thequantitative researchers using the concept of ethnicityimplicitly assume what anthropologists call a "static"concept of culture, viewing ethnicity as a trait one is bornwith, an unchanging characteristic, like hair color or body type.In contrast, most ethnographers view culture as "a dynamicprocess through which individuals and societies learn the sumtotal of their society's behaviors and associated belief systems,including those encompassing drug use practices and beliefs"(4). Many recent ethnographic studies focus on socially meaningfulunits in which members share social statuses, behaviors, andattitudes. For example, a recent book on drug use among Hispanicsincluded ethnographic accounts of Cuban so-called streetside druguse in Miami, Florida, drug use among male and female gangmembers from the East Los Angeles, California, barrios, and druguse and dealing among low-income Puerto Ricans in New York City,New York, and Chicago, Illinois. (28). Inclusiveness in Drug Abuse Research One drawback of studying increasingly specific drug-usingcommunities is losing sight of the larger whole. Ethnographicdrug studies at times fail to link the customs of the specificstudy communities to customs in other communities or to place thecustoms in a larger framework. A way that both highlights andcritiques the contribution of ethnography in the field of drugresearch is to focus on the social relationships around drug use,specifically, on the pattern of use in relation toself-identification with a social group. In the ethnographicliterature, four basic patterns appear: o Individuals who use drugs with others who share anidentification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug useis the central component. o Individuals who use drugs with others who share anidentification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug useis customary and openly accepted, but not the central component. o Individuals who use drugs with friends and acquaintances,but there is no self-identification with a drug-using lifestyleor subculture. o Individuals who use drugs by themselves while maintainingself-identification with a group that stigmatizes drug use (seetable 7-1). Drug Use Within a Drug Subculture Numerous studies have documented that, for pragmatic andsocial reasons, individuals whose lives have become oriented to adrug often associate with others who use the drug in a similarfashion. Over time a subculture develops with specializedknowledge, norms, and expectations. Individuals think ofthemselves as belonging to the subculture, and others define themas such. "Where subcultures exist, social-psychologicalbarriers separate participants from onlookers" (13). It hasoften been noted, for example, that for many heroin users, use ofthe drug overrode background characteristics, such as race,class, and national origin, to become the definingcharacteristic. As one heroin user related: I always refer to myself as a junkie, even when I'm nothooked on anything. And when you're introduced to somebody forthe first time the first thing you find out is whether he's ajunkie or not. It's like belonging to some fantastic lodge, youknow, but the initiation ceremony is a lot rougher (57). However, even within a drug-using subculture variationsexist, especially with regard to frequency and amount of use.This difference was emphasized by a 38-year-old regular heroinuser from New York City: .?.?. all heroin addicts are not heroin abusers, okay? Andyou get the abuser, he's a dog, right? He's the one who sits inthe drug house and shoots all day long. That's an abuser. I'm avisitor, you never catch me in the drug house. Not me, no (41). A similar distinction was made by a female crack user, who,although her life revolved around crack, was still attractive,healthy, in a relationship, and the social center of a network ofusers. In contrast, for her: The crack addict is the person who's lost all sense of what'sgoing on. They are like zombies. They are out there standing inthe pouring rain. If it's cold and snowing, they'll be walking upand down out there .?.?.?. They are .?.?. to the point ofdesperation where they will take off [rob] people they know. Theywill set you up. It comes to the point where they will set upfamily, friends, anybody--the point where they don't care anymore(61). One ethnographer noted that these types of individuals wereattempting "to become `visitors' in social networks of otherusers, to establish a degree of contact and membership whileremaining somewhat detached from the network. Their attempts toremain partially marginal to both street and straight society area central part of their strategies for controlling their use andtheir own lives" (41). Drug Use as Part of a Lifestyle or Identity Drug use often occurs within a lifestyle or subcultureinwhich drug use is common and accepted, but is not the definingcharacteristic. The subculture may be professionally oriented.For example, some of the earliest drug research was done amongjazz musicians (2,62). Anabolic steroid use was common amongprofessional and amateur athletes in certain sports (29). Duringits peak, cocaine use was rampant among entertainers. In one study, a waitress at a rock-and-roll bar calledcocaine use an "occupational hazard." She and otherrestaurant workers in the study described how groups of workerswould pool funds to purchase small amounts of cocaine for usewhile working: "For them. ?.?. hard work, constant activity,and long, late hours seemed instrumental to their cocaineuse" (59). Recent research has documented that at times the nuclear orextended family may act as the subcultural unit in which illicitdrug use is common and accepted. We was with my mother over her girlfriend's house when AuntJeannie came by and she had some coke. She cooked it up and toldMa and Ruth to try it. After that things started goin' crazier. Ihad to take care of my oldest sister's two sons, my son, and myyounger brother. I had to do everything. Most of the time wedidn't have nothin' to eat. We stayed hungry all the time. When Iwashed clothes I'd find vials in her [mother's] pockets.. ?.?. I`member comin' home one day and she'd been smokin' for awhilethen, but the house was full of people smokin' all over theplace. I went to go to my bedroom and close the door and it wasfull too. I said to her, `what's happenin'? I just turned roundand left. I was tired, the house was dirty with vials on thefloor and the tables and I'd just had my son.. ?.?. I just wantedto get away.. ?.?. At first I had smoked some crack to kill myappetite, to keep me from bein' hungry. ?.?. I just felt like Icouldn't take it no more so I took my son to my sister and left .?.?. I went on a binge and smoked for three months. Nobodyknew where I was, but I was out smoking crack and gettin' moneyanyway I could get it (18). Drug Use With Partners and Peers Drug use can also occur when there is no subcultural supportor membership in a group that approves of drug use. In somecases, an orientation toward, or acceptance of, drug use may havebeen acquired earlier in life when the individual was part of adrug-accepting subculture: former hippies, student drug users, orparticipants in street life. Such individuals may continue theirdrug use long after ending their other associations with thesubcultures. Recently reported by ethnographers is the recreational use ofMDMA (Ecstasy) by some middle-class individuals. Some professionals, particularly those whose ideas aboutdrugs were formulated during the 1960s, quietly view psychoactivesubstances as one of many ways to relax, to relate, to "kickback." It is within this context, coupled with the need torelax fast and relate quickly, that Ecstasy is used (50). Drug Use in Social Isolation Last, some individuals use illicit drugs primarily bythemselves. Often they identify themselves with a professionalsubculture or social group that is opposed to drug use. Onewell-documented pattern is that of physicians, nurses, and otherhealth workers who illicitly use psychoactive pharmaceuticaldrugs, especially narcotics (63,64). Other patterns of use in social isolation are known butpoorly documented in the ethnographic literature. Unsuperviseduse of pharmaceutical drugs is fairly common and often the linebetween licitly obtained and illicitly obtained drugs can beblurred. Emergency room and family physicians, for example,encounter suspected middle-class prescription drug abusers. Onemiddle-class housewife interviewed as part of a study ofemergency room drug episodes began her use of prescription painkillers because of a back problem, and then continued chronic(and essentially unsupervised) use of the drug for years byobtaining prescriptions from multiple physicians (49). Typology as a Whole The ethnographic method of describing how and, to someextent, why people use drugs differs from the purely quantitativemethod that analyzes the association of drug use with the socialand demographic characteristics of the users. To date, most of the ethnographic research has concentratedon drug-focused subcultures or on crime-related subcultures.There are few studies on other populations, and many of these arenow dated. For example, there have been no significantethnographic studies of student drug use in almost two decades.The drug problem has been defined in the public mind and amongsome funding sources as a problem of poor minority communities.Some ethnographers acknowledge that, to some extent, their ownattitudes have contributed to the skewing of the drug research aswell. Ethnographic field work with drug-focused and criminalsubcultures is considered by some to be more adventurous andprofessionally rewarding. Also, in its own way, it may be easierthan field work in the general population, since studyparticipants can be readily delineated from onlookers andsubjects can be relatively easily located on the street orthrough their relationship with treatment and law enforcementagencies. One consequence of the absence of information concerning druguse within the general population is that, like a self-fulfilling prophecy, attention continues to be paid almostexclusively to minority drug use. Drug use and drug users aredefined as the "other," different from the rest ofsociety. Ethnographers have paid relatively little attention tothe relationship between culturally approved drug use (e.g.,caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, psychoactive prescription drugs) andillicit drug use. Another consequence is that there are few data available onwhich to base prevention programs for individuals who areunlikely to become members of a drug or criminal subculture.Virtually nothing is known about experimenters, casual users,controlled users, or chronic users not associated with a drugsubculture. POVERTY, RACISM, AND CYCLE OF ABUSE The preceding section outlined a variety of drug usingcontexts in the United States and documented the presence of druguse and abuse among different social, racial, and ethnic classes.Equally important, however, is the realization that theconsequences of drug abuse are especially devastating inchronically poor, often minority, communities. While poverty asan individual risk factor for substance abuse is described inchapter 6, this section considers ethnographic observations onthe links between the poverty of the inner-city communities andsubstance abuse. The Social Context of Poverty Drug ethnographers have noted that urban poverty means morethan lacking money. Often it means living in substandard housingin communities that lack basic municipal services, and for youngpeople it usually means attending overcrowded, underfunded,demoralized schools. Researchers regard illicit drug use,especially the use of heroin, cocaine, and crack, as both aresult of oppressive social conditions and a cause of theworsening of these conditions. To cope with difficult social circumstances, ethnographershave documented the effective utilization of extended familynetworks and kin relationships. However, even with thesesafeguards, it is not uncommon for children to encounteralcoholism, other drug use, depression, physical abuse andneglect, sexual abuse, and other traumatic experiences. Lack of Opportunity In ethnographic life histories of men and women who becomedeeply involved with illicit drugs, the characteristic ofinner-city life most often mentioned is the lack of opportunityfor meaningful work. For example, an ethnographer studying heroinaddicts in the early 1970s noted: Often in interviews with addicts I have thought that thisantiwork attitude was a sour-grapes defense because so few havehad meaningful work experiences and many do not considergood-paying or creative jobs work, but I think that theseattitudes are more than psychological mechanisms. They are, Ibelieve, deeper in the fabric of our society and arise out ofpoverty and the reality of poor, uneducated persons who can onlyexpect the most dull, stultifying, and meaningless work. Most, Iwould expect, held these attitudes before their addiction andwhen they became addicted simply added another good reason not topursue something that offered so little (56). More recently, ethnographers studying the crack subculture,have related changes in drug use patterns to structural changesin the world economy. For many inner-city residents the difficulteconomic situation of the 1950s and 1960s became impossible inthe 1970s and 1980s, as many of the secure semiskilled andunskilled jobs shifted overseas. New York City, for example, losta half million manufacturing jobs and 100,000 jobs in wholesaleand retail trade between 1967 and 1987 (36). For individualswithout post secondary degrees, jobs that could support a familybecame scarce. Because of the structural shifts, basic expectations aroundwork have changed dramatically: The option of a steady, legal job appears so distant forinner-city high-school dropouts (and even graduates), that theycease job searches after a few attempts or experiences inlow-wage jobs. Adult household members can rarely provideconcrete assistance in finding jobs or help in accessing networksof employers (19). Racism Clearly a person need not be a member of a racial or ethnicminority group to use drugs. Much of the early ethnographicresearch was done on white heroin-using individuals (20,21,48) orwith mixed ethnic and racial backgrounds samples (47, 20,56).Nonetheless, many ethnographers introduce race as an explanatoryelement. It is not used in the genetic or biological sense butrather that racial discrimination has shaped the social contextand opportunity structure for many people of color. Ethnographerscite the indirect racism of some politicians who have beenunresponsive to the worsening social conditions of schools,housing, and municipal services in many minority communities.Also reported is the active racism encountered by many minoritypeople in daily life (9,8). Ethnographers describe inner-city minority residents ashaving a pervasive sense of not fitting into white mainstreamsociety. Within most poor inner-city communities, whites arerarely encountered except as representatives of conventionalinstitutions such as police, teachers, and social workers. Development of an Oppositional Culture While oppressive social conditions, limited economicopportunities, and racism are identified by ethnographers ascontributing to the high prevalence of drug abuse in the innercity, in and of themselves they offer little insight into thespecific attitudes and behaviors of those involved in illicitdrug use. For this, ethnographers have often relied on the notionof an oppositional culture, one of resistance or refusal. Some ethnographers argue that amidst oppression andexclusion, minorities, such as blacks, Hispanics, and AmericanIndians, develop "a collective identity or sense ofpeoplehood in opposition to the social identity of whiteAmericans." Developed in tandem with this oppositionalsocial identity is a cultural frame of reference that defines"certain forms of behavior and certain activities or events,symbols, and meanings" as not appropriate because they arecharacteristic of white Americans while "other forms ofbehaviors and other events, symbols, and meanings [are defined]as more appropriate because they are not a part of whiteAmericans way of life. To behave in the manner defined as fallingwithin a white cultural frame of reference is to `act white' andis negatively sanctioned" (26). Many ethnographers studying inner-city communities argue thatillicit drug use is embedded in an oppositional culture, formedin response to oppressive social conditions and lack ofopportunity. Ethnographer Terry Williams explains: .?.?.?to some extent, it is possible to see the violence,crime, and substance abuse that plague the inner city asmanifestations of resistance to a society perceived as white,racist, and economically exclusive. This could be called aculture of refusal. The young people in the crackhouses refuse tobe part of the system, refuse to obey their parents, rejectschool or any adult-controlled education or training, spurnprevailing social values and most authority. In the crackhouses,teenagers and adults refuse to obey the law, refuse to staysober, refuse to engage in safe sexual practices--even thoughthis refusal leads them to behaviors that are manifestly harmfulboth physiologically and psychologically (61). Cycle of Abuse Attraction of the Drug Ethnographers have emphasized three factors to help explainthe use of illicit drugs, especially heroin and crack by poor,inner-city, and minority populations. First, ethnographers report that as the use of a drug beginsto spread through a community, its use is seen as a status symbolwithin the street hierarchy. Many ethnographers attributed thequick expansion of cocaine smoking that occurred in the middle1980s to cocaine's reputation as a high-status drug, especiallywhen smoked or free based (23). Second, initiation into drug use almost always occurredthrough an established friendship or kin relationship. Virtuallyevery ethnographic study of drug use quotes users as saying: Iwas at a party (or with a friend) and someone offered me someheroin (cocaine, crack), so I tried it. The third theme is simply that many people, when they tryheroin or crack cocaine, like it. For some individuals, at leastin the beginning, their drug experiences are more highly valuedthan anything else in their lives (6,61). Several ethnographers have suggested that once crack becameavailable at relatively low cost in the late 1980s, the sharprise in its use was due primarily to the intensity of the drugexperience, comparable in somatic effect to arterial injection.The drug's effects attracted intravenous drug users withcollapsed veins or with concerns about HIV transmission, as wellas many nonintravenous drug users (23,40,43). Slide Into Abuse In explaining the slide of inner-city residents into drugabuse, addiction, and dependency, ethnographers have highlightedtwo complementary themes. One theme explains the function drugdependency serves in simplifying and giving meaning to a druguser's life. Stated succinctly: "The euphoria of heroin andthe excitement of hustling serve many addicts in the same waythat jobs, sex, and consumption serve nonaddicts" (56). A similar conclusion was drawn by another ethnographerstudying crack use patterns: Substance abuse in general, and crack in particular, offerthe equivalent of a millenarian metamorphosis. Instantaneouslyusers are transformed from being unemployed, depressed highschool drop-outs, despised by the world--and secretly convincedthat their failure is due to their own inherent stupidity,"racial laziness" and disorganization-- into being amass of heart palpitating pleasure, followed only minutes laterby a jaw-gnashing crash and wide awake alertness that providestheir life with concrete purpose: get more crack--fast! (8). The complementary perspective emphasizes the lack of a viablelifestyle alternative to drug use. One researcher contends thatdue to the unequal distribution of viable nonaddict social rolesin society, some groups will have more difficulty in recoverythan others: For example, a white, middle-class, high-school-educated,male addict will have more personal and social resources to drawfrom when he decides to give up drugs than will a Chicano addictliving in a barrio. In fact, a relatively uneducated Chicanoaddict may opt to retain the junkie- dealer role and identitybecause it provides him with greater status and financial rewardsthan any other social role available to him (7). End of the Cycle Despite little improvement in the social conditions of manyinner cities, recent journalistic accounts, ethnographic studies,and reports from surveillance systems indicate that theprevalence of crack use may be decreasing. Ethnographers reportthat for many individuals, the initial appeal of crack use hasfaded. "Youths under 16 have made a new pastime ofridiculing or beating up crackheads who they say disgraceneighborhoods or are nuisances or thieves. Five years ago,youngsters their age had initiated crack use after first becomingdistributors, as youngsters had previously been drawn into heroinuse" (34). Ethnographers present several possible explanations for thisdownturn. Epidemiologically, a parallel could be drawn to thedecrease seen in bacteria-based epidemics, where all individualsmost likely to be infected have been. Economically, it could beargued that all possible wealth to be extracted from the innercity has been. There are simply fewer resources for drugtraffickers, smugglers, and importers. A complementary explanation is based on concepts put forward25 years ago (3). It was argued that the social consequencesresulting from a drug's use could be related to the historicalstage of the drug's introduction in society. Most importantly,over time, a subculture of drug users develops ".?.?.material on how to obtain and ingest the drug, definitions of thetypical effects, the typical course of the experience, and thepermanence of the effects.. ?.?." In the case of marijuanaand LSD, this type of shared information may have accounted forthe sharp decrease in reported psychotic reactions even thoughthe actual number of users was increasing. This subculture can also define certain drugs or styles ofuse as dangerous. For example, ethnographers argue that thedownturn in cocaine use in the late 1980s among middle- andworking-class individuals was due to the belief that"cocaine can mess you up," and that this subculture ofusers understood this warning as more than just propaganda ofprevention proponents (59). This same process may be occurring in inner-city communitiesamong the subculture of crack users. Researchers note that thecrack epidemic has followed a predictable developmental cycle,previously seen with heroin use, "characterized by periodsof onset, incubation, widespread diffusion, peak, and decline.The final stage is stabilization at reduced levels of use"(34). In exploring the devastation caused by crack epidemics oninner-city communities, ethnographers have called attentionto theprocess through which harm-reducing information develops within asubculture of users. For example, among middle-class,cocaine-using individuals, many users gained information fromconventional sources (such as books, magazines, and evenscholarly journals) on the progression of cocaine dependence,long-term negative consequences, danger signals, and methods tocontrol or end use. This information then spread through thewider user community. In contrast, researchers note that theinner-city subculture of crack users paid little attention toconventional information sources and were ideologicallypredisposed to discount what information did reach them. Whilethere was no deficit of warnings about the dangers of crack usein the popular media, ethnographers observed that little effortwas made to translate prevention information into moreappropriate media messages for inner-city communities. FUTURE RESEARCH Over the past 30 years, ethnographers have contributed to theunderstanding of substance abuse research through their workamong different countries and among different subpopulations inthe United States. However, some additional contributions couldbe made in the following areas. Filling in the Gaps The earlier sections on the social contexts of drug useemphasized that drug use in the United States is much more thanheroin and cocaine in the inner cities and LSD in the suburbs.Research is needed, for example, on middle-class prescriptionabusers, substance abusers in rural areas, and hidden populations(e.g., homeless, runaways, dropouts); since many of theseindividuals are either excluded from, or under sampled in, thenational drug abuse surveys. To further complete the matrix ofsubstance use and abuse in the United States, future researchcould address not only those individuals whose use isunmanageable, but individuals and communities who do not use, orwhose use is moderate and controlled. Expanding Research Hypotheses The documentation that cultural and societal norms, to alarge degree, shape individuals' and groups' behaviors towarddrugs use, could be used to formulate new substance abuseresearch hypotheses, or expand on existing hypotheses. Forexample, understanding the etiology of drug use through studiesof children will help explain initiation of drug use and provideguidance for prevention efforts. Basic studies that document howchildren come to perceive drugs are lacking. "...when ithappens, how it happens. How they conceptualize, for example,what is a drug and what is a poison, and how that changes whenthey begin experimenting with drugs" (44). Planning Prevention Programs The insight gained by ethnographic research on a community'sor subculture's view on substance use could be incorporated to agreater degree in the needs assessment, planning, implementation,monitoring, and evaluation components of substance abuseprevention research. The information gained from ethnographicresearch could help assure that the prevention information isculturally appropriate not just in a generic ethnic sense, but interms of the specific cognitive framework and concerns of thetarget audience. Additionally, the qualitative tools used inethnography can assist quantitative researchers in theinterpretation of substance abuse data in varying contexts. Identifying Emergent Trends Ethnographic research is also useful in its ability torelatively quickly document changes in existing drug use patternsor identify the use of new drugs by a particular subculture. Thistimely information could assist in the planning of appropriateprevention strategies. SUMMARY Studies on drug-using subcultures have provided a wealth ofknowledge on why, how, and who uses and abuses drugs.Experience-based methods of data collection, such as ethnography,provide the field of substance abuse research with uniqueinformation on drug abuse among individuals, groups, andcommunities. Some of the contributions discussed in this chapterhave been theoretical, substantive, and programmatic. Ethnographic studies have documented drug use patternsworldwide and in so doing have assisted the understanding ofsocietal influences on drug use. These insights have, forexample, been utilized in the planning, implementation, and tosome extent, evaluation of drug prevention programs in a varietyof different social contexts. Researchers have also utilized ethnographies to followconstantly changing drug use patterns. Moreover, ethnographersprovide valuable data on new drug use such as who is using it,how the drug is being used, and where the probable epicenters ofthe drug use are. While not without methodological limitations, ethnography andother experience-based research provide new insights intosubstance abuse, as well as complimenting more quantitativemethods of data collection. BOX 7-1: What is Ethnography? Ethnographic research isdescriptive, subjective, analytical, and comparative. The focuson context is central to the ethnographic approach, explaininghow a particular behavior, institution, or process is acted on bylarger forces outside of the control of the participants. Itdescribes how events happen and the social life of the studyindividuals. While qualitative interviewing and other more formalmethodologies are usually part of an ethnographic study,participant observation (i.e., informally interacting withparticipants and observing events as they naturally occur) is ahallmark of ethnographic research. Studies are subjective in thatthey focus on the understandings, interpretations, and worldviews of the participants. Ethnographic accounts describe notonly what occurs, but also the multiple levels of distinctions bywhich individuals and groups make sense of and purposively act inthe world. Ethnographic studies are also analytical. Theobservations, interviews, and documents are raw data, as formsand responses are raw data for survey statisticians. Theethnographer's analytic responsibility is to condense and orderthese data. The analytic work can include the identification ofnonobvious patterns, associations, and themes, as well as theconstruction of typologies, process models, or explanatoryframeworks. Finally, ethnographic research is comparative in twosenses of the term. First, it often explores how attitudes andbehaviors are shaped by social forces in two or more contexts.The contexts are at times spatial (two different cultures orsubcultures), at other times temporal (the same culture orsubculture at different times). Ethnographic studies are alsoconducted within a research tradition, so that each new projectdraws on the methods and findings of previous research. Overtime, a corpus of work develops regarding a particular culturalcommunity (e.g., Samoans, inner-city drug users) or a particulartopic (e.g.,witchcraft, ethnic boundaries). As new work appearsit is scrutinized for fit with the existing corpus. Lack of fitmay be attributed to differing circumstances, methodologies,theoretical concerns, or possibly to inferior research oranalysis._ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-2IA031-000652-B047-209http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132203 text/html 88784HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:47 GMTContent-length: 88566 COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS This chapter reviews substance use and abuse-related researchon factors and interventions in homes, schools, workplaces,recreational and other developmental settings, and community-widesettings. These community activity settings are the majorphysical and social arenas in communities where individualsinteract and learn their values, attitudes, and behaviors, someof which can increase or reduce the likelihood that individualswill use and abuse substances. The addition of treatment settingsof all types and correctional settings would provide a fairlycomprehensive and systematic overview of all the major settingsin communities. Those settings are not discussed at length inthis report, however, because of its focus primarily onprevention, even though comprehensive prevention strategies willalmost always want to include treatment and correctionalcomponents as well. By focusing on any one of these settings, researchersinterested in substance use and abuse can study the interplay ofmultiple factors in a context, and practitioners can implementprograms designed for specific settings. By examining all ofthese settings together, policymakers and practitionersinterested in substance abuse and the healthy development ofindividuals and communities can identify and, within availableresources, implement concrete, systematic, and comprehensivepreventive interventions for communities as a whole. Thedevelopment and strengthening of community-wide norms against theuse of substances may well be one of the more important ways toprotect individuals against the use of substances. The section oncommunities discusses some of the issues and tools forcommunity-wide prevention planning and coordination. HOMES AND FAMILIES Although American society expects families in their homes totake the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problembehaviors (69), families in this country generally receive onlylimited outside support in protecting themselves againstsubstance abuse. This situation may result in part from thebelief that most nuclear families can raise their childrenlargely independently and therefore do not need outside support,and in part from the belief that teens and young adults are moreinfluenced by their peers. The first belief, however, is notsupported by long- standing practices in most societies, whereextended families and life-long neighbors have traditionallyhelped raise children (although in the United States many parentsdo not have access to these additional child-rearing resourcesbecause of urbanization, high technology, and family mobility).And the second belief is being questioned by growing evidencethat certain parenting practices and family intervention programscan significantly reduce the risk of substance abuse amongadolescents and young adults. An extensive and growing body of research strongly suggeststhat many families do need, and can benefit from, support fromoutside the family, and can often protect their children fromsubstance abuse, even into adolescence and adulthood. While someof the findings reported here may appear to be commonsensical,they are presented because they have been addressed byresearchers as part of a growing body of increasingly rigorousresearch. Some of the studies focus on risk and protectivefactors that are known or thought to be associated with substanceuse and abuse, while others focus directly on substance use andabuse. To reduce redundancy, factors and programs discussedelsewhere in this report are for the most part not consideredhere. Protective Factors Families can protect against substance use and abuse byproviding close family relationships, sufficient monitoring,clear messages about substance use and abuse, and attractivealternatives to substance use and abuse. Close Family Relationships Family relationships can help protect against substance useand abuse when they are characterized by closeness and warmth,effective and positive discipline, and successful problem solvingand communications. For example, young people who report feelingclose to their families are less likely to abuse substances thanthose who report not feeling close to their families. Parents insuch families are more likely to comfort their children when theyare afraid, have two-way communications, and give children somesay in what happens to them (83,86,152). Because such parentsspend more time with their children, there can be more conflict,but the time spent together can also lead to greater mutualunderstanding and acceptance (23,59). Parents can better channel their children away from substanceuse and abuse if they have routinely used effective,age-appropriate discipline methods, including clear expectationsand rules about homework, television, curfews, and drugs andalcohol. Such methods are particularly effective when they areenforced by praise and encouragement, instead of by threatening,nagging, and blaming (42,47). In contrast, ineffective orprovocative family management practices, including overly harshor reluctant discipline practices and inconsistent followthrough,are associated with early sampling of substances and later abuse(8,115). Unruly behaviors in childhood can lead children to poorachievement in school, social rejection by more conventionalpeers, and greater association with other children with behaviorproblems (46). Skillful handling of problems by families helps childrenlearn how to distance themselves from problems and address themwith specific problem-solving strategies (77). Such skills canhelp children later avoid the use and abuse of substances. Bycontrast, families where children eventually abuse substances donot make decisions and solve problems as well as other families(97). Positive caregiving and discipline can prevent negativeoutcomes even for highly stressed, minority, low socioeconomicstatus (SES), urban families (177). When the birth parents arenot available, effective parenting by a surrogate, relative, orneighbor can also be protective (173). Sufficient Monitoring When parents or parent surrogates know how their children arespending their time, the risk of substance abuse is low (47).Such monitoring may prevent abuse by reducing access tosubstances, preventing use of substances, or allowing parents toidentify substance use earlier and to apply sanctions. Monitoringmay also entail greater involvement by parents in theirchildren's lives, which may help render substance use and abuseless appealing by enhancing feelings of trust, warmth, andcloseness in the family. Such monitoring prevents substancesampling across ages, ethnicities, and settings. Single parents and working parents are often less able tomonitor their children thoroughly, because they can be in onlyone place at a time. However, grandmothers, aunts, after-schoolpersonnel, and other caring and supportive adults can alsomonitor children and help reduce deviant behaviors (59,88). Earlyautonomy and unsupervised leisure time apparently increase therisk of substance use and abuse by children. Clear Messages About Effects of Substances, IncludingSanctions Children are more likely to avoid the use of substances ifthey know that use will bring negative outcomes, such as adversephysical and psychological effects, disapproval, and penaltiesimposed by parents. Many children develop expectations about theeffects of substances as early as the preschool years (100),influenced primarily by their parents. Frequent parental use evenof aspirin, cold pills, prescribed psychotropic medications (85),and cough medicine can give children positive expectations aboutthe effects of substances (61). When parents apply reliable penalties, such as revokingprivileges, and coach their children about the adverse effects ofsubstances, use is likely to discontinue (6). By contrast, if thepossible adverse effects (e.g., illness and depression) are notemphasized and few negative sanctions are applied whenadolescents first use marijuana, while the immediate experiencesare to feel pleasantly stoned and potent (87), then continued useand adult drug problems are more likely (37). Parentaldisapproval of children's alcohol use has been found to beprotective across ethnic groups (33). Increased appreciation ofrisks and social disapproval of substance use is credited withthe recent downturn in cocaine and marijuana use nationally (5). Attractive Alternatives to Substance Use and Abuse Participation in religious and other conventional andchallenging activities can protect against substance use andabuse (26,81,111,173). Especially important are activities aboutwhich youth are passionate. Parents are more likely to guide their children away fromsubstance use and abuse if parents have instilled hope in theirchildren to succeed as adults (172). By contrast, some childrendo not look forward to and plan for adulthood, but learn onlyshort-term thinking (see box 8-1) and have been encouraged bytheir parents to believe they cannot succeed. Parents of inner-city African American children face specialdifficulties in holding out hope for their children's successthrough traditional opportunities. Unemployment among AfricanAmerican men is almost 50 percent (24) and the marriage rateamong African American women is low and still declining (10),with substance use and abuse among African Americans increasingas they reach 26 to 34 years of age, instead of decreasing aswith other racial and ethnic groups (164). Risk Factors Families also face risk factors, such as parental neglect andrejection, behavioral problems and crime, physical and sexualabuse, substance abuse in the family, failure in school,emotional problems, negative life events, early use ofsubstances, substance abuse in the neighborhood, and poverty,unemployment, and homelessness. Because some of these factors arediscussed elsewhere in this report, this section will focus onlyon parental neglect and rejection, physical and sexual abuse,substance abuse in the family, negative life events, and drugtrafficking in the neighborhood. Parental Neglect and Rejection Children who are neglected anytime, but especially fromearliest childhood, are at greater risk of substance abuse(17,142). When children have been continually rejected, theybecome immune to parental guidance. Such children fail to formclose relationships, get along with others, solve problems, andregulate impulses. Physical and Sexual Abuse Physical or sexual abuse in childhood leads to greatervulnerability to substance abuse in adolescence and adulthood(38). Rape victims, particularly those with Post Traumatic StressDisorder (PTSD) symptoms, are 20 times more likely to havesubsequent substance abuse problems (165). Substance abuserehabilitation programs report that as many as 60 to 70 percentof the female patients and 25 percent of the male patients havebeen sexually victimized, while 43 percent have been beaten(45,99,92). Victims of sexual or physical abuse often reportwishing to avoid unpleasant memories, including flashbacks to theabuse (126). The use of substances may help some victims forgetfor awhile (see box 8-2). Substance Abuse in the Family The biological children of alcoholics have a higher thanaverage chance of abusing alcohol, even if they are reared awayfrom their alcoholic parents (40,63). Thus, a part of thevulnerability to alcohol abuse, at least for some, may beinherited. Children of alcoholics, for example, may experiencemore positive effects or fewer negative effects from the use ofalcohol. Either of these responses could result from individualdifferences in experienced pharmacological effects of drugs (135)or differences in temperament that can be modified by the use ofalcohol and other drugs (154). In addition to friends and acquaintances, relatives are acommon source of alcohol and other drugs for teens. Familymembers and other relatives can be very persuasive when theyoffer such substances to teens. One study, that included bothabstainers and heavy users, found that young people refusedavailable substances, mainly alcohol, 46 percent of the time whenfriends offered them, but only 18 percent of the time whenrelatives outside the family offered them. When their own parentsoffered such substances, the young people never refused (9).Family members who use substances can also inadvertently makethem available to teens by leaving family cabinets containingalcohol or pills unlocked (35). Family members can learn how to use alcohol and other drugsby watching and listening to abusing family members; they canalso adopt the abusing members' expectations about the effects ofthese substances. For example, children of alcoholics are morelikely to think that the purpose of drinking is to get drunk(107). They also have greater expectations for the use of alcohol(143), and sometimes believe they can do things better after afew drinks. Families with a substance abusing parent experiencesignificant disruptions in many aspects of their lives, includingchild rearing (160). Substance abusing parents and spouses oftenhave difficulties guiding their children, especially away fromsubstances, because of inconsistent nurturing, monitoring, anddisciplinary practices (36,47). Their abuse of substances canalso rob children of stability in life and of competent adultrole models. Even a nondrinking spouse can become so involvedwith the drinking spouse and so depressed and isolated fromsocial support that children feel neglected (13). Marital qualitycan be affected (160), and the level of conflict and verbal andphysical aggression can be high (151). In addition, adolescentand adult children of substance abusers are less influenced bytheir parents and have lower parental attachment, lessinvolvement with other people, more difficulty getting along withother people (84), lower self- esteem, lower academicachievement, higher depression (128), and a greater number ofother psychiatric symptoms (143). Major Negative Life Events Substance use and abuse often increase as children experiencemore negative events (106,174) (see table 8-1). Adult alcoholicsreport a significantly higher number of severe life events justbefore their alcohol dependency begins (65), with seven out ofeight of them reporting disruptions in important personalrelationships, such as with friends, lovers, or spouses. Amongthe elderly, late- onset alcoholism is reportedly preceded by newfeelings of loneliness and depression, perhaps also due to recentlosses of important relationships (120,134). Such negative life events may heighten vulnerability tosubstance abuse by increasing depression (174). For instance, onestudy found that children who had lost a parent to death had a7.5 times greater risk of developing a depression than otherchildren (60). Negative life events may also occasion perceptionsof helplessness and decreased personal control; these too can beoffset, at least for awhile, by some drugs (91). Families are likely to have the greatest difficultypreventing substance abuse if friends abuse substances (86,109)or if substance use is rampant in the neighborhood(39,44,51,124). Such conditions encourage substance use andreduce the barriers against use by making drugs continuouslyavailable and socially acceptable (even appealing) and byproviding temporary escape from the frequent hassles andtragedies of life among highly transient and troubled (ratherthan stable and helpful) neighbors (146). Programs To Enhance Protective Factors This section discusses some of the numerous programs thathave been developed for families with infants, school-agedchildren, and young adults. Few of these programs specificallytarget substance abuse and addiction, but many have been found toenhance family-based protective factors and/or reduce riskfactors that can be associated with drug abuse. Unlike someschool-based programs, methodologically rigorous studiescorrelating the efficacy of these programs to the level ofsubstance abuse and addiction have yet to be done. Families With Infants Parent education, prenatal and infant care, and socialsupport programs help strengthen involved and responsiveparenting (4), which in turn can significantly reduce substanceabuse risk factors such as child abuse and neglect and childhoodaccidents. Parents who had participated in such programs attained moreeducation, had fewer other children, and were less likely to beon welfare by the time their children were 10 years old, thanparents who had not participated in such programs. Participatingparents reported less stress and more confidence in theirparenting (175). Most importantly, children were dramaticallyless likely to experience attendance, behavior, or academicproblems in school (112,138,139). These programs can take many forms: o a neighborhood house where parents and their infants cancome during the day for companionship, child care advice, socialservices, and health care from a stable professional staff (139); o twice-a-week home visits by the same nurse, from pregnancyuntil the child is 2 years old (112); o home visits, with child development advice, help inacquiring other services, and time-limited family counseling tolower conflict and increase support from the extended family; o a public school dedicated to pregnant teens and new mothersand that provides health and child care education, socialservices, and intensive high school education (138); and o parent meetings in the hospital where the baby was born(175). Families With School-Age Children Parent training and support programs can help parents ofschool-aged children motivate their children to more willinglypay attention to and accept parental guidance and to developskills for success outside the family. A parent training programcalled WINNING, provided through a Texas school system, increasedpositive and corrective feedback from parents to children,increased parent-child interactions, and decreased the attentionparents gave to inappropriate child behavior. Concomitantly, theportion of their children's behavior that was inappropriatedecreased (43). Another parent training and support program, "How toHelp Your Child Succeed in School," was offered throughSeattle, Washington schools to increase protective factors andreduce risk factors for substance use and abuse. After theprogram, parents spent more time reading with their children andprovided more consistent positive and negative consequences forbehavior (70,71, 72,73,74). Involving parents more in schools can furthersupportparenting and prevent it from being undermined by peersand by school environments. In the School Development Program inNew Haven, Connecticut, for example, parents serve as members ofthe School Advisory Council and as employees or volunteers inclassrooms. Significant improvements have been seen in studentattendance, language skills, math scores, and social competence,and virtually all classroom behavior problems have beeneliminated (34,41). A community grassroots effort to provide these and otherresources for parents began 17 years ago in the Ravendale sectionof Detroit, Michigan. The "Joy of Jesus" programs nowsupport families living in more than 30 contiguous blocks. Everyday after school about 250 youth of all ages participate inscheduled activities such as tutoring, music, dance, gym,writing, teen sex education, cultural field trips, universitytours, and an entrepreneur's club (for 30 teens who are startingtheir own businesses). This program provides several substanceabuse protective factors and prevents the risk factor of schoolfailure, by monitoring report cards and enrolling students in anindividualized after-school motivational learning program, ifnecessary. In Los Angeles, California, an after-school tutoring andactivities program has been developed in a for profit apartmentbuilding. The program, called EEXCEL, provides a room in thebuilding and live-in counselors and tutors who offer children a"sanctuary for education [and]...incentives forlearning." When report cards come out, good grades arerecognized at parties. Only those families that want thisresource for their children are accepted as tenants in thebuilding (108). Atlanta, Georgia-based Inner-City Families in Action has beenpresenting comprehensive information in a series of 2- hoursessions about how specific drugs, such as alcohol or crack,affect every system in the body, to residents in two Atlantahousing projects. The curriculum is called "You Have theRight to Know." After 2 years of using the curriculum inmany locations, the narcotics arrests in both housing projectsare down (52). Through flyers, personal invitations from schools, and a 1-hour television special, parents were recruited to 87 local sitesaround Seattle, Washington, for workshops on "Preparing forthe Drug (Free) Years," led by trained parents. Surveysshowed that parents' attitudes and behaviors were changed in thedirection of providing protective factors. Parents also ratedhighly the workshops' content, process, and leaders (71). The Midwestern Prevention Project (Project STAR) in KansasCity, Missouri, used the local media to recruit parents to becomeinvolved in a school and parent substance abuse education courseand to repeat the messages for more than one year. This intensiveeffort reduced the rate of increase in initiation of alcohol,tobacco, and marijuana use among seventh and eighth graders whohad participated in the program, as compared to those who had notparticipated (116). Families With Young Adults Job Corps, Peace Corps/VISTA programs, American Conservationand Youth Service Corps, National and Community Service Programs,universities, and the military all provide young people shelteredwork experiences, educational training if necessary, andopportunities to live away from home with other young people instructured environments. Research shows that such experiencesenhance the confidence of participants in their ability to workhard (48). Programs To Reduce Risk Factors Reducing Drug-Trafficking and Substance-Using Peers Operation Clean Sweep, now being run by the Chicago,Illinois, Housing Authority, is designed to reduce drug dealingand other crimes in housing projects. Staff approach onehigh-rise building at a time, spending at least a whole day atthe building. State and local law enforcement officers andhousing authority security officers search apartment units (ifthere is reasonable cause) for illegal weapons and unauthorizedresidents. Authorized residents are given photo I.D. cards, whileothers are put on the lease, given a 2-week pass, or asked toleave. The maintenance staff makes repairs, cleans graffiti,encloses lobbies, and builds a security station for 24-hour-a-daysurveillance and review of photo I.D.'s and passes foradmittance. The program is being replicated in cities across thenation, with funding and technical assistance from the U.S.Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Reducing Physical and Sexual Abuse Physical and psychological security is important for theemotional well-being of children (30) and may well reduce theirrisk of later substance abuse. Mandatory arrest and briefincarceration for physical and sexual abuse of children ormothers has been shown to deter more repeat offenses than dowarnings or counseling alone (144), and court-mandated treatmentfor convicted offenders seems to reduce later abuse even further(50). Since 40 to 87 percent of adult sexual or physical abusersalso report alcohol or drug abuse, individuals treated for familyviolence should perhaps also be screened and, if appropriate,treated for substance abuse (176). Reducing Substance Abuse in the Family Substance abuse treatment for the family can reduce substanceabuse in the short-term and maintain those reductions in thelong-term (27,75, 101,147,149,153,). Substance abuse treatmentfor married adults is more effective when both spouses areinvolved (96), and especially with a behavioral approach tomarital problems (110). Clearly, families can help rehabilitatesubstance abusers, thereby reducing the risk of substance abusefor other family members. Reducing Impact of Negative Life Events Linking people with modest community supports during crisesor adjustments can reduce risk factors and enhance protectivefactors. For example, when widows were contacted individually bytrained, previously widowed persons to discuss grief anddecisions to be made, 61 percent accepted the widow-aide services(145) and one month after bereavement were less depressed andless preoccupied with the past than widows who had received nointervention. One year later, the intervention group wassignificantly more resocialized in their roles as singles; twoyears later, the health of the intervention group members wassignificantly better than that of control group members (168). Also, a 6-month program for newly separated or divorcedpeople in Colorado (which included both one-to-one counseling bytrained volunteers and group meetings about practical problems,such as career planning and child- rearing) significantly reducedthe participants' problems and their anxiety, nervousness, andfatigue. It also improved their psychological adjustment (lessguilt and self-blame, more competence), as compared with arandomly selected control group (18). More indirect approacheshave also been tried. For example, socially isolated and lonelyindividuals, who were provided a free blood pressure station inthe lobby of their innercity single room occupancy hotel, wereintroduced to each other by the nurse and later formed a"Senior Activities Club." In another example, a surplusfood distribution service, that required individuals to worktogether to get their food, produced new friendships (117). Reducing Parental Neglect Parents whose children failed to maintain gains after parenteducation or family therapy are often socially isolated andsubject to seemingly insurmountable daily problems (49). Anexperimental program--with weekly follow-up sessions withisolated parents, to discuss environmental problems that affectedhow parents saw their children's behavior--reduced maternalcriticisms of children, negative responses by children tomothers, and child problem behaviors (170). When the weeklydiscussions stopped, however, the negative interactions resumed. In a more comprehensive program for low SES parents believedby Child Protective Services to be at high risk for child abuseor neglect, Project 12-Ways held meetings with parents in theirhomes (95). Treatment goals were developed and, as needed,behavioral training was provided in stress reduction,assertiveness, self-control, leisure time planning, maritalcounseling, and job finding. Social support groups, alcoholtreatment referral, homemakers, physicians, and mental healthworkers were also involved. Parent compliance and involvement inthis 5- to 6-month program were high. Twenty months aftertreatment, only 2 percent of Project 12-Ways parents abused orneglected their children, while 10 percent of a nonprogramcomparison group did. Families on the verge of having children placed in foster-care, group homes, or psychiatric hospitals can benefit fromfamily preservation programs. Children have fewer behavioral andacademic problems when they are raised by birth-parents in safehomes (130). Thus, the goal of a family preservation counselor isto help the family out of the crisis and learn how to retain thechild safely at home. The interventions are typically intensiveand brief--for example, a counselor is available for meetings inthe home 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for about 6 weeks. Thecounselor deals with any relevant problems, helping the familyclarify values, set goals, and solve problems, and helps connectfamily members with community resources (see box 8-3). Many families, especially those with substance abuseproblems, need more prolonged help. A family support program thatprovides such longer term support is Camden House, in theRavendale section of Detroit, Michigan. A rundown house waspurchased, renovated, and made the center of an outreach anddrop-in program for about 10 local families with multipleproblems that included substance abuse, lack of skills, chronicunemployment, early pregnancy, and crime. After staff had workedwith the families for one to two years, taking one problem at atime and actively mentoring the parents, six out of 10 of theoriginal parents were out of the Camden House program, drug-free,trained and employed, and safely and responsibly raising theirchildren. SCHOOLS AND PEERS Millions of school-age youth in the United States experimentwith alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs annually, often(especially with alcohol) in ways that can cause overdose deaths,accidental injuries or deaths, and permanent impairments. Manyschool-age youth continue to use substances and later developlong-term addictions. To address these substance abuse problems,schools provide the most important settings for reaching youngpeople with standardized, broadly applied educational andpreventive messages. Because school-age youth are especially likely to initiatethe use of alcohol and other drugs, much of the research hasfocused on use, rather than on abuse and dependency. Suchresearch is nevertheless relevant to an understanding of abuseand dependency, since use is a precondition and contributor toabuse and dependency and even experimental use can be harmful.For example, nearly half of all youth who experiment withcigarettes develop long-term smoking habits, and alcohol andmarijuana use by youth with no chronic problems still contributesto highway deaths, crime, and violence. This section summarizesresults from an analysis of survey research on the causes ofschool-age substance use and discusses school-based preventionprogramming. Analysis of Survey Research on Causes of School-Age SubstanceUse OTA commissioned a review of the survey research literatureon school-aged substance use that compiled, classified, andexamined 9,930 statistical analyses from 242 separate studies.This is by far the most extensive systematic examination of thisbody of research conducted so far. Most of the studies dealt withschool-based populations, but some focused on school-age armyrecruits, dropouts, children of alcoholics, and individualsinvolved in clinics. The studies reported statisticalrelationships between substance use and its postulated causes.Statistical findings from the study reports were sorted into 11major categories and 50 subcategories (see table 8-2), and thenanalyzed to identify strong, moderate, and weak statisticalrelationships, as well as those that had been insufficientlystudied. Characteristics of Database The studies tended to focus on so-called gateway substances,with tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana analyses accounting for 82percent of the completed analyses (see figure 8-1). Cocaine,inhalants, heroin, and prescription drugs, which have recentlyreceived extensive social attention, have been relatively ignoredby quantitative researchers to date; none of these lattercategories of substance use accounted for more than 5 percent ofthe analyses in the research reports examined. Gateway drugs areindeed important, since they may lead some individuals to laterabuse. Nevertheless, the literature has gaps. Inhalants, forinstance, may well be one of the most commonly used and abusedsubstances among some youth, but they have received almost noattention from survey researchers. Although the primary measures were of use, not abuse, thedatabase included some measures of alcohol abuse (e.g., drunkdriving and impairment from alcohol use). Abuse of cocaine,heroin, and analgesics was not measured. The percentages ofanalyses in the database for each of the 11 major types ofindependent variables is displayed (see figure 8-2). The types ofindependent variables most studied were personality, use byothers, and cognitive factors (including attitudes, beliefs, andvalues). Results of Analysis After being sorted into the 11 major categories and 50subcategories, the average of all the correlations in eachsubcategory was calculated. Then, each subcategory was ranked byits average correlation and the rankings were divided into threegroups, defined by ranges of correlations: primary (withcorrelations over .30), secondary (with correlations betweenabout .20 and .30), and tertiary (with correlations under about.20) (see figure 8- 3). Primary correlates The four variables that dominate as correlates of andpossible contributors to substance use are: 1) prior andconcurrent use of substances, 2) substance use by peers andfriends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substance use, and 4)offers to use substances. The prominence of prior and concurrentuse is consistent with the reinforcing nature of substance useitself. The prominence of the other three variables emphasizesthe importance of the social environment in contributing to andreinforcing substance use among school-age youth. Secondary correlates Of the 15 variables judged to be of secondary importance,seven are social variables: 1) susceptibility to peer pressure,2) resistance skills, 3)??perception of social pressure to usesubstances, 4)? beliefs that such pressure can be effectivelyhandled, 5) beliefs about social consequences of use, 6)bondedness (especially to school), and 7) peer groupcharacteristics. With the exception of parent attitudes aboutsubstance use, other parental variables--such as parentalsupervision, monitoring, and relations--are notably missing asprimary or secondary correlates. Tertiary correlates Of the 38 variables found to have no more than a minor rolein substance use, 10 were included in at least 100 of thecorrelational analyses in the database for this review. They are:1) substance use by parents, 2) personality traits, 3)intelligence, 4) social personality traits, 5) parentalrelations, 6) affect, 7) participation in structured activities,8) bonding with the peer group, 9) beliefs about healthconsequences of using substances, and 10) self-esteem. Variables requiring further study Several of the secondary and tertiary variables in thestudies reviewed here were insufficiently examined to allowgeneral conclusions to be drawn. However, they may later prove tobe useful to the field. For example, religious affiliation andthe development of substance use-specific values, while notextensively studied as separate variables, both address issuesrelated to social norms and influences that have often been foundto be associated with substance use; thus, an association betweenthese two variables and the onset of substance use might beexpected. Also, availability may prove to be important,especially if it is defined in future studies more broadly (e.g.,as physical and social availability, as discussed in ch. 5)rather than as potential availability (that is, how easy itappears to be to get a substance, if motivated), as many currentsurveys define it. Preventive Interventions Schools can seek to prevent substance use and abuse throughcurriculum-based drug prevention programs and through other, morenovel approaches, such as school-based clinics, studentassistance programs, and holistic environmental interventions.School-based prevention efforts have been hampered, however, by alack of good evaluation data on the most widely marketed programsand by insufficient information about and dissemination of themore promising programs. Numerous studies of the effectiveness of curriculum-baseddrug prevention programs have been completed and reviewed (67).Studies of prevention programs focusing on tobacco have beenextensively reviewed (16,20,54,58,94,132,155) and alcohol studieshave been reviewed several times (62,64,102). Reviews ofschool-based prevention curricula that specifically targetmarijuana or cocaine do not exist. However, several reviews haveexamined studies of programs designed to prevent the use ofmultiple substances (7,25,102,131,156). Even these reviews,however, typically focus primarily on tobacco and alcohol. Effectiveness of Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program Three merchandised curriculum programs have captured asizable share of the prevention program market: DARE (Drug AbuseResistance Education); Quest: Skills for Living; and Here'sLooking at You 2000. Of these, evaluations only of DARE have beenreported in sufficient numbers to allow conclusions to be drawn. The DARE program is delivered in schools by uniformed policeofficers who have been trained in any of five regional trainingcenters. It was designed by the Los Angeles, California, UnifiedSchool District, which borrowed from research-based programsdeveloped in the early 1980s. DARE is delivered annually to about5 million students in all 50 States, at a total cost of about $50million (an average annual cost of about $10 per student) (93).DARE is thus one of the better funded drug prevention programs inschools. One research team examined 17 published and unpublishedevaluations of DARE (53). For the 11 studies that met minimalstandards of methodological rigor, the average reductions insubstance use were very small. Use among control schools and DAREschools was roughly equal. The few studies that were longitudinalfound neither short-term nor long-term reductions. DARE has important strengths, including favorable reactionsamong students who have participated in DARE programs, widespreadpolitical support, substantial funding, uniformly reportedimprovements in school-police relations, highquality of programimplementation, and expert marketing. However, these strengthshave not guaranteed that DARE is always effective as a drugprevention program. A scientific advisory group has beenestablished to review research and evaluation of the DARE programand to consider changes in the curriculum. The General Accounting Office (GAO) estimated that aboutone-fourth of the funds given to the States and local schoolsunder the Drug-Free School and Communities Act went towardpurchasing and delivering school curricula (163). However, widelyadopted curriculum packages (such as Quest: Skills for Living;Here's Looking at You 2000; Project Adventure; BABES; ProjectCHARLIE; and Children Are People) have presented no adequateevaluation results that allow program effectiveness to be judged.Evaluations conducted to date have been primarily short-termreviews for dissertations and theses, and they lack interpretablebehavioral end-points. Given the widespread dissemination ofthese curricula, quality evaluation studies would be important. Conclusions About Curriculum-Based Prevention in Schools Curriculum-based drug prevention efforts to date can becharacterized as showing promise (67,156), but critics point outthat the effectiveness of these programs, especially those thatare being commercially marketed, has not yet been proven and thatsignificant difficulties remain (102). Some of these aremethodological difficulties intrinsic to all field trialresearch, while others relate to the possibly intrinsiclimitations of curriculum approaches when used alone. Individualstudies suggest that curriculum-based prevention programs in theschools may ultimately be proven to be effective for preventingsubstance use among some youth, especially when used ascomponents in more comprehensive substance use preventionefforts. However, school-based prevention technologies currentlyin use have not been refined and tested enough to demonstratetheir effectiveness for reducing substance use for students ingeneral, and especially not for multiproblem youth, who are athigher risk of substance abuse. Clearly, for DARE and for theother major school-based curriculum prevention programs,resources must be set aside to properly evaluate program results. Noncurricular Approaches to School-Based Prevention Curriculum-based efforts have dominated the field, largelybecause they are relatively simple to understand, implement, andreplicate, and because methods to evaluate them have becomestandardized. However, curriculum-based prevention programs havenot been demonstrated to be effective, and several noncurricularapproaches have recently emerged, including student assistanceprograms, school-based clinics, and more holisticschool-community collaborations and alterations of psychosocialenvironments in schools. These approaches have been evaluatedonly rarely, but interest in them has been growing. For example,although student assistance programs remain largely unevaluated,they accounted for about half of the spending, under the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, in six recently evaluated urbanschool districts (163). Student assistance programs try to identify substance-usingstudents early on and then provide social support, build skillsfor dealing with life problems, or refer to treatment, asappropriate. Peers often help as crisis managers, small groupfacilitators, and referral agents, while adults often act asprogram facilitators and counselors. Programs typically counselstudents who are children of alcoholics, who use alcohol or drugsabusively, and who are performing poorly at school. Programs canalso help parents address their children's needs. Only three evaluations of student assistance programs werefound by OTA for this review. Two focused on process issues only(89,118), while one addressed program outcomes (90). The outcomestudy focused on interventions for students in six residentialfacilities, including a locked correctional facility. Althoughthe sites are atypical for student assistance programs, theprogram otherwise resembled student assistance programs inschools. The outcome study found that marijuana and tobacco usedeclined among program participants in five of the sixfacilities. Alcohol use declined in half of the sites, whilealcohol use in two sites remained unchanged and in one site roseslightly. The declines in use were observed at about nine and 15months after participation in the program. Although these resultsare promising, one study (especially a study conducted innonschool settings) cannot support general conclusions about theeffectiveness of student assistance programs in schools. Many schools, either directly or through community agencies,are bringing services into schools to help deal with social andhealth problems that are often interrelated, such as depression,violence, substance use, and sexually transmitted diseases.School-based clinics and youth service centers are being set upto provide comprehensive and integrated health and socialservices. This new wave of programming has been supported byState governments, local school districts, and privatefoundations. School-based clinics have been developing in response togrowing poverty, widespread lack of insurance, and increases inhealth and social problems among youth. One study indicates thatthe percent of adolescents defined as living in poverty increasedfrom 15 percent in 1979 to 19 percent in 1986 (22). Not all youthliving in poverty are covered by Medicaid or other healthinsurance, and millions of other youth (e.g., in near-poor orrecently unemployed families) also lack health insurance.Violence, teen pregnancy, and substance use and abuse remain highor are increasing in many communities, and these problems oftenrequire direct one-on-one medical or social interventions, ifthey are to have a chance of being resolved. Self-referral and other data suggest that school-basedclinics are providing health care and social support. Forexample, a survey of 306 such clinics in 33 States and PuertoRico (22) found that about half the visits were for medicalproblems, such as injuries and illnesses, with 40 percent of thevisits for counseling and 10 percent for birth control suppliesor counseling about reproductive issues more generally. Noevaluations seem yet to have focused on the effectiveness ofschool-based clinics for assisting with the treatment andprevention of substance use and abuse. School-based clinicsperhaps should not focus primarily on these problems, but asclinics expand in numbers questions will naturally and morefrequently arise about their role in addressing substance use andrelated problems. Several notable collaborations between schools and othercommunity agencies and resources have been supported and, atleast in part, studied. For example, the Community PartnershipProgram, administered by the Center for Substance AbusePrevention, has supported more than 250 local partnerships forthe prevention of substance use and abuse, with over 60 percentactively involving schools as coalition members. Each site musthave a local evaluator that will monitor primarily programactivities, and a national evaluation to monitor programactivities and outcomes has begun. The local evaluations areexpected to vary widely, in part because uniform, acceptedstandards for community-wide program evaluation have yet to bedeveloped. Outcome findings are expected by 1997. The Midwest Prevention Project (116) provides and studiesschool-based interventions in the greater Kansas City, Missouri,metropolitan area and in Marion County (Indianapolis), Indiana.Due to constraints in the study design, the evaluation results todate speak directly only to the impact of the school-basedcurricular interventions; the impact of community organization,parental, and media components cannot be evaluated. Nonetheless,this approach suggests the potential for communities to supportschool- based prevention efforts. Cities-in-Schools is a national nonprofit organizationdevoted to preventing students from dropping out, throughpartnerships among schools, local governments, and businesses.Cities-in-Schools operates in 122 communities in 21 states with384 schools participating in the program. The nationalorganization strives to bring health, social, and employmentservices into schools across the nation, to help youth find jobs,tutors, and counseling and to motivate them to stay in school. Anational staff assists local boards. A prominent person inbusiness presides over each local program, directs fund-raising,and organizes a team of professionals to help potential dropouts.In most programs, a case manager is assigned to each high-riskchild. Beyond these basics, programs vary greatly, focusing on adiversity of prevention and intervention strategies. SeveralCities- in-Schools sites have achieved national attention.Although little concrete evaluation data are available about theeffects of these programs in general or on substance use, themodel appears promising and warrants further study. Changing the social or physical climate in schools may alsohelp reduce substance use and abuse. Future research andevaluation studies could focus on the impacts on substance useand abuse of this and other holistic models, such as open versusclosed campuses, alternative schools, and after- school careprograms. These models may be especially promising for high riskyouth suffering from multiple risk factors and limited protectivefactors, many of which are rooted in problematic (often substanceusing and abusing) homes, neighborhoods, peer groups, and othersubcultures, which cannot easily be influenced by more limitedschool- based prevention approaches alone. WORKPLACES Workplaces can also contribute to and protect against alcoholand drug abuse. This section reviews literature on factors andinterventions associated with substance abuse in the workplace,with a special focus on the role of workplace settingsthemselves. Researchers have investigated the causes of substanceabuse among workers for nearly four decades, and U.S. managementand labor have been concerned about workplace substance abuse forover a century (150,158,159). Alcohol has been the drug moststudied in workplaces and appears to be the drug most commonlyused. Magnitude of Problem The prevalence of substance abuse among the employed remainsinadequately documented, based on a small number of flawedstudies. For American workers more information exists on theextent of alcohol use and dependence (although gaps remain) thanon the use and abuse of illegal substances (57, 68,114). The 1988 National Health Interview Survey found that about 13percent of employed men and 6 percent of employed women werealcohol dependent (68). This nationwide household survey ofalmost 27,000 individuals found that, for both men and women, thepercentage of white-collar workers who drank was greater than thepercentage of blue-collar workers who drank. However, among thosewho drank, blue-collar workers drank more than white-collarworkers. Consistent with an earlier survey in Detroit, Michigan,alcohol-related disorders were also found to be greater amongblue-collar workers, with the rates highest for men who werecraftsmen, laborers, and service workers, and for women who weremachine operators, laborers, and service workers (114). Anotherinvestigator has reported that the rate of on-the- job substanceuse among young men in the 6 months prior to the study was about28 percent (105). Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such asaccidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,compensation claims, and insurance costs (11). The total cost tothe American economy related to substance abuse has beenestimated to be more than $144 billion a year, with about 60percent due to alcohol abuse and 40 percent due to the abuse ofother drugs (121). Costs to the economy include costs due tomedical care, prevention, law enforcement, and lost productivity.The 1985 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse found thatsubstance-using employees were 3.6 times more likely to haveaccidents than nonusing employees. They had 2.5 times moreabsences of 8 days or more. They were three times more likely tobe tardy than nonusing employees and were 2.2 times more likelyto ask for early dismissal. They requested sick leave three timesas much as nonusing employees. They were five times as likely tofile for worker compensation. The total cost of lost productivitydue to alcohol and other drug abuse has been estimated at morethan $33 billion in 1985 and a little more than $43 billion in1988 (122). Factors Affecting Individuals in Workplaces Substance abuse in workplaces can be affected by nonworkplacefactors and workplace factors. Nonworkplace Factors Early research attributed drinking and other drug problems onthe job to factors outside the workplace. Substance abuse wasseen as a problem brought to the workplace but not caused by theworkplace, and some believed that substance abusers selectedworkplaces where they could conceal their problems. This viewassumed that substance abusers had the knowledge and freedom tochoose jobs on this basis, an assumption unlikely to apply toall, given the limits of education and work experience among manysubstance abusers, especially blue-collar workers (113). In anycase, family and community experiences interact with workplaceexperiences (2), and workers from families and other subgroupsthat drink may find that drinking influences their work lives aswell. As noted earlier, drinking problems are more common amongthose with lower SES, although drinking occurs more frequentlyamong higher SES individuals (31). Workplaces that employ morelower SES employees may therefore be expected to have morealcohol abusers (157). The acceptance of alcohol and other drugs in the largersociety outside the workplace can also influence substance useand abuse in the workplace. This can be seen in the new attitudesin American society toward smoking. Consumers used to be assailedconstantly by advertisements presenting smoking in a positivelight, but are now more informed about its negative effects onhealth. As a result, smoking has been banned from many airplaneflights, restaurants, stores, and public and private workplaces. The availability of alcohol in the local community from whicha work organization derives its employees can also influenceworkplace drinking (157). Higher rates of drinking problems existin communities where alcohol is cheaply and widely available andalcohol outlets remain open for long hours. Workplace Environment Factors Several decades ago, researchers distinguished fourcategories of workplace factors that place employees at risk forexcessive drinking (127). They are: o lack of work visibility, o absence of job structure, o lack of social controls that discourage alcohol use, and o job stress. A more recent review (157) of risk factors internal toworkplace environments identified the following elements: o alienation and powerlessness, o work stress, o structural features of the workplace, o influence of administrative subcultures, o poorly implemented intervention programs, and o union-management conflict. It has also been suggested that individual factors andperceived work situations may be more important for alcohol usethan objective work situations (136). Those with boring androutine jobs, or jobs over which they have little control, may bemore likely to drink (3,76). For example, a study of auto factoryassembly line workers found that 40 percent drank alcohol at work(129). Other research found a consistent relationship betweenpowerlessness and alcohol use, and no evidence that workexperience or social support moderated alcohol use (137). Workplace subcultures, whether administrative oroccupational, may also encourage drinking or the use of otherdrugs at work. Administrative support for heavy drinking canexist throughout the work organization or can be limited tospecific sites or occasions. Subcultures that can support theheavy use of alcohol, but strongly discourage the use of illicitdrugs, are found in the military (28,119). Anecdotal reportssuggest that other occupational settings have encouraged the useof cocaine (e.g., entertainment industry). Although availableresearch does not support the conclusion that workplacesubcultures are the primary cause of substance abuse, there isevidence that at least alcohol problems vary widely according tooccupation (148). Workplaces can offer protective factors as well. For some,the fact of being employed, with the income and stability andstatus that employment can convey, may offer protection againstsubstance use and abuse. If unemployment and underemployment areviewed as risk factors, then employment by itself, at a decentwage in a decent job, may offer protection. In addition, thespecific characteristics of a workplace can be protective. Forexample, the risk factors listed above could be viewed as theextremes on a continuum, the other end of which could be expectedto offer protection. Thus, work visibility, job structure,manageable stress, worker involvement and empowerment, supportiveadministrators, well implemented treatment and preventionprograms, and union-management harmony could be expected to beprotective factors. Interventions Two primary ways of dealing with employee substance abuse andhealth have emerged: traditional employee assistance programs(EAPs), which seek to help employees with identified problems,and health promotion programs, which seek to prevent illness andpromote health (56). Employee Assistance Programs EAPs help employees with personal problems at the employer'sexpense, by providing services directly (through the workorganization) or indirectly (through a provider in the community)(140). In some workplaces, for example, EAPs are located inmedical departments, which generally provide emergency medicalcare and may also provide preventive or rehabilitative care.Medical departments, however, appear to be declining as sites forEAPs (141). EAPs rely on a strategy of constructive confrontation, whichassumes that supervisors or coworkers of substance abusers willhelp refer them to the EAPs. In addition, workers are encouragedto refer themselves to EAPs for assistance. A review of what works in fighting substance abuse in theworkplace stresses that an employee assistance program is a keyto a good workplace program (167). It also recommends a writtendrug-free workplace policy, management and supervisory training,drug testing in workplaces where appropriate (one example ofwhich is when substance abuse may be dangerous to self orothers), and employee education programs focused on substanceabuse. Testing may well prevent substance use and abuse inworkplaces. Some studies suggest that EAPs can be cost-effective forbusiness. The Department of Labor has reported thatemployersgenerally find that for every dollar invested in an EAP, savingsof from $5 to $16 are achieved (167). Other reviews of thelimited evaluations of the economic and other benefits of EAPshave found that health care costs and absenteeism, for example,decline after employees have been served by EAPs (178). However, EAPs have also been criticized in some cases, fortheir inability to reach those at greatest risk, their incompletecoverage of lower status employees, their failures to identifyproblem drinkers early enough, their inadequate handling ofsituation-dependent drinking problems, and their uncertaineffectiveness in rehabilitating problem drinkers (140). Therelative lack of EAPs in medium and small workplaces is animportant constraint on the ability of EAPs to offer morewidespread protection to the employed. Health Promotion Programs Health promotion programs seek to prevent illness and promotewellness through behavior change. For example, they provideinformation and support activities to help individuals increaseexercise, quit smoking, change diets, and manage stress andhypertension. There are several advantages to using such generalworkplace health promotion programs to prevent substance abuse inthe context of promoting positive life-style changes for allemployees. These include: o little or no stigma; o the use of positive, optimistic approaches; o ease in selling to employees and generating enthusiasm;and, o generous corporate financing of health promotion programs(103). The use of health promotion programs to prevent substanceabuse can also present problems, however. For example, preventionhistorically has been one of the lowest priorities for Federalfunding (104). When implemented by businesses, health promotionprograms may inadequately deal with the needs of a particularwork organization's employees, since the programs often come fromoutside and have not been tailored to fit the needs of aparticular group of employees. Decision makers within a workplacemay decide on the basis of intuition, whim, or trendiness to buya health promotion program from the increasing number ofpurveyors of programs (140). Furthermore, many of the proponentsof marketed health promotion programs have failed to adequatelyevaluate their programs. Unfortunately, this has beenparticularly true of activities intended to prevent substanceabuse. Environment-Oriented Approaches to Substance Abuse Prevention A third approach, often associated with Scandinavia, focusesless on changing employee behaviors and more on alteringworkplace factors that influence worker health. The Swedish WorkEnvironment Fund, established in 1972, supports research,workplace innovations, information dissemination, and training toachieve better working environments. Grants that supportoccupational health centers and research programs in Sweden arefinanced through a combination of employer fees, payroll taxes,and government financial assistance. By contrast, the goal of alcohol policy in the workplace inthe United States has for centuries been to change individualdrinking behavior (1). Researchers have recently begun to focuson how the workplace environment influences problem drinking. TheHarvard School of Public Health, jointly funded by the NationalInstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and the Robert WoodJohnson Foundation, is surveying thousands of managers and workgroups in up to 10 large multinational corporations (171). Thestudy will determine corporate and work site patterns ofdrinking, levels of work site drinking problems as they relate toattitudes and practices of management, how corporate cultureaffects managerial behavior and drinking problems in theworkplace, and what role the work group plays in promoting orpreventing problem drinking. RECREATIONAL SETTINGS Recreational and other developmental activities and settingsmay also contribute to the prevention of substance use and abuse,or by their absence increase the risk. Examples of suchrecreational and other developmental activities and settingsinclude Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts, organizedsports, cultural activities, and local park and recreationdepartment programs. Organized Activities and Drug Abuse Research on the impact of organized youth activities onsubstance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies haveaddressed the issue directly, while others have addressed it moreindirectly. One study (which relied extensively on reports from employeesof Boys and Girls Clubs) found that public housing developmentsserved by Clubs had 22 percent less drug activity thandevelopments not served by Clubs. The presence of crack inparticular was 25 percent lower, and even lower in developmentsserved by new Clubs with SMART Moves, a substance abuseprevention program (133). A more extensive investigation has been conducted by theSearch Institute, which has surveyed 180,000 6th through 12thgrade youth in 430 school districts since 1988. Analysis of thedata found that as developmental assets increased (includinginvolvement in music, school team sports, nonsport school-basedcocurricular activities, nonschool clubs or organizations, andchurches) at-risk behaviors decreased, including the use ofalcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs (12). Specifically, thecorrelations: o tend to be small; o are strongest for tobacco use and weakest for alcohol use;and, o are slightly higher for church involvement than for otheractivities. Involvement in youth programs and activities has been foundto be associated with fewer at-risk behaviors among youth. Onestudy found that higher levels of four youth assets (perceivedpositive school climate, family support, involvement instructured youth activities, and involvement in church orsynagogue) were associated with lower levels of 20 at-riskindicators, contained mainly in eight at-risk domains (alcohol,tobacco, illicit drugs, sexuality, depression/suicide, antisocialbehavior, school, and vehicle safety) (12). High school studentswho listed no assets, for example, reported an average of 5.6at-risk indicators, while students listing all 4 assets reportedonly 1.7 at- risk indicators. A study of different communities found that 55 percent of theyouth in the healthier communities (defined by fewer at- riskbehaviors among youth) were involved in structured activities,whereas only 39 percent of the youth in the least healthycommunities were involved in such activities (19). Qualitative assessments across prevention disciplines supportthese findings. For example, although a review and analysis ofdelinquency, adolescent pregnancy, substance abuse, and schoolfailure and dropout prevention programs did not directlyinvestigate connections between youth development programs andsubstance abuse prevention, its authors concluded that theelements in youth development organizations can play a criticalrole in preventing each of these problem behaviors (48). The Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development has identifiedseveral successful prevention efforts launched by nationalyouth-serving organizations, including the adolescent pregnancyefforts of the Association of Junior Leagues and of Girls, Inc.,and found that participation in such programs was associated withfewer at-risk behaviors (32). The Carnegie Council's Task Forceon Youth Development and Community Programs concluded that, takentogether, current social science theory and field evaluationsprovide a solid rationale for strengthening and expanding therole of community-based programs in promoting healthy adolescentdevelopment, since unsupervised after-school hours represent aperiod of significant risk, with young adolescents standing agreater chance of engaging in substance abuse. Another study tested whether inactivity or boredom wasassociated with substance abuse. It compared adolescents who hadbeen clinically diagnosed as substance abusers with a comparisongroup of nonsubstance abusers, and found that the substanceabusers experienced their leisure activities as more boring, eventhough they had participated in more leisure activities(including such activities as going to concerts and going for adrive). Available leisure activities may, for some youth, fail tosatisfy "their need for optimal arousal," leaving themmore vulnerable to the appeal of drugs (78). Thus, being active does not by itself protect againstsubstance abuse. Some activities, such as those that areunstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks ofsubstance use and abuse through association with a wider range ofpeers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activitiesperceived as boring may not protect against substance use andabuse. More research is needed, to clarify the aspects ofrecreational and other leisure activities that may protectagainst substance use and abuse. Research might profitably focuson whether activities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) areassociated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. Elements of Notable Programs Several of the most important elements of notable substanceabuse prevention programs are provided by youth developmentprograms as well. These include: o Promoting social and life skills. Programs that relyexclusively on transmitting information about the health, legal,and social risks of substance use and abuse are generallyineffective (79). If, as the author of a recent longitudinalstudy contends, substance use is a symptom rather than a cause ofpersonal and social maladjustment, promoting social andpsychological well-being may help prevent substance abuse (66).Many alcohol and other drug prevention programs focus on thedevelopment of social and life skills, as a way to help youthunderstand their emotions, control their anger, curbaggressiveness, and presumably reduce their inclination to turnto substances (66,166). o Strengthening families. Increasingly, alcohol and otherdrug prevention programs are recognizing and addressing familyfactors. Youth development organizations afford opportunities forinvolving parents in recreational and other nonschool, nonfamilyactivities. o Promoting healthy peer interactions. Several studies haveshown the value of using peers as role models in preventionprograms. One study conducted a meta-analysis of 143 adolescentdrug prevention programs and collapsed prevention programs into 5strategies or types: knowledge only, affective (i.e., addressingfeelings) only, peer programs, knowledge plus affective, andalternatives. Peer programs that highlight peer influences andemphasize skill building were found to be the most successful(156). Peers are often the best positioned to help others buildresistance skills and bring about significant results in reducingsubstance use, as compared to teachers or other adults. Peercounseling and student assistance programs, for example, offerunique opportunities for youth to cope with difficult issues anddevelop skills to resist peer pressure (33). o Indirect and participatory approaches to substance use.Substance prevention programs are more likely to be effective ifthey develop creative ways to reach and connect with theirparticipants. Many programs incorporate lessons concerningsubstance use into activities such as games, theatricalperformances, creative arts, and sports. Some programs avoidstating in their names that they are focusing on substance useprevention, and in this way often attract more youth and precludethem from feeling stigmatized (161). Because youth spend so muchtime in school, where didactic, lecturing approaches so oftenpredominate, these approaches may well be less effective innonschool activities. GAO has recommended that programs engageyouth in activities that are more motivational and participatory,such as support groups, dramatic productions, leadershiptraining, and role- playing (161). o Alternative activities. Communities are beginning to createhealthy, substance-free alternative activities, such as teencenters or drug-free parties, for youth who may feel there isnothing else to do. This alternatives approach grows from theidea that youth who turn to substances to meet certain social andpsychological needs can meet those needs in more positive andhealthy ways without chemicals. In its guide book, PreventionPlus III, CSAP stresses the importance of incentives for youth toparticipate in such alternative activities. At a minimum,activities should reflect the interests and preferences of theyouth involved. A 10-year study with over 500 subjects found thatthe largest percentage (67 percent) of assuredly recoveredsubstance abusers, defined as those who have been clean for fiveyears, used alternative activities to cope with or improve theirmoods (169). However, although it remains a promising strategy,many agree that more substantial research is needed. The elements of notable programs suggest that youthdevelopment organizations may be able to play a greater role inthe prevention of substance abuse. First, they can providespecific information about substances and training in refusalskills. Second, they can address life skills development,emotional issues, and academic remediation. Further, they caninvolve both youth and their families, as well as peers, insettings for collaborative, substance-free interactions. Researchhas shown the importance of building supportive communitiesthrough such networks of social support that can diminishsubstance use and abuse and promote healthy youth development(14,19,133). PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, AND EVALUATINGCOMMUNITY-WIDE PROGRAMS If substance abuse and addiction problems in a particularcommunity affect individuals via multiple risk and protectivefactors interacting in multiple settings, then efforts to preventthese problems may require multipronged efforts involvingschools, parents, media messages, and other community resources(116). While it is possible that an assessment of problems may becarried out by relatively few individuals, it is extremelyunlikely that the planning, implementation, and evaluation ofcommunity-wide efforts can be achieved without participation ofresidents and leaders throughout the community. Widespreadcoordination and cooperation are intrinsic to community-wideefforts. To help achieve such community-wide coordination andcooperation, several different types of community coalitions havebeen created. The CSAP has studied the ability of 7 pilot testcommunities, under Community Partnership grants, to gatherinformation on 15 community-wide indicators of alcohol and otherdrug abuse (see table 8-3). Some of these indicators are directlyrelated to and measure the extent of substance abuse andaddiction among subpopulations in a community (e.g., number ofdrug positive urine samples from pregnant women at time ofdelivery). Some of the indicators measure the extent of behaviorsor outcomes that may be directly related to substance abuse(e.g., number of single vehicle nighttime accidents and number ofdeaths due to alcohol and other drugs). Some of the CSAPindicators relate to community activity settings, such asworkplaces and schools. CSAP has recently supported, through the CommunityPartnership program and the High-Risk Youth program, the use ofnonquantitative techniques to gain insights into substance abuseand addiction and related problems in communities. Thisinformation can be garnered by ethnographers and citizeninformants, who can report on the values, attitudes, purposes,behaviors, and experiences of individuals in the subcultures ofcommunities. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation has funded 13 communitycoalitions in its "Fighting Back" program to reducesubstance abuse and addiction. About 600 coalitions now belong toa national organization, Community Anti-Drug Coalitions ofAmerica (CADCA). Some coalitions have been formed to addressother health and social issues, including the ASSIST and COMMITcommunity tobacco control programs, funded by the NationalInstitutes of Health, and the Planned Approach to CommunityHealth (PATCH) program, funded by the Centers for Disease Controland Prevention to encourage local coalitions for community healthplanning and implementation (29). HUD now has funds to supportCommunity Coalitions Against Crime, which also address substanceabuse and addiction. And CSAP has supported numerous activitiesconducted by approximately 250 coalitions through its CommunityPartnership program (see table 8-4). A recent review of some of the Community Partnershipsrevealed the wide range of activities they have so farimplemented, including general prevention programs, publiceducation, alternative activities, community organizing andempowerment, advocacy for policy change, and other communityactivities. Although coalitions have not been extensively evaluated asyet, and although the evaluations that are now in process willnot produce outcome results for several years, there is reason tobelieve that community coalitions offer promise forcommunity-wide efforts to prevent substance abuse and addiction.First, as documented by this report, the factors contributing tosubstance abuse and addiction are multiple and interactive.Second, these factors interact in subcultures and communityactivity settings that can encourage or inhibit substance abuseand addiction and are widely dispersed. Thus, especially incommunities severely impacted by these problems, multiple effortsaddressing multiple factors in multiple settings may be required.A recent report from the General Accounting Office concluded that"preliminary research results indicated that acommunity-based approach may hold promise in preventing druguse," and went on to emphasize the need for comprehensiveevaluations of such efforts (162). Community coalitions could make use of the framework in thisreport to develop plans for preventive interventions addressingtargeted populations in selected community activity settings.Building on a systematic quantitative and nonquantitativeassessment of needs, a coalition could identify optionalpreventive interventions that address selected populations andsettings, and then phase them in as resources permit. However,some community coalitions may need additional support andtechnical assistance to help them resolve conflicts, formconsensus on goals and plans, and sustain cooperative,coordinated efforts that are subject to more rigorous evaluationsand midcourse corrections. Each community coalition needs to takea critical look at what works and what does not work, and needsto be flexible enough to try promising and proven analytical andprogrammatic technologies, even if they are somewhat new to thecoalition. SUMMARY This chapter has reviewed research on factors andinterventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substanceuse, abuse, and addiction in the four principal communityactivity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,workplaces, and recreational and other community settings.Research indicates that families may influence whether familymembers, especially (but not limited to) the young, initiatesubstance use and progress to abuse and dependency, and can bethe target of a wide range of increasingly tested preventiveinterventions that can help family members resist the use ofsubstances. Similarly, schools, especially through peer groupnorms and behaviors related to substance use, can also beimportant locations for the onset of substance use (includingalcohol use) and for preventive interventions, especially thosethat focus on social influences, including peers. Factors inworkplaces, although less studied, can also contribute to andprotect against substance use and abuse, and workplaceinterventions that focus on individuals and environments provideopportunities for prevention. Finally, an emerging literature onthe role of recreational settings and activities, especially foryouth, suggests that the availability of attractive andcompelling substance-free activities can play a role indissuading youth from becoming heavily involved in the use andabuse of substances. BOX 8-1: Example of Short-Term Thinking Eighteen-year-oldLyle is a senior at an inner-city highschool. In four weeks, hewill receive his high schooldiploma. In six months, he willbecome a father.Lyle has a significant history of delinquentbehavior,including assault, drug dealing, and grand larceny. Hehasrecently withdrawn from a gang because "it's gottencrazyand it's gotten really out of hand" and "I don'twant todie." However, he adds, "I still hang with thefellows andstuff like that."Because he "feels likeworking," Lyle is looking forward togetting out of highschool. He has no plans for college,which he regards as "toomuch hassle, to tell you thetruth." His plans for the futureare vague--to "work, makemoney, you know"--but he triesnot to think about it muchbecause, "you know, you mightdie." For Lyle, "the wayeverything's happening now, youcan't really think about thefuture...the way things happen now,you can get shot comingout of your house. You can be shot in thewindow, you know."Lyle is a daily smoker of ten or morecigarettes, a habit hedescribes as "like a everydayroutine--whenever I can gettime to smoke one, I'll smokeone." He drinks a couple beersalmost daily, and also smokesmarijuana "most likely" everyday.But Lyle avoids harderdrugs, like cocaine, because "I don'twant to killmyself." By way of explanation, he adds "I'drather killmyself slowly than fast."SOURCE: H. Stauber, "I've GotPlenty of Cells to Waste:"Perceptions of danger andinvulnerability among reckless-behaving adolescents, Unpublishedpaper, Harvard GraduateSchool of Education, in progress. BOX 8-2: Janice Janice, a 28-year-old, white, married female,was inoutpatient treatment for bulimia nervosa, abinge-purgepattern of eating that began when she was 18 yearsold. Shealso had an intermittent history of alcohol abusedatingfrom midadolescence. Janice appeared to be well-motivatedintreatment. She used the psychoeducational approach taught byhertherapist to increase her knowledge of how her binge-eating andmoodiness were related to her restricted dailycaloric intake. Shemade progress quickly, using cognitivebehavioral techniques tochallenge her distortions andunderstand her behavior; she beganto eat consistent mealsin adequate amounts. These changes led toa decrease in herbinge-eating and self-induced vomiting. However,along withthis progress she became increasingly anxious, fearful,andagitated about weight gain (despite the fact that littleornone had occurred). At the same time, she became overwhelmedbythe intensity of the feelings she experienced, was havingbaddreams, and withdrew from her support system in waysthat angeredher friends. She once more resorted toinconsistent meal patterns,dieting, poor nutrition, and--inevitably--binge-eating andvomiting. Her alcohol useincreased.Janice's symptomatologyshifted once she significantlydecreased her bulimic behavior.Instead of dealing witheveryday feelings, behavior, and thoughts,she began torelive memories from her unresolved traumatic past.Thesememories started with vague feelings of uneasiness,whichgrew more intense as she binged less. She then begantoremember her dreams, which, as they came into clearerfocus,caused her to be suspicious of her friends, andparticularlyof the men around her. Janice reported feeling fineoneminute and then very frightened the next. Whereas she usedtobe flattered by any male attention, she now felt fearfulwhen menlooked at her. She started to remember multiplesexual assaults inher past, both by persons known to herand by strangers. She feltincreasing urges to suicide, andobserved the reality of herinternal suffering as being "tooawful." As she said,"If this is what recovery is all about,I don't think it'sworth it; I'll take my chances andstruggle with addictions. If Ican't stand that, there'salways suicide."SOURCE: M.P. Root,"Treatment Failures: The Role of SexualVictimization inWomen's Addictive Behavior," AmericanJournal ofOrthopsychiatry, 59(4), 543, 1989. BOX 8-3: Dara Dara (20) was the natural mother of Christina(9 months).Christina was in danger of placement in foster caredue tothe cocaine addiction of her mother. Her father, Matt,wasserving time in jail on a drug charge. Christina'solderbrother, Jason, was placed in foster care priortoHomebuilder involvement. Dara's addiction prevented herfromproperly caring for herself and the children. Dara rentedtheupstairs apartment in her parent's home. Her19-year-oldboyfriend, Brian, spent a great deal of time with herandChristina.I helped Dara find out about drug treatment centersand aschedule for Narcotic Anonymous (N.A.). She missed herfirstdrug evaluation because of having an abortion. She andBrianwent to one N.A. meeting and then missed many days. TheCPScaseworker met with me and Dara and stressed the importanceofher drug recovery. Dara agreed to complete the evaluationas wellas attend N.A. meetings. Initially I accompanied herto the N.A.meetings for moral support. Sometimes Brianwould go and the restof the time her mother would accompanyher. Dara successfullycompleted her drug evaluation andattended regular counselingsessions with a drug counselor.She volunteered for urinalysis,"just to keep her honest."Dara got involved with otheryoung adults in N.A. They wentto eat together and went out todances and movies. She beganassociating with a new peer group.The CPS caseworkerauthorized maximum day-care to be paid for soshe couldattend her meetings and counseling. Dara'smothervolunteered to baby-sit Christina if Dara was withherfriends from N.A.Dara's husband got out of jail and wanted adivorce. Hefiled for custody of both of their children. I helpedDaraarrange for legal aid. She said she was more determinedthanever to "stay straight so she would look good incourt" overthe custody of the children.Dara asked herboyfriend to move out so she could live byherself. She and Briancontinue to stay in contact from timeto time. Dara retainedcustody of Christina. She and Mattagreed on joint custody oftheir son, Jason, and Dara sawhim every other weekend. Shecontinued drug counseling andattending N.A. Her urinalysis alwaystested negative.SOURCE: J. Kinney, D. Haapala, and C. Booth,KeepingFamilies Together, (pp. 22-23) (New York: Aldine DeGruyter,1991)._ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-3IA031-000652-B047-230http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132214 text/html 47105HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:22:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:29 GMTContent-length: 46887 CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have longoccupied the attention of the American public. Congress has:authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed at reducing orpreventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs and to regulatethe availability of illicit substances, appropriated billions ofdollars each year to federal agencies, provided oversight offederal programs, and passed broad-based legislation tocoordinate programs as part of the war on drugs. Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressingthe causes of substance abuse and addiction: o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the drivingcause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk andprotective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, andaddiction. o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by the WhiteHouse Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), are spreadamong many federal agencies, whose authorization andappropriations are the subject of action by numerouscongressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drugdemand reduction efforts alone involved the efforts of federalagencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makescoordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creationof new domestic programs that target known risk and protectivefactors in individuals and communities. The framework andliterature reviews presented in this report make clear thatmultiple factors in individuals, groups, and substance abuse andaddiction can arise and be influenced by communities. Thus,effective intervention requires prevention practitioners toselect from a variety of options, so they can target the specificfactors that are especially important for the particularpopulations and communities they are addressing. This does notmean that everything must be done at once nor that everything beknown in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakersand practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, asresources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps thataddress a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. o Current drug prevention programs lack scientificallyaccepted standards for determining their success or failure.While federal supply-side efforts yield hard data (e.g., amountof illicit drugs confiscated, number of persons incarcerated), itis much more difficult to demonstrate and quantify the impact ofa domestic program designed, in part or in whole, to prevent drugabuse. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporatedinto prevention programs, a critical component of success iscareful, rigorous evaluation. Answering "what works?"is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. This chapter addresses some of the policy issues brought tothe Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA's) attention duringthe course of this assessment, and possible options forcongressional action. The issues and options are broken into fourbroad categories: federal focus and prevention program structure,research needs, community activity settings, and availability.Given the broad nature of federal antidrug efforts, manyimportant issues relating to federal antidrug efforts remainbeyond the scope of this report. Such topics include drugtreatment, interdiction and enforcement, and drug legalization. The order in which the issues and options are presented doesnot imply priority. Moreover, the options presented under eachpolicy question are intended as a short menu from which Congresscan choose one or more options for consideration andimplementation, and they are not necessarily mutually exclusive. FEDERAL FOCUS AND PREVENTION PROGRAM STRUCTURE Supply vs. Demand Reduction The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primaryfocus the eradication of the supply of drugs. The federalgovernment currently spends over $12 billion annually on antidrugefforts, with approximately two-thirds of this amount supportingdrug interdiction and law enforcement activities, and theremainder supporting demand- side activities, such as drugtreatment, research, and prevention programs. While ONDCP's mostrecent National Drug Control Strategy argued for a slightlyincreased percentage of funds for demand-side reduction, thelarger percentage of funds remain devoted to supply-side efforts.Congress could decide that existing levels of effort and programapproaches in interdiction may need to be continued for a longerperiod of time before they can succeed in reducing theproduction, distribution, and local availability of illicitsubstances. Congress could direct that interdiction efforts, andthe balance between supply and demand efforts, continue on thesame track. If Congress decided to increase federal efforts in demandreduction efforts, it could adopt any of three methods: 1)increase appropriations for treatment and prevention programs; 2)redirect some of the interdiction funds to increase support fortreatment and prevention programs; or 3) require that assetsforfeited in drug seizures be increasingly used to supporttreatment and prevention programs. If Congress chose to simplyincrease appropriations for additional treatment and preventionprograms, this option would require raising the current level offederal spending for drug control efforts at a time when thefederal deficit is a key concern. Since costly interdiction andincarceration programs have not eliminated either the supply ofillicit substances or the demand for and use of such substances,Congress could decide to increase appropriations for treatmentand prevention programs by reallocating funds currently spent indrug interdiction and law enforcement activities; this would meana drop in supply-side efforts such as drug interdiction and lawenforcement activities. The reallocation of assets forfeited indrug seizures to treatment and prevention programs, if donetogether with closer coordination of local antidrug efforts amonglaw enforcement and treatment and prevention practitioners, maybe an attractive small step. Congress could direct that ONDCPmonitor the reallocation of such assets, to ensure the flow offunds to programs that directly focus on substance abuse andaddiction and, programs that do not directly address substanceabuse and addiction but that target risk and protective factorsknown to be associated with abuse and addiction. Many stakeholders agree that the federal antidrug effortshould be more focused on treatment and prevention. Widespreaddisagreement exists, however, as to whether such additionaltreatment and prevention efforts should be created at the expenseof, or in addition to, current supply-side efforts. Structure of ONDCP Since its creation in 1988, ONDCP has served as the mostvisible federal entity in the war on drugs. The Director, theso-called drug czar, has the opportunity to galvanize publicattention on federal antidrug efforts, and to propose andadvocate policies within the White House. ONDCP's effectivenessis limited, however, both in its statute and through itsoperation as a White House office. Congress could choose toreauthorize ONDCP, and in so doing maintain or alter its missionand authority; or allow ONDCP to expire. If Congress chooses to reauthorize ONDCP, a number of optionsexist for altering its mission. Congress could: o Direct ONDCP to address the full range of the most harmfulabusable substances, including alcohol, tobacco, and inhalants.Although federally funded prevention programs address the rangeof abusable substances, the statute creating ONDCP emphasizedillicit substances. As a result, ONDCP has historically providedlimited attention on abusable substances that have beenassociated with higher levels of death and injury than illicitdrugs. More recently, ONDCP increased the focus in its NationalDrug Control Strategy on the illicit use of alcohol and tobaccoby minors because of the extensive damage to the health andsafety of minors, resulting from the use and abuse of thesesubstances. This approach could be enhanced through congressionalauthorization. o Alter ONDCP's leadership structure. ONDCP by statute has aDeputy Director of Supply Reduction and a Deputy Director forDemand Reduction. This structure has, in part, resulted in anongoing public policy debate regarding the overall federal focuson antidrug efforts, with supply-side and demand-side reductionefforts seen by some as philosophically incompatible (seediscussion on supply versus demand reduction earlier in thischapter). By creating an alternative structure, ONDCP may beencouraged to adopt programs that more closely link variouselements of the antidrug strategy (e.g., a focus on drugavailability could link current supply-side elements that targetphysical availability of a drug with current demand-side effortsthat focus on economic and social availability, as discussed inchapter 4). Despite the advantages that may result from a neworganizational structure, the simplicity of the current structuremakes it easier to provide a sharper focus on supply and demandelements of the National Drug Control Strategy. o Give ONDCP increased authority over federal agency antidrugprograms. Although ONDCP is charged with leading a war on drugs,its authority is limited to a coordinating function. Congresscould provide the Director of ONDCP with specific authority overcertain elements of various federal programs, or with additionalauthority over federal agency budget proposals. Such actionswould give the drug czar more substantive authority to direct thewar on drugs, but would likely be viewed by some federal agenciesas an unwarranted intrusion in agency matters. o Mandate the size of ONDCP. Because it is part of theExecutive Office of the President, ONDCP is subject to increasedpolitical manipulation by each administration. Recently, forexample, ONDCP took the largest personnel cut of any White Houseoffice to meet President Clinton's pledge of a 25 percentreduction in overall size of White House staff. While mandating aspecific size for ONDCP might lead to increased effectiveness forthe office, it would hamper White House efforts to control staffsize. Alternatively, Congress could allow the authorization forONDCP to expire. While ONDCP has produced National Drug ControlStrategies that summarize and set policy for federal efforts, theoffice lacks the authority to shape the antidrug policies of thefederal agencies. Coordination of antidrug efforts is difficultat best when the number of relevant agencies is so large; sinceantidrug policy involves many federal agencies, it might makesense to disband ONDCP and rely on efforts by diverse federalagencies to continue to address the many aspects of the drugproblem. Recent reductions in the size of the ONDCP staff, as apart of the down-sizing of the White House staff, could make thisan opportune time to eliminate the office altogether. TerminatingONDCP would, however, be viewed by many as federal abdication ofthe war on drugs. Structure of Federal Substance Abuse Prevention Programs Federal efforts supporting substance abuse preventionprograms are housed at a number of agencies. Congress recentlyreorganized the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAdministration (ADAMHA), splitting service-based components intothe Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA) and research-based components--the National Institute onAlcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute on Mental Health(NIMH)-- into the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Morerecently, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has been renamedthe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), which hasalready expanded its title and mission to include prevention.Congress could maintain the current structure if it determinesthat substance abuse is a problem that has many aspects anddeserves to be addressed by many agencies and in many settings. If Congress decided to create a more centralized structure,it could enact legislation designating a single federal entity asthe chief agency for prevention efforts, or merge the componentsof various agencies under one federal roof. Possibilitiesinclude: o Merging NIDA and NIAAA into a single National Institute onSubstance Abuse and Addiction. The use of multiple substances(including alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, cocaine, and heroin) isincreasingly reported by researchers and practitioners. Indeed,the gateway theory or hypothesis focuses on the progression inthe use of substances, beginning with alcohol and tobacco (whichare illegal for youth, but legal for adults) and moving tomarijuana, cocaine, and heroin. Since clinicians and researchershave increasingly commented on the progression in substance useand on the co-occurrence of the use of multiple substances, theseparation of the major federal research agencies into an alcoholagency (NIAAA) and a drug agency (NIDA) is more and moreinconsistent with the shape of the problem. The Center forSubstance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) is an integrated substanceabuse agency that explicitly focuses on alcohol, tobacco, andother drugs, and all state alcohol and drug abuse agencies arenow integrated or located in the same place. To facilitate moreintegrated and coherent research on the range of abusablesubstances, NIDA and NIAAA could be combined into a nationalinstitute on substance abuse and addiction. Such a merger wouldfurther integrate the federal research efforts in substanceabuse, but might be seen by some as downplaying the emphasisgiven to illicit substances. o Place CSAP in CDCP or in the Health Resources and ServicesAdministration (HRSA). CDCP could give the substance abuseprevention field a solid base in the health and medical sciences,especially in the tracking and prevention of diseases. HRSA couldgive CSAP a broader health care environment to work within, whichincludes Community Health Centers and the National Health ServiceCorps. One disadvantage to the merging of CSAP into either ofthese other health agencies is that it would emphasize themedical aspects and interventions of drug prevention and downplaythe many nonmedical factors and interventions that are importantin the onset of substance use and abuse. Merger would alsopresent problems of moving people--CSAP is headquartered inRockville, Maryland, while CDCP is headquartered in Atlanta,Georgia--and threaten the loss of identity that some proponentsof CSAP say is found in an agency that solely addresses substanceabuse and prevention. However, the fragmentation of the federaleffort on substance abuse prevention has been viewed by some asextreme and counterproductive, and the efforts of ONDCP have notsucceeded in achieving coordination across departments. o Merge federal substance abuse prevention efforts into asingle agency, such as CSAP. CSAP has been workingcollaboratively with the staff in many other federal agencies,and would be seen as a natural leader for this effort. Inaddition, its recent efforts to begin to develop standards ofpractice for substance abuse and addiction prevention programscould be continued and more effectively infused into thecomponents of programs currently in other agencies anddepartments. Evaluation of Prevention Programs Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically acceptedstandards for determining their success or failure. Mostevaluations focus on the processes used in formulating andimplementing a prevention program (e.g., who was involved, whattype of program was used) and outcome evaluation (e.g., how manypeople were part of the program, how the program was replicated).Congress could allow the current level of process and outcomeevaluation related to substance abuse prevention programs tocontinue. If it chose to improve the quality of program evaluation,Congress could direct NIDA and NIAAA, or CSAP to design, lead,and support a multiyear national process (involvingrepresentatives of other federal agencies and of outsideorganizations) to forge consensus on standardized definitions andoutcome measures, using technical reviews, consensus-formingtechniques, and technical assistance monographs. Thesedefinitions and measures could include substance use, heavydrinking, substance abuse, substance addiction or dependency, andrelated behavioral problems such as school truancy, unemployment,delinquent and criminal behaviors, and the like. CSAP, NIDA,NIAAA, the Department of Education (DOE), and other federalagencies could be required to increase funding and technicalassistance for process and outcome evaluations through grants andcontracts. CSAP could focus on process evaluations that mayassist program managers throughout the course of a program. NIDAand NIAA could focus on outcome evaluations that are morerigorously designed and conducted by individuals who areindependent of the programs being evaluated. DoE could requireboth process and outcome evaluations by states and by schools,using Drug-Free School monies. NIDA, NIAAA, or CSAP could bedirected to provide incentives for researchers and programs toparticipate in a national program database, using consistentdefinitions and including data from multiple evaluations. Thecreation of such a database would allow researchers to extendtheir own analyses by tapping into data from other program sitesand populations that have used consistent definitions andmeasures. States could be required by legislation to use a portion oftheir 20 percent prevention set-asides under the Alcohol and DrugAbuse Block Grant program and a portion of their Drug- FreeSchools funds for evaluation of substance abuse preventionprograms. Since evaluations of prevention programs can beexpensive, Congress could consider increasing block grant fundinglevels to allow increases in evaluation studies without requiringdecreases in programs. If such an option were enacted, Congresscould mandate that evaluations be conducted by independentbodies, such as university-based researchers, rather than bystate government agencies that have vested interests indemonstrating program effectiveness. RESEARCH NEEDS Data Collection The National Household Survey and the National Survey of HighSchool Seniors have developed credibility over the years fortheir regular reporting of substance use in households and highschools. These surveys could be allowed to continue, with nosubstantial changes in the cost, frequency of data collection,focus on target groups, analysis, and sharing of the database. Because of the methodology employed, national surveys miss orunderreport various populations. Much of the data now collectedfocuses on substance use (e.g., any use within the past 30 daysor anytime in a lifetime), rather than on more intense substanceabuse and addiction. In addition, questions aresubstance-specific, and less oriented to the use and abuse ofmultiple substances. Such polydrug users and abusers areincreasingly being identified by researchers and clinicians.While substance use is a key precondition to later abuse andaddiction, most individuals who use illicit substances do not goon to addiction. Thus, an important question for the developmentof prevention policies and programs is: What are thecharacteristics of individuals who abuse and become addicted tosubstances, and how do they make the transition from use to abuseand addiction? If Congress felt that current data do not provide adequateinformation, it could direct that the Household and High SchoolSurveys be conducted less intensely or less frequently. Theexpense of these surveys, especially the National HouseholdSurvey, is high. In 1992, the High School Survey cost about $3million, and the Household Survey costover $12 million. Spendingcould be reduced if the survey data were compiled less intensely(e.g., with fewer questions or from a smaller sample) or lessfrequently. Alternatively, Congress could direct NIDA to developand support survey methodology that reaches populations missed bycurrent surveys (notably the homeless, school dropouts, andresidents of some inner-city and rural areas), or throughlegislation, create a mechanism, comparable to the release ofeconomic indicators, for the regular and nonpolitical release ofsurvey data. Data could then be released through a well-definedprocess that includes careful and timely technical reviews forcompliance with high standards of data collection and analysis,rather than being subjected to bureaucratic or political reviewsthat may delay the release of or bias the data. Individual Risk and Protective Factors A substantial body of research has been developed regardingpotential risk and protective factors for children andadolescents. A variety of theories has been developed concerninghow many and which risk factors increase the chances for a childor adolescent to first use alcohol or other drugs. Historically,one of the flaws with much of the risk and protective factorresearch has been that studies analyzed one factor in isolationfrom all others. Increasingly though, researchers are examining awider variety of factors among different populations, as well asusing more complex data analysis procedures. Even so,sophisticated multifactor research studies are still in theminority. While a substantial amount of risk and protective factorresearch has focused on children and adolescents, not as much isknown about factors among other populations. Recent research hasled to interest in the possibility of further analyses inselected populations and/or selected risk or protective factors.Some examples: o Adults. Additional research in this area could result inlearning more about factors associated with long-term drug abuseand addiction as well as the importance of factors more oftenfound in adult populations (e.g., effects of aging, death of aspouse or child, divorce). Data from a recent National HouseholdSurvey on Drug Abuse show that individuals aged 18 to 25, and 26to 34, respectively, have the two highest reported rates forheavy drinking and smoking, past month use of cocaine, crack,marijuana and hashish, or psychotherapeutic drugs. Additionally,gender, racial, and ethnic substance use differences appearwithin the adult population. Some research has indicated thatwomen who drink heavily do so several years later than men,although the reasons for this remain unclear. Researchers alsoindicate that black men who drink heavily, do so in their latetwenties and early thirties, in contrast to white men whosedrinking peaks at age 15 to early twenties. Increased research onthe adult population could be useful in developing appropriatesubstance abuse prevention and treatment programs for adults. o Race and Ethnicity. The biological and genetic substanceabuse studies completed on different racial and ethnic groupshave been few in number, mostly limited to alcohol, andinconclusive. While race and ethnicity have not been shown to bebiological or genetic predictors for substance use, abuse, oraddiction, certain risk factors appear to be unique for specificcultures. To date, however, the racial and ethnic categories usedin many large-scale studies are so broad that many researchersconsider them useless. Increased federal funding for studies ofspecific subpopulations living in geographically different areas(e.g., urban versus rural, reservation versus nonreservation)will provide much needed baseline data on which to plan,implement, and evaluate appropriate substance abuse services. o Poverty. Disagreement exists on the appropriate definitionof poverty and its exact relationship to substance abuse. Whilefew researchers deny that the daily stresses associated withliving in chronic poverty probably contribute to substance abuse,poverty is certainly not the only factor, or perhaps even themost important. There are after all, more individuals living inpoverty who do not abuse substances than who do. However, theconsequences of substance abuse appear to be worse in chronicallypoor areas. Additional research to study the complex relationshipbetween poverty and substance abuse could provide substance abusepractitioners with a framework from which to build programs mostsuitable for the special needs of chronically poor areas. Congress can, through its reauthorization and oversightpowers, monitor the amount and scope of risk and protectivefactor research that is being conducted, and redirect federalefforts toward more extensive multifactor research and analysis,as appropriate. Such focus could include factors other thansubstance use that may contribute to later abuse and addiction,such as other problem behaviors, availability, marketing,psychological factors, social norms in communities, andsubcultures. The increased use of ethnographers as part of amultidisciplinary drug abuse prevention research teams could alsobe encouraged. Biomedical Research Biomedical research on substance abuse helps explain theacute and chronic biological effects of substances on the brainand other organs, and also points to appropriate short- andlong-term medical treatments for substance abuse. This in turnhelps treatment providers understand treatment outcomes andrelapse rates for long-term abusers. Most federally supportedbiomedical research is administered by the 17 institutes thatcomprise the NIH. With the passage of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse,and Mental Health Administration Reorganization Act of 1992(Public Law 102-321), NIDA and the NIAAA were moved to NIH.Research targeting substance use, abuse, and addiction issupported primarily by these two institutes, whose combinedappropriation level ($580.7 million in fiscal year 1994) isapproximately 5 percent of the NIH total. Congress has historically increased annual appropriations forbiomedical research at NIH; if Congress continues this trend,both NIDA and NIAAA annual appropriations will rise, although notat the dramatic levels many scientists would like. If Congresswere to decide that substance abuse and addiction should commandmore of the nation's biomedical research budget, it couldsubstantially raise appropriation levels for NIDA and NIAAA. Suchan action would allow increased levels of research in a number ofareas including: genetics; drug development; identification ofbiological factors related to transitions from casual drug use toabuse, addiction, and dependence; the pharmacology of multipledrug use; environmental factors and their effect on individualbiological susceptibility; and the biological effects of drug useand abuse on the development of children and adolescents. Givenbudget realities, however, an increase in the funding levelsavailable for basic biomedical research could mean a decreasesomewhere else. A number of budgetary pressures have recently slowed robustNIH budget growth, including the need to fund disease- specificresearch (e.g., acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), indirectcosts of research, and the increasing pressure to limitdiscretionary spending. Some scientists identify stable budgetgrowth--as opposed to sporadic increases targeted at particulartopics--as most important for continued progress in research. Infiscal year 1994, both NIDA and NIAAA received a 5.2 percentincrease in appropriations, following an Administration requestthat would have raised NIDA's appropriation by less than 1percent, and decreased NIAAA's appropriation by 1.6 percent.Fluctuations in appropriation levels could impede the developmentof scientific advances that are necessary to the creation of newmedications and therapies. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in its March 1994report to Congress, Reducing the Deficit: Spending and RevenueOptions, identified a reduction in funding for NIH research asone of nearly 200 policy options. As noted by CBO, a reduction inNIH funding could have adverse effects on biomedical research andmight cause some researchers to leave the field. NIH cannotcurrently fund the majority of grants it approves; in addition,funding is insufficient to support some important areas ofresearch. According to a 1992 General Accounting Office report onDrug Abuse Research: Federal Funding and Future Needs, antidrugresearch appears now to have a very modest role, with only about4 percent of total drug strategy spending devoted to research anddevelopment. COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS Substance abuse and addiction occur in communities around ourNation. Those who believe that drug abuse and addiction areclosely related to social and economic problems argue thatantidrug programs should more directly address the risk andprotective factors that have been identified by researchers. Manyprevention program providers also argue that the most successfulprograms are those that are more comprehensive in scope (i.e.,tailored to address the many community settings in which drugabuse can occur) rather than addressing one or two risk factorsin isolation. In conducting this assessment, OTA surveyed literaturesaddressing substance abuse and addiction in various communitysettings--families and homes, schools and peers, workplaces, andrecreational settings (see ch. 8). The literature reviewspresented in this report make clear that substance abuse andaddiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors inindividuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effectiveintervention ideally should be comprehensive, employing multipleservices and addressing the many factors that cause drug abuseand addiction; and community-based, sensitive to and directed atthe needs of the local population. Still, three problems arise in assessing policy optionsrelated to community settings: 1. There is the inherent difficulty in drawing a link betweenmany social services and their effect on drug abuse andaddiction. 2. Since broad-based social services are provided through thework of many federal agencies, further analysis (e.g., by ONDCPor a congressionally enacted national commission) could identifywhich federal agencies are best suited to implement the varietyof options that Congress may wish to employ. 3. The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creationof new domestic programs that target known risk and protectivefactors in individuals and communities. Schools and Peers The primary focus of federal efforts at community-based drugprevention is programs aimed at our nation's schoolchildren. Infiscal year 1993, Congress appropriated $598 million to DOE underthe Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986. The federalgovernment could continue to fund school-based preventionprograms, with a continued emphasis on prevention curricula andevaluations that are limited to substance use prevention. Thelikely limited effects on preventing abuse among high-risk youthwould continue. Other school-based prevention programs wouldcontinue to be implemented sporadically, without significantevaluation and with few or unknown effects. If Congress decided that more rigorous evaluation of school-based programs was called for, it could mandate DOE to spend aset percent of its Drug Free Schools monies on research andevaluation of prevention curricula and the dissemination offindings. A special initiative could be launched to testprevention curricula for high-risk youth and for different racialand ethnic groups, since most of the research and evaluation todate has been based on samples of schools with middle incomewhite youth. Special expertise would need to be brought in, onstaff and as advisers, to assure the research and evaluation meethigh standards of methodological rigor. This could be achieved byhiring staff with research and evaluation expertise, detailingstaff from the NIDA, setting up an interdepartmental advisorygroup that guides and oversees a research and evaluation program,or appropriating funds directly to NIDA (e.g., as a set- asidefrom the Drug-Free Schools appropriation) to support such aresearch and evaluation program. Also, easier access toinformation about the many drug prevention curricula that existcould help school personnel select curricula that fit theirneeds. DOE could be directed to prepare and disseminate morewidely information about the purposes, design, methods, resourcesrequired, and evaluations (if any) of drug prevention curriculacurrently available, and to inform school personnel of thelimitations of school- based curriculum approaches and thegrowing availability of supplementary and alternative approaches.If Congress decided that Drug-Free Schools funds should be usedmore widely to target risk and protective factors found inschool-aged populations, it could require DOE to set aside acertain percentage of Drug-Free Schools funds for a variety ofactivities that target high-risk youths and to work individuallywith them and their families. Such targeting could enhanceactivities already carried out under the Drug- Free Schools Act(e.g., Drug Abuse Resistance Education, replication of successfulprograms, local programs for high- risk youth, school personneltraining). However, congressional mandates could reduce state andlocal flexibility in tailoring programs best suited to localneeds, and could increase administrative costs associated withimplementing the Drug-Free Schools Act. In addition to Drug-Free Schools programs, comprehensiveprimary health, mental health, and social services can beprovided in many school-based clinics. School-based clinics canbe supported by a variety of federal funding sources, includingMedicaid, the Maternal and Child Health Block Grant, Drug-FreeSchools, and Special Education funds. DOE and the Department ofHealth and Human Services could be encouraged or directed tocollaborate on the support of such services in schools. Since researchers have found that peers and other socialinfluences strongly affect substance use, programs thatstrengthen total school environments may be potent in preventingsubstance use and abuse. Models that involve schoolrestructuring, parent involvement, mental health components, andelevated expectations for achievement have been developed and arebeing tested. The hypothesis is that engaging high-risk youth inpositive educational environments and experiences can profoundlyinfluence their behaviors for the better. Congress could expandresearch on the effects of restructuring of school environmentson substance abuse by appropriating funds for extensive large-scale longitudinal research that could be supported by DOE, NIDA,the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), and otherfederal agencies that conduct and support research on youthoutcomes. Homes and Families Congress appropriates funds for federal programs addressingsubstance abuse and addiction in homes and families, which aresupported by the HUD and HHS' Administration on Children, Youth,and Families (ACYF) and CSAP. Also relevant to the health andwelfare of families are health funding programs (e.g., Medicaidand Medicare) and welfare programs (e.g., Aid to Families withDependent Children). Through its oversight, authorization, andappropriations of these programs, and others that impact on thequality of family life, Congress can support a number ofpreventive interventions that are both comprehensive andintensive. Programs can be initiated by almost any local serviceor support setting, such as health care, school, familypreservation, juvenile justice, and housing authority, withcoordination with other services and settings. Such interventionscan include health care, counseling, intensive in-home services,neighborhood patrols, clean sweeps of public housing, and familyand parent education for all family members. Because substance abuse and other related problems can beinfluenced by so many family factors and programs, a long- termeffort to identify family needs may be desired. Congress couldenact legislation to create a Presidential commission or taskforce to formulate a national family policy and create ablueprint for long-term national efforts to shore up the manyfamilies, rich and poor, that would benefit from more guidance,skills, and support. Such a national policy could be framed inthe near-term, based on the many studies and programinterventions that have been documented so far. Alternatively, itcould be formulated later, after additional research and programinterventions have been supported and major gaps in knowledgehave been filled. Workplaces Congress could allow current activities that focus onproviding workplace employees with information, development ofdrug-free workplace policies, drug testing, and employeeassistance programs to continue. These programs are scatteredamong many federal agencies, with some leadership by theDepartment of Labor (DOL), CSAP, and the Office of Management andBudget. If Congress chose to increase efforts in workplace antidrugprevention, it could mandate that federal agencies increase theinformation that is made available to workplaces about drug-freeworkplace programs and policies. For example, DOL is implementingan electronic database, with information about workplacesubstance abuse treatment, prevention, and other control programsand research. Such a database, if properly supported, publicized,and accessed by businesses and unions, could help workplacesidentify and implement approaches that can meet their needs inaffordable ways. Recreational and Community Settings Congress currently funds community partnership demonstrationprograms administered by CSAP. These partnerships fosterpublic/private sector partnerships that create and preservecomprehensive strategies for addressing substance abuseprevention within communities. A major advantage of thesepartnerships is the ability to create programs that addresssubstance abuse prevention within individual communities. As withother drug prevention programs, however, evaluation has generallybeen limited. Congress could, through appropriations andauthorization, direct CSAP to expand the provision of technicalassistance and expand the national process and outcome evaluationof partnerships. More site visits would be possible, withadditional resources for national and regional workshops,conferences, and training. Other federal activities in this area remain limited andlargely uncoordinated. Major current programs are administered bythe Department of Agriculture's Cooperative Extension Service(with its 4-H program, which is refocusing its efforts onhigh-risk youth) and CSAP (through some of its High Risk YouthDemonstration Grants). The President's Council on PhysicalFitness addresses one aspect of recreational and leisureactivities--that is, physical fitness. If Congress decided toprovide more information and support more research onrecreational, leisure, and other youth development programs, aninformation clearinghouse could be established to shareinformation about federal and non-federal recreational, leisure,and youth development activities. The purpose would be to helpcommunities and program developers identify and develop suchprograms especially for youth at risk of drug use and abuse. Theclearinghouse could be managed in-house or under contract, andcould be located in the Cooperative Extension Service (which isnow attempting to redirect 4-H programs to address high-riskyouth); ACYF; or CSAP (perhaps in the existing National Centerfor Alcohol and Drug Information, a federally sponsoredclearinghouse). The dearth of recreational places, especially in highlydeveloped urban areas, can be remedied by an enhanced nationaleffort to acquire land and facilities for park and recreationpurposes. Such an effort could focus especially, but notexclusively, on rural and inner city areas where low propertyvalues make the acquisition of such properties financiallyattractive as long-term investments in the future development andenrichment of communities. Such a national effort could becomparable in scope and long-termcommitment to the development ofthe national park system, but could contribute to a broadernational system of parks owned and managed by the federal, state,and local governments specifically for more intense human uses.Such a system could focus on the developmental needs of youth,especially in urban areas, where usable open spaces are often inshort supply. Congress could designate a lead federal agency forsuch an effort (e.g., Department of Interior or HUD), and couldacquire properties outright or by encouraging and subsidizing theacquisition of properties by nonprofit groups and by state andlocal governments. The latter approach would require less federalfunding and administration. Possible sources of land andfacilities include: closed military bases, holdings of theResolution Trust Corporation, assets forfeited through drugseizures, individual gifts and bequests, and corporate andphilanthropic gifts. AVAILABILITY The primary current focus of federal antidrug efforts isstemming the physical supply of illicit drugs. A multitude ofpolicy issues arise in addressing drug availability, most ofwhich are beyond the scope of this report. The discussion inchapter 4, however, touches on two availability issues currentlyon the congressional agenda. Taxes The federal government currently levies excise taxes onalcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on alltypes of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their currentlevels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack, 12-ounce cans)carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of winecarries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettescarries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. If Congress takes noaction, current federal levies will remain in effect. Congress could enact legislation raising the federal excisetax on a variety of tobacco and alcohol products if it sought todecrease consumption of such products, to recover estimatedsocietal costs (i.e., health costs, injury, death) resulting from consumption of such products, or toraise revenue for federal spending programs. Such tax hikes couldbe targeted at all tobacco and alcohol products, or at selectedproducts in these industries. Advocates of increased excise taxeshave argued that abuse of and addiction to tobacco and alcoholproducts cost the United States more than any illicit substance;that increased taxes would make such products less economicallyaffordable and hence less used and abused; that increased taxescould be used to pay for financial damages arising from the useof such products; and that such excise taxes, which haveincreased less rapidly than the general rate of inflation, shouldbe adjusted upward to reflect inflation. Opponents of taxationhave argued that excise taxes are regressive in that they targetprimarily low- and middle- income taxpayers, that increased taxeswould result in significant losses to major companies that areimportant players in the American economy, and that targetingso-called sin taxes unfairly singles out millions of Americanswho use tobacco and alcohol products. Alcohol Labeling Federal law currently requires that each alcoholic beveragecontainer bear a specific warning statement that is conspicuouslyand prominently located (27 USC 215). This requirement wasenacted by Congress in 1980. Both Congress and States haveauthority regulating alcohol advertising. At least 35 statesregulate alcohol advertising, and self-policing by segments ofindustry places some limits on advertising (e.g., the distilledspirits industry code prohibits the advertising of liquor onradio or television). Congress has considered legislation that would requirewarnings on all alcohol beverage advertising, both print andelectronic media. Congress could amend current alcohol labelinglaw to require stricter labeling (e.g., multiple labels, rotatinglabels, specific messages). Opponents of such action argue thatno significant relationship has been found between exposure ofindividuals to alcoholic beverage advertising and/or labeling anddrinking behaviors. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-4IA031-000652-B047-249http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/appa.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132224 text/html 26050HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:22:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:29 GMTContent-length: 25832 APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:HISTORIC TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES The United States has always been a drug-using country. Incolonial days, people drank more alcohol than they do today, withestimates ranging from three to as many as seven times morealcohol per year (13) While public drunkenness was a criminaloffense, it was generally considered a personal indiscretion.(1). The temperance movement began in earnest after theRevolution, when heavy drinking was revealed to be a problem, andreligious figures became committed to temperance. (1). Sincethen, the American experience with both licit and illicit drugscan be viewed as a series of reactions to the public's shiftingtolerance toward their use (9). THE EARLY 1900s: NARCOTICS AND COCAINE In the late 19th century it was possible to buy, in a storeor through mail order, many pseudomedical preparations,containing morphine, cocaine, and even heroin (9). The ubiquitoussoft drink Coca-Cola used to contain cocaine until 1903, when itwas replaced with caffeine (9). Pharmacies sold cocaine in pureform, as well as a number of opium-derived drugs, such asmorphine and heroin, the latter of which became well-known whenit was marketed by the Bayer Co. beginning in 1898 (10).Physician prescriptions of these drugs increased from 1 percentof all prescriptions in 1874 to between 20 to 25 percent in 1902;they were not only available but they were widely used, withoutmajor concerns about negative health consequences (14). Cocaine and narcotic preparations were taken off the marketfor various reasons. Increasing awareness of the hazards of druguse and adulterated food led to such regulations as the Pure Foodand Drug Act of 1906 that required that fraudulent claims beremoved from patent medicines, as well as disclosure ofhabit-forming substances. The passage of several antinarcotic andpharmaceutical labeling laws was spurred on by these healthconcerns, a growing temperance movement, the development of safepain relievers (such as aspirin), a broader range of medicaltreatments, and the growing immigrant population thought to beassociated with specific drug-using practices. However, theselaws did not make patent remedies, cocaine, and opium illegal.Some individual states imposed tighter restrictions on theiravailability, but there was no uniformity among state laws. Itwas United States involvement with international narcoticsconcern that led there (9,10,14). In 1909, the International Opium Commission called by theUnited States, met in Shanghai, to begin an internationaldiscussion concerning the problems of narcotics and the narcoticstrade. Twelve nations, in addition to the United States, werepresent to discuss problems relating to opium. At that time theperception in the United States was that Chinese immigrants wereto blame for the opium smoking problems. This angered theChinese, who had instituted strict campaigns against the sale anduse of opium within their own country. The Chinese were seekingU.S. assurances for help in ending Western opium trafficking intoChina. The State Department not only wanted to support China'sdrug control efforts, but thought that international drug controlmeasures would help stanch the flow of drugs into the UnitedStates, and thus the nonmedical consumption of these drugs. Itwould not be until two years later, in the Hague, that a treatywould be signed stating that all the signatories would enactdomestic legislation controlling narcotics trade, specificallylimiting the use of narcotics for medicinal purposes (9,10). Hamilton Wright, the State Department's opium commissioner,attempted to draft legislation but met opposition from theStates, the medical profession, pharmacists and pharmaceuticalcompanies. After nearly three years of debate, Congress passedthe Harrison Act in December 1914 (named for RepresentativeFrancis Burton Harrison, who introduced the initial form of thebill for the Administration). The bill provided for strictcontrol of opium and coca and their derivatives: both their entryinto the country and their dispersion to patients. Maintenance ofaddicts by physicians was allowed until 1919. Opposition to theHarrison Act came mainly from pharmaceutical companies andpharmacists, who objected to what they called the Act's confusingand complex record keeping requirements (9). Passage of the Harrison Act reflected, in part, growingpublic sentiment that opium and cocaine were medicines to betaken only in times of illness (and then only when prescribed bya physician) and that these substances could cause insanity andcrime, particularly in foreigners and minorities. Smoking opiumwas associated with Chinese immigrants; popular belief also heldthat cocaine would affect blacks more forcefully than whites andincite them to violence. Marijuana was believed to have beenbrought into the country and promoted by Mexican immigrants andthen picked up by black jazz musicians. These beliefs played apart in the 1937 Marijuana Tax Act, which attempted to controlthe drug's use (9). As early as 1910, many people argued againstany nonmedical use of narcotics. PROHIBITION AND BEYOND Focus on Alcohol Ratification in 1919 of the 18th amendment prohibited themanufacture, sale, transportation, importation, and exportationof alcohol and shifted the Nation's focus for more than a decadefrom the dangers of narcotics to the Nation's alcohol problems.Prohibition had its roots in the Temperance Movement, which beganshortly after the Revolution. In 1784, Benjamin Rush, a physicianand signer of the Declaration of Independence, published apamphlet entitled, "An Inquiry Into the Effects of ArdentSpirits on the Mind and Body," which was widely disseminatedamong Temperance leaders. In it he described a "diseasemodel" of excessive drinking, which characterizeddrunkenness and alcohol addiction as a "disease of thewill," in addition to causing many physical diseases. By themid-19th century, the American middle class had become more awareof the dangers of alcohol to the family, the nation, and thefactory (1). By the late 19th century and early 20th century, theTemperance Movement came to be associated almost exclusively withAmerican Protestantism as a political mechanism to control thegrowing numbers of non-Protestant immigrants. This political andsocial strength helped, in 1919, to ratify the 18th amendmentwhich forbade the sale of alcoholic beverages, and to implementit by means of the Volstead Act in 1920 (1). The shifting tolerance of Americans toward substance use isevidenced by the successes and failures of the Prohibition era.In 1919, many were optimistic that the prohibition of alcoholwould solve many of the country's social problems. If alcoholcontributed to the crime and unemployment associated with thecities, then removing it from the market might help solve thoseproblems. However, despite evidence that consumption declined(based on declining rates of death due to cirrhosis and ofalcoholic psychosis in State mental hospitals), there is alsoevidence that widespread dishonesty existed in the enforcement ofdry laws. Jobs to enforce Prohibition were doled out as politicalfavors, which may have contributed to graft, corruption, and thesurge in underworld crime (9,17). In addition to the perceivedrise in corruption, the passage of progressively stricter lawsregarding violations of the Volstead Act also contributed towaning public support of prohibition (17). The 1933 repeal ofProhibition signaled that public sentiment had once again becomefavorable toward alcohol, and alcohol and its related problemsreturned to private, rather than public, arenas. The scientific literature of the 1930s and early 1940sconcentrated mainly on captive alcoholic populations in jails,mental hospitals, and skid row, allowing many Americans todistance themselves from alcoholism (1). During this same period,Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) was founded, but lacked mainstreamrecognition until the 1950s and 1960s when the scientists lentsupport to the disease model of alcoholism, which has always beenthe central tenet of AA (1,11). Focus on Narcotics While alcohol experienced a transition period in respect topublic tolerance, negative attitudes toward narcotics and otherdrugs remained constant, or became even more severe. During the1920s, the Federal government expanded its antidrug effortsthrough new Treasury Department regulations (8). In 1930,President Hoover created the Federal Bureau of Narcotics andappointed Harry Anslinger as the Commissioner of Narcotics, aposition Anslinger held from 1930 to 1962, a precursor, perhaps,to the modern day drug czar. For more than three decades,Anslinger oversaw all aspects of drug control, from interdictionto domestic supply, to public relations. He effectively usedreligious and other antidrug groups to maintain a high antidrugsentiment in the country. He also controlled the flow of legaldrug supplies, by keeping watch over doctors who might prescribeunusually large amounts of narcotics. Anslinger was opposed tothe medical treatment of addiction, and addicts, like alcoholics,were seen as deviants (9,15). Prior to the mid-1960s, marijuana use in the United Stateswas mostly confined to various subgroups such as Mexicanlaborers, jazz musicians, and beatniks. Although portrayed as akiller weed and a menace by antimarijuana reformers, there islittle evidence that it was either at this time. In 1937, theMarihuana Tax Act (the Federal government then spelled marijuanawith an "h"), became law, making the use and sale ofmarijuana without a tax stamp Federal offenses. Some companieswere permitted to apply for a license to use cannabis products(e.g., for birdseed, paint and rope), and doctors could stillprescribe marijuana in limited circumstances. However, startingin 1937, recreational use was punished with greater severity(15). Some speculated that the passage of the Marihuana Tax Actresulted from strong anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwest andthe political power of Anslinger (5). Intolerance toward drug use was very strong in the 1930s and40s. Federal laws concerning the sale and use of drugs gotprogressively stricter, culminating in the introduction of thedeath penalty for the sale of heroin to anyone under 18 years oldby anyone older than 18 (10). Illicit drug use during thesedecades was low in the mainstream population. Thismarginalization of narcotics (or at least, of the people who usedthem) may have played a part in the resurfacing of these drugsafter the 1930s. There was a concern during World War II thatAmerican soldiers in Asia would succumb to drug suppliesavailable in those countries and return home with drug habits.The Bureau of Narcotics received no budget increases, sinceCongress apparently believed it was well equipped to deal withthe current drug levels (9). In the 1950s, however, heroin was brought into the country inlarger quantities than at any time since it was outlawed. Dealerslearned that poor quality heroin could be sold at inflatedprices, and this higher cost pushed users into criminallifestyles heretofore not seen on such a wide scale (12). Anationwide scare that drug use would spread from the urban poor(mostly minorities) to the rest of the country erupted. The factthat young people appeared to be the biggest users of heroin wasparticularly alarming. This fear was reflected in the passage ofthe Narcotic Control Act of 1956, which increased penalties forthe sale and possession of marijuana and heroin (15). The reaction to this rise in drug use was not entirelyfearful, however. Scientific and technological advances offeredalternative answers to coping with the drug problem a switch fromthe past tactics of law enforcement. Even though thestereotypical heroin user was still a poor minority, new ideasfor treating and helping these people emerged as part ofincreasing acceptance of the medical model of addiction. In the1960s, methadone maintenance pilot programs were launched. Byusing the long-acting opioid methadone for treatment of addictionto the short- acting opiate heroin, these programs offer a wayfor heroin addicts to control their addiction (6). 1960s-PRESENT In the 1960s, white middle-class youths, who were morevisible than their minority counterparts, began experimentingwith drugs, including marijuana and heroin, causing wide publicconcern and demand for more treatment approaches and additionallaw enforcement (17). Some of this new interest in drug use maybe attributed to the intolerance toward it in the precedingdecades. Marijuana had never been widely used, and after the1930s its use was not a widespread concern. It was rediscoveredby young people in the 1960s, who had grown up with parents whoused alcohol. Some of the drug consumption may also be linked toan increase in consumption generally during the late 1960s andearly 1970s, the Vietnam War protest movement, and the rapidchanges in American society that occurred in those years(9,10,17). Despite the image of the sixties as a time of widespreadexperimentation, the increase of drug use activated many who hadbeen quiet on the issue. Marijuana, the drug of choice among manyyoung people, was seen by some researchers as the gateway to moredangerous drug use. Richard Nixon was elected President in 1968on a law and order platform, and it is said that no otherPresident has campaigned as hard against drug abuse (9). Asduring World War II, concern rose that soldiers serving inSoutheast Asia would develop drug habits while there. In thiscase, the fears were well- founded, as many servicemen did availthemselves of cheap supplies of heroin and marijuana. However,even among those who became addicted, many stopped their drug useupon returning to the United States. During the 1960s, the oldlinkages between corruption, Asians, and opium surfaced onceagain in public opinion, leading to more stringent measures tostop the flow of drugs into the United States from both Asia andLatin America (8). Public support of law enforcement against drugs was highduring the late 1960s and early 1970s, and President Nixon spokeof mounting "a frontal assault on our number one publicenemy [drugs]," but long mandatory minimum sentences forpossession of small amounts of marijuana disturbed manyAmericans, even those who did not approve of marijuana use. TheComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970lessened penalties for possession of marijuana. It alsoestablished a system for classifying drugs into five schedules,which is still used today. Drugs are placed in each schedulebased on their potential for abuse, their known harmfulness, andmedical value. Marijuana and heroin are listed in schedule1--drugs with high potential for addiction and no recognizedmedical value. There have been, however, limited experimentalprograms approved by the DEA and FDA for the use of marijuana intreatment of nausea due to chemotherapy and of ocular pressuredue to glaucoma. Cocaine is listed in schedule 2--drugs withpotential for addiction for acceptable for some medicalapplications. Subsequent to the establishment of this system,drug policies and laws for individual drugs have been based onthe drug's schedule (3,16). In 1972, the President's National Commission on Marijuana andDrug Abuse recommended that the laws against the use of marijuanabe relaxed, since the enforcement of these laws was becoming tooburdensome to police in some areas, and was considered intrusiveon individual privacy in others. The drug was increasinglythought to be innocuous in its effects, both by scientists andothers (4). Several States passed decriminalization laws, whichallowed possession or use of small amounts of marijuana andimposed fines instead of prison sentences for transgressions ofminor possession laws (10). The Commission remained strict oncocaine, which was also seeing a surge in use, but few expertsthought it was physically addictive or should be classified inthe same category as other narcotics. Despite President Nixon's emphasis on "law andorder" responses to drug use, his drug budget favoredprevention, education, and treatment. The National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA) was created as the lead agency for demandreduction, directing Federal prevention and treatment servicesand research. The Drug Enforcement Administration was created asthe lead agency for supply reduction, and single state agencieswere created to guide Federal funds into state and local antidrugprograms (3). From the mid-sixties to the late seventies, the compositionof drug users changed substantially. While drug use was stillassociated primarily with minorities and the lower classes, druguse by middle-class whites became a widespread and more acceptedphenomenon. As in the late nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies, when middle class whites haphazardly used narcoticpreparations, this new group of drug users down-played or ignoredthe dangerous effects of drugs, and extolled their virtues asagents of nonconformity and mind-expansion. Cocaine was anexpensive and high-status drug, used mainly for recreation byupper- and middle-class whites. From the drug experiences of this cohort, which were by nomeans entirely positive, the public of the late seventies wasbetter educated about the effects of drugs, and publicdisapproval of drug use began once again to increase. Drug use,however, particularly of cocaine and marijuana remained high. TheFord Administration (1974-1977) focused on the drugs it thoughtposed the greatest danger--heroin, amphetamines, andbarbiturates. Some even thought that drugs such as cocaine andmarijuana should be legalized, "so as to end the enormousgovernment expenditures of money and time on a problem that onlyseemed to bring profits to drug dealers and elicit contempt forthe law from an ever-growing body of drug users" (9). During the Carter Administration (1977- 1981), Peter Bourne,a special assistant for health issues, argued for Federaldecriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana,while focusing interdiction efforts on heroin. But Bourneresigned over a scandal involving criticisms over his prescribingpractices. His resignation forced President Carter to take aharder position on drugs, and Federal decriminalization neveroccurred. There were still States in which marijuana wasdecriminalized, but these decreased in numbers through 1990, whenthe last State--Alaska--to have decriminalization repealed thoselaws. The departure of Bourne coincided with the emergence ofseveral parents' groups concerned about drug use by their preteenchildren. One group in particular, in Atlanta, Georgia, becameenraged when they found that in addition to drug use at parties,their children were able to buy drug paraphernalia and prodrugliterature in local stores. The group formed the Parent ResourcesInstitute on Drug Education, National Families in Action, and theNational Federation of Parents. These groups were instrumental inprodding NIDA to publicize more widely the dangers of marijuanaand other drugs once thought of as harmless. The Administration of Ronald Reagan (1981-1989) favored astrict approach to drug use and increased law enforcement. FirstLady Nancy Reagan actively campaigned against drug use, urgingschool children to "Just Say No." At the same time,funding for research and treatment decreased, while theavailability of cocaine, heroin, and marijuana remained the same(9). The budget for antidrug related activities rose from $1.5billion in 1981 (split nearly equally between supply reduction(domestic law enforcement and international/border lawenforcement) and demand reduction (research, prevention andtreatment) to $4.2 billion by the end of President Reagan'ssecond term. Two-thirds of the funds were now allocated for lawenforcement activities, with the remaining third allocated fordemand reduction (2). In 1984, the Crime Control Act increaseddramatically Federal mandatory minimum sentencing provisions fordrug- related crime, including the manufacture, distribution, orpossession of controlled substances. It also expanded thecriminal and civil asset forfeiture laws to penalize drugtraffickers and increased Federal criminal penalties fordrug-related offenses (3). This trend continued through theremainder of the Reagan administration as well as that ofPresident Bush. The 1980s saw significant shifts in patterns of cocaine use.The negative effects of cocaine use, especially long-termuse, hadpreviously been masked, but middle-class users with drug-relatedproblems suddenly were more common. Concurrently, cocainesmuggling escalated, resulting in increased availability, lowerprices, and higher quality. Low-income, minority communitiesbegan experiencing major drug problems, first with powderedcocaine, then in the mid- eighties especially with the new formof cocaine--crack. Commonly called an epidemic, the spread ofthis smokable cocaine inspired both President Reagan and antidruggroups to heightened drug intervention efforts. Crack appeared tobe highly addictive, as well as affordable, and fear of itsconsequences forced many lawmakers into action. The Anti- DrugAbuse Act of 1986 authorized more funds than ever before for thewar on drugs, most of which was designated for internationalinterdiction activities (9), and the establishment of the Officeof Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP). The AIDS epidemic has alsoaffected patterns of drug use, since some intravenous (IV) drugusers may have switched to smoking crack in order to avoidexposure to the AIDS virus. Other IV drug users, however, havecontinued to inject, and comprise a large percentage of theAIDS-infected population. While the main focus of drug control policy in the 1980s wasinterdiction of illicit drugs, significant policy initiativesconcerning alcohol were also implemented. For example, the goalof the national minimum drinking age of 21 was stated in 1984 andachieved by 1988. Warning labels were required on all retailcontainers of alcoholic beverages beginning in 1989 (7). When George Bush was elected President in 1988 the climatewithin the country was highly intolerant to the use of illicitdrugs. President Bush echoed President Nixon when he declaredthat the drug epidemic was "public enemy number one"(16). The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 mandated the creation ofthe Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), to be headedby a director, sometimes called the drug czar, who wouldcoordinate U.S. drug control and abuse policy, resources, andoperations (Public Law 100-690). The first director was WilliamBennett, former Secretary for Education under President Reagan.He was followed by Robert Martinez, former Governor of Florida.The director, in conjunction with the President and CabinetSecretaries, sets Administration policy on drug control. However,ONCDP lacks budgetary authority, and under President Bush thedirector of ONDCP was not a Cabinet position. During the BushAdministration, additional funds were authorized for the war ondrugs, including increased funds for treatment and prevention.However, most of the funds were designated for law enforcementactivities. Spending for antidrug-related activities rose fromthe high of $4.2 billion under President Reagan, to a proposed$12.7 billion in the last year of President Bush's term. Again,the monetary split was roughly two-thirds for law enforcement andinternational interdiction activities and one-third for demandreduction (2). While "The War on Drugs" has remained part of thepolitical lexicon, President Clinton, after taking office in1993, cut the Office of National Drug Control Policy from 146positions to 25. He elevated the director of ONDCP to cabinetstatus, and Lee P. Brown, former Police Commissioner of New YorkCity was appointed to this position. During his campaign for thepresidency, Clinton advocated drug treatment on demand, and theaddition of 100,000 new police officers to the streets. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-5IA031-000652-B047-292http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/appc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132252 text/html 22824HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:22:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:40 GMTContent-length: 22606 Perspectives On Defining Substance Abuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and Addiction TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment APPENDIX C: PERSPECTIVES ON DEFINING SUBSTANCE ABUSE Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuse-relatedissues include, mass communications, criminal justice, medicine,and public health. These entities often operate independently ofone another and use substantially different terms when describingthe use of illicit substances or the illegal use of licitsubstances. MASS COMMUNICATIONS The traditional realm of mass communications includestelevision, radio, and popular journals and newspapers. Withinthese media, the term substance abuse has become a catch-allphrase, with no clear boundaries. Much of the general public hasbecome familiar with the term substance abuse within thisambiguous context. CRIMINAL JUSTICE While it is well-known that many crimes are committed bypersons with substance use disorders and that these disorders canbe major contributors to their crimes, there is no systematicpolicy within the criminal justice system for the evaluation ofthese disorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state,or local, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicitsubstance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner,is considered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitativeanalyses including blood, urine, and breath tests can beperformed to detect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presenceof illicit substances. The Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is0.10 grams/deciliter for all States excluding Oregon, California,Utah, Vermont, and Maine, where the level is 0.08grams/deciliter. As of December 1992, 15 states had lower BAClevels for youthful offenders charged with driving whileintoxicated. These levels range from 0.00-0.02 grams/deciliter,which is considered "zero tolerance," up to 0.04grams/deciliter (6). The alcohol breath test, while a differentprocedure from the BAC, converts the results into BAC units.Thus, the levels of intoxication for BAC and breath test areidentical. However, there are limitations to these analyses. In somejurisdictions, these tests can be performed only with the writtenconsent of the person. In others, the urine test measures thepresence of only one or two drugs rather than looking for theentire range of abusable substances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation, there islittle use of psychological screening examinations or structuredinterviews to determine the level and severity of use, abuse, ordependence. PUBLIC HEALTH The traditional public health model incorporates the host-agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has anindividual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential useand/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may include possible genetic, psychological, andbiological susceptibility. Agent factors incorporate thesubstance's abuse liability capacity, as well as how thesubstance is marketed. Lastly, environmental factors encompassnot only the availability of the substance, but the social,cultural, political, and economic climate as well (3,4). Over the past 20 years, professionals within the field ofpublic health have attempted to deemphasize the strict medicalconcept of substance abuse. Attention had previously focusedalmost exclusively on individual drug use patterns, rather thanfeaturing the diverse problems of drug, alcohol, and tobacco useas being intimately tied into communities and society as a whole. Even the term "substance abuse" has come underscrutiny. While the word "substance" may at firstappear quite generic, in many fields, this term has come toincorrectly infer illicit drug use--reinforcing the misperceptionof many individuals that alcohol and tobacco are not drugs."Abuse" generally denotes the more severe forms ofaddiction. In reality, there is a continuum that begins withinitial drug use and may progress to harmful use and addiction,with various problems present along the spectrum. In lieu of theterm "abuse," public health professionals prefer termssuch as "alcohol and drug problems" or the"harmful/hazardous use" of a drug. The focus of the public health perspective is to understandthe importance social norms, environment, and availability playin the shaping of alcohol- and drug-related problems both on anindividual and societal level. MEDICAL Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently citedtexts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence arethe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)issued by the American Psychiatric Association and theInternational Classification of Diseases (ICD) published by theWorld Health Organization (WHO). Each successive version of theDSM and ICD has been given a number signifying its order in theoverall sequence of manuals; DSM uses Roman numerals and ICD usesordinary numbers. The newest version of ICD, ICD-10, waspublished in 1992. The current version of DSM is the ThirdEdition- Revised (DSM-III-R), which will shortly be superseded byDSM-IV. ICD While the current ICD and DSM definitions of substancedependence are nearly identical, the two manuals differ sharplyon the concepts of abuse, which ICD classifies as harmful use. The ICD manual is intended to be used on an internationalbasis, and the socially defined "American" criteriapresent in the DSM manual for substance abuse cannot beadequately transferred to a wide range of cultures. The currentICD-10 category of harmful use, while applicablecross-culturally, is limited to: "A pattern of psychoactivesubstance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may bephysical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administrationof injected drugs) or mental ( e.g.,episodes of depressivedisorder secondary to heavy consumption of alcohol)." DSM In the early 1950s the first DSM manual grouped alcohol anddrug use disorders under the broad category of "SociopathicPersonality Disturbances." At that time, a substance usedisorder was considered a moral weakness or the manifestation ofa "deeper" psychological problem, rather than adisorder in-and-of itself with social, psychological, and perhapseven genetic determinants. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s clinical research identifiedthe need for separate categories for substance use disorders. TheDSM-III manual, in 1980, was the first manual in this series toclearly identify substance abuse and dependence as pathologicalconditions different from substance use alone. DSM-III alsoalluded to the fact that social and cultural factors arecontributors to the onset and continuation of abuse anddependence. The DSM-III definition of dependence emphasizedtolerance (needing to take much higher doses of the substance toobtain the same effect) and withdrawal (having a distinct patternof physiological arousal upon abrupt discontinuation or reductionin dosage), and required the presence of one or both of thesephenomena to make a dependence diagnosis. Substance abuse wasdefined as problematic use with social or occupationalimpairment, but with the absence of significant tolerance and/orwithdrawal. In both disorders, impairment in social andoccupational function was a prominent aspect of the definitions,creating a significant overlap between the criteria for substanceabuse and dependence. In 1987, DSM-III was revised (DSM-III-R) togive the behavioral aspects of substance use disorders equalweight to the physiological components. This shift away from the physiological to the behavioralelements of dependence was strongly influenced by the work ofresearchers Edwards and Gross, who had extensively studiedpersons with alcohol problems. These researchers conceptualizedalcohol dependence as a syndrome of graded severity that involvedan interconnected complex of behavioral, psychological, andphysiological elements associated with loss of control overalcohol consumption. Contributing to the emphasis on behavioral aspects ofdependence was work by Brady, Thompson, and others who had shownthat animals can be taught to self-administer substances ofabuse. Once taught, it was observed that most animals will expendtremendous amounts of energy to obtain additional doses and thatthis "drug-seeking behavior" is very difficult toextinguish. Efforts to repeat drug self- administration wereespecially prominent if the experimental drug was one with a highabuse liability such as morphine, methamphetamine, or(especially) cocaine and was difficult to extinguish. This body of work was among the first in a line ofinvestigation studying the behavioral aspects of drugs. Thisfield of research became known as "behavioralpharmacology" and was strengthened by additional studies byOlds and others. Thus, both the work of Edwards and Gross, that of behavioralpharmacologists, and of basic scientists pointed toward thepresence of a definable and independent syndrome that can resultafter an organism has learned to self-administer abusablesubstances. This syndrome was not dependent on the ability of thedrug to produce tolerance and withdrawal, but rather on itspositive reinforcing effects. These effects were evident byobserving the behavior of the organism, and could be measured byquantifying the work that the organism would produce to obtainthe substance. The development of the substance use disorders section forDSM-IV began in 1988 and involved the most extensive process yetundertaken for such a task. The major change in DSM-IV is in thedefinition of substance abuse. Unlike DSM-III and DSM-III-R, DSM-IV clearly separates the criteria for dependence from those ofabuse. Dependence in DSM-IV is a syndrome involving compulsiveuse, with or without tolerance and withdrawal; abuse isproblematic use without compulsive use, significant tolerance, orwithdrawal. Preliminary data from the DSM-IV field trialsindicate that this change will probably increase the number ofpersons diagnosed as having substance abuse, especially for thoseusing hallucinogens, inhalants, sedatives, and amphetamines. Substance Use and the Transition to Abuse/Harmful Use orDependence One problem in developing criteria for this second,nondependent category, whether called abuse or harmful use, isthat though dependence has been well-studied, the progressionfrom use to abuse has not been adequately researched (except inthe case of alcohol); and depending on the perspective, may notalways be linear. For example, using the DSM-IV classifications,it is possible that substances such as opiates may follow a paththat begins with use and progresses to dependence beforeabuse-related problems are identified. Within the field ofalcohol research, the consensus of studies is that consumingthree to four standard-sized drinks/day by males (equal to 40 ormore grams of alcohol at 12 grams/drink) is associated with anincreased probability for the development of problems. As femalestend to absorb alcohol more quickly, studies have shown thatproblems typically begin at about two to three drinks/day(1,2,5). Little work has been done on other substances. All persons whoend up with abuse, harmful use, or dependence begin with use. Useof a substance, whether licit or illicit, does not constitute asubstance use disorder even though it may be unwise and stronglydisapproved of by family, friends, employers, religious groups,or society at large. Use by itself is not considered a medicaldisorder. For a disorder to be present, use must become somethingelse such as: occur more frequently; occur at higher doses; orresult in a magnitude of problems. Though there have been someconceptual models developed for how one might approach a betterunderstanding of this transition, there are few data available toclearly point out where the border lies. DSM-IV AND ICD-10 DEFINITIONS DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria: Abuse A. A maladaptive pattern of substance use leading toclinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested byone or more of the following occurring over the same 12- monthperiod: 1. Recurrent substance use resulting in a failure to fulfillmajor role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeatedabsences or poor work performance related to substance use;substance-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions fromschool; neglect of children or household). 2. Recurrent substance use in situations in which it isphysically hazardous (e.g.,driving an automobile or operating amachine when impaired by substance use). 3. Recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g.,arrestsfor substance-related disorderly conduct). 4. Continued substance use despite having persistent orrecurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbatedby the effects of the substance (e.g.,arguments with spouse aboutconsequences of intoxication, physical fights). B. Has never met the criteria for Substance Dependence forthis substance. Dependence: A maladaptive pattern of substance use, leading to clinicallysignificant impairment or distress, as manifested by three ormore of the following occurring in the same 12- month period: 1. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: a. need for markedly increased amounts of the substance toachieve intoxication or desired effect b. markedly diminished effect with continued use of the sameamount of the substance 2. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: a. the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance b. the same (or closely related) substance is taken to relieveor avoid withdrawal symptoms 3. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over alonger period than was intended 4. Any unsuccessful effort or a persistent desire to cut downor control substance use 5. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary toobtain the substance (e.g., visiting multiple doctors or drivinglong distances), use of the substance (e.g., chain- smoking), orrecover from its effects 6. Important social, occupational, or recreational activitiesgiven up or reduced because of substance use 7. Continued substance use despite knowledge of having had apersistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that islikely to be caused or exacerbated by the substance (e.g.,current cocaine use despite recognition of cocaine- induceddepression, or continued drinking despite recognition that anulcer was made worse by alcohol consumption) Specify if: o with physiological dependence: Evidence of tolerance orwithdrawal (i.e., either items (1) or (2) are present). o without physiological dependence: No evidence of toleranceor withdrawal i.e., neither items (1) nor (2) are present). ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Clinical Use: Harmful Use: A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damageto health. The damage may be physical (as in cases of hepatitisfrom the self-administration of injected drugs) or mental(e.g.,episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavyconsumption of alcohol). The diagnosis requires that actual damage should have beencaused to the mental or physical health of the user. Harmfulpatterns of use are often criticized by others and frequentlyassociated with adverse social consequences of various kinds. Thefact that a pattern of use or particular substance is disapprovedof by another person or by the culture, or may have led tosocially negative consequences such as arrest or maritalarguments is not in itself evidence of harmful use. Acute intoxication or "hangover" is not in itselfsufficient evidence of the damage to health required for codingharmful use. Harmful use should not be diagnosed if dependencesyndrome, a psychotic disorder, or another specific form of drug-or alcohol-related disorder is present. Dependence Syndrome A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually be made onlyif three or more of the following have been experienced orexhibited at some time during the previous year: 1. A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take thesubstance. 2. Difficulties in controlling substance-taking behavior interms of its onset, termination, or levels of use 3. A physiological withdrawal state when substance use hasceased or been reduced, as evidenced by: the characteristicwithdrawal syndrome for the substance; or use of the same (orclosely related) substance with the intention of relieving oravoiding withdrawal symptoms. 4. Evidence of tolerance such that increased doses of thepsychoactive substance are required in order to achieve effectsoriginally produced by lower doses (clear examples of this arefound in alcohol- and opiate-dependent individuals who may takedaily doses sufficient to incapacitate or kill nontolerantusers). 5. Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or interestsbecause of psychoactive substance use, increased amounts of timenecessary to obtain or take the substance or recover from itseffects. 6. Persisting with substance use despite clear evidence ofovertly harmful consequences, such as harm to the liver throughexcessive drinking, depressive mood states consequent to periodsof heavy substance use, or drug- related impairment of cognitivefunctioning; efforts should be made to determine that the userwas actually, or could be expected to be, aware of the nature andextent of harm. Narrowing of the personal repertoire of patterns ofpsychoactive substance use has also been described as acharacteristic feature (e.g., a tendency to drink alcoholicdrinksin the same way on weekdays and weekends, regardless of socialconstraints that determine appropriate drinking behavior). It is an essential characteristic of the dependence syndromethat either psychoactive substance taking or a desire to take aparticular substance should be present; the subjective awarenessof compulsion to use drugs is most commonly seen during attemptsto stop or control substance use. This diagnostic requirementwould exclude, for instance, surgical patients given opioid drugsfor the relief of pain, who may show signs of an opioidwithdrawal state when drugs are not given but who have no desireto continue taking drugs. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specificsubstance (e.g., tobacco or diazepam), for a class of substances(e.g., opioid drugs), or for a wider ranger of differentsubstances (as for those individuals who feel a sense ofcompulsion regularly to use whatever drugs are available and whoshow distress, agitation, and/or physical signs of a withdrawalstate upon abstinence). The diagnosis of the dependence syndrome may be furtherspecified by the following (the following roughly correspond tothe course modifiers and relapse section of DSM-IV): o Currently abstinent. o Currently abstinent, but in a protected environment (e.g.,in hospital, in a therapeutic community, in prison, etc.). o Currently on a clinically supervised maintenance orreplacement regime (controlled dependence, e.g., with methadone;nicotine gum or nicotine patch). o Currently abstinent, but receiving treatment with aversiveor blocking drugs (e.g., naltrexone or disulfiram). o Currently using the substance (active dependence). o Continuous use. Episodic use. _ Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and AddictionWT01-B33-6IA031-000652-B048-128http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132436 text/html 4463HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:24:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:20 GMTContent-length: 4248 Beyond Prohibition - Executive Summary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 Executive Summary The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law ReformProject began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promoteinformed public discussion about drug law reform, and tocontribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws. The Project's main achievements over the pasttwo years are: Published discussion papers, fact sheets,stickers and a poster promoting a range of initiatives to end thecurrent prohibition policy on currently illicit drugs and movetowards a model of controlled availability; Convened a series of community forums in SouthSydney and Cabramatta on ways that drug laws impact on the workof community and health organisations; Held discussions with a number of NSWParliamentarians, including Ministers and their advisors; Participated in several conferences andseminars, including the International Conference on the Reductionof Drug Related Harm Provided formal, detailed submissions to arange of inquiries including the Wood Royal Commission into theNSW Police Service and the Victorian Premier's Drug AdvisoryCouncil (Pennington Committee). This report includes two of the Project's mostsignificant publications: Steps Towards Harm Reduction Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability. In addition, this report provides summaries ofcomments on these publications from a diverse range oforganisations and individuals. The comments show that the Projectand its publications have made a significant contribution to thedebate about reform of the drug laws in NSW. Future activities for the Redfern Drug LawReform Project are likely to include closer links to othercommittees and organisations working on drug law reform in NSWand other parts of Australia. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-7IA031-000652-B048-152http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132454 text/html 11793HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:24:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:25 GMTContent-length: 11577 Beyond Prohibition - History of the Project Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 1 . History of Project Background The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law ReformProject began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promoteinformed public discussion about drug law reform, and tocontribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws. Redfern Legal Centre provided funding to payone part-time worker to coordinate the Project and to carry outmany of its tasks. The Project was oversighted by a small buttypically enthusiastic committee, which reported to the Centre'sManagement Committee. The funding for the Project came (untilFebruary 1996) from the Centre's own resources, primarilylitigation costs. From March until September 1996, the Projectwas funded by a grant from the Law Foundation of NSW Redfern Legal Centre undertook this Project forseveral reasons: 1. Drug prohibition fosters crime (becauseprohibition artificially inflates prices for drugs on the blackmarket). Abandoning prohibition would be the simplest single wayto achieve a noticeable reduction in property crime, and to alesser but still important extent, violent crime. 2. Those affected by drug-inspired crime areprimarily the socially disadvantaged. Drug law reform isdesirable as a social equity measure. 3. Prohibition contributes to policecorruption. It is no accident that the clear majority of policenamed adversely in evidence before the Wood Royal Commission intopolice corruption are in some way connected to drugs - policestealing drugs or money from drug suppliers, police sellingdrugs, police planting drugs on suspects as false evidence.Prohibition makes the drug trade so extravagantly profitable (itis the second largest trade in the world) that it createsenormous temptations for police and other officials. We cannothope to significantly reduce the opportunities for policecorruption while the drugs prohibition continues. 4. Prohibition has a significant negativeimpact on the legal system. Dealing with people facing drugcharges, or charges of property crime generated by the drugsblack market, creates an enormous drain on the courts, and inparticular on public funds available to provide legal servicesfor the poor and disadvantaged. Reducing drug-related crime wouldfree up law enforcement resources for other activities, and wouldimprove the resource capacity of the Legal Aid Commission andcommunity legal services to pursue other matters, such asconsumer claims and antidiscrimination cases. 5. Public health outcomes are compromised bylaws which drive drug use underground. In particular, the druglaws hamper efforts to contain the spread of HIV and Hepatitis Band C. 6. Despite years of community debate and thestrength of the case for reform, prohibition has been fiercelyresilient . Reliance on the criminal law to control behaviour inother areas of moral or personal choice gambling, sex work,abortion, censorship - has generally receded in recent decades,with the drug laws the notable exception. The demise ofprohibition is not as inevitable as it perhaps once appeared tobe. We believe that meaningful reform of our druglaws necessarily involves reconsidering the laws about supply aswell as possession and use of drugs, and laws about other drugsas well as cannabis. Harm reduction is a pragmatic approach whichemphasises reducing the personal and social harms associated withdrug use, while accepting that eliminating drug use isimpossible. Harm reduction has been officially the central goalof Australian drugs policy since the mid 1980s, although mostpublic resources devoted to the drug problem continue to promoteprohibition (eg, funds to police and customs services andunrealistic, wholly negative drug education). We believe thatharm reduction (in any meaningful definition) is incompatiblewith prohibition. The Project has attempted to develop coherentharm reduction strategies, focusing on measures which wouldreduce or eliminate the drugs black market. Community Forums The Project convened a series of communityforums at which service providers in the health and communitysectors in particular were invited to identify, from theirperspective, the ways in which existing legal approaches to drugsimpacted on their work, and to identify which legal frameworkcould best support drug treatment and education programs. Theseforums were held in both South Sydney, where the Legal Centre islocated, and in Cabramatta, Sydney's major heroin distributionpoint. The discussion at these forums was invaluable in assistingthe Project to developing strategies and proposals for change. Publications Two discussion papers were written anddistributed in the course of the Project. The Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability, published in May 1995, attempted to tackleconcretely the question of what exactly drug law reform couldlook like. Most previous proposals for law reform were eitherinadequate (eg, the on-the spot fine model adopted in variousforms in South Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory), orairy generalisations about the possibility of regulating orderegulating the drugs market (with the idea of controlledavailability little more than a slogan). We considered it apriority to do the work of systematically applying harm reductionprinciples to all aspects of drug consumption, production anddistribution - in an open-minded but hopefully not fanciful way.The Harm Reduction Model therefore represents a detailedprojection of what controlled availability might look like inpractice. The Harm Reduction Model was widely circulatedand was endorsed by a number of community organisations andindividuals. An updated and expanded second edition of TheHarm Reduction Model was published in July 1996. Importantly, thesecond edition included a set of Principles for Controlled DrugAvailability to complement the essentially practical proposalsillustrating some possible means of regulating drug supply andconsumption. The Project's other discussion paper was Stepsto Harm Reduction. A companion document to the Harm ReductionModel, this paper addressed the present and short-term future. Itprovided an analysis of the possible immediate steps which couldand should be taken in drugs policy and drug law reform. Again,the value of the paper lay in its attempt to be detailed andspecific. The paper is a blueprint for reform, providing a listof proposals to achieve a graduated replacement of prohibitionwith harm reduction. These two papers form the major part of thisreport. The Project also produced: Two very popular bumper stickers (slogans EndProhibition: Support Drug Law Reform and Break the Crime Cycle:Support Drug Law Reform) A full colour poster, a graphic presentation ofwhat the future of drugs policy might look like. A series of Fact Sheets with statistics andother information detailing the social impact of existing druglaws. Discussions with politicians Throughout the Project, we held discussionswith a number of NSW Parliamentarians, including Ministers andtheir advisors. It must be said that the political climate provedto be not conducive to change on drug policy, despite some earlyencouraging if ambiguous statements from the incoming CarrGovernment. Issues discussed included many of the issuesdealt with in this report, including the desirability ofintroducing a trial of legal safe injecting spaces, and apossible Parliamentary motion on prioritising harm reduction indrugs policy. Inquiries The Project also provided formal, detailedsubmissions on proposals for law reform to the followinginquiries. Wood Royal Commission into the NSW PoliceService Victorian Premier's Drug Advisory Council(Pennington Committee) Commonwealth Access to Justice Inquiry. Conference papers During the life of the Project, we participatedin a number of conferences and seminars. Perhaps the mostsignificant conference papers we presented were a paper inSeptember 1995 to the NSW Corrective Health Services Symposium onDrug-Related Crime, and the two papers to the 7th InternationalConference on the Reduction of Drug Related Harm, in Hobart inMarch 1996. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-8IA031-000652-B048-181http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132517 text/html 29181HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:24:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:05 GMTContent-length: 28965 2. Steps to Harm Reduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 2. Steps To Harm Reduction INTRODUCTION Our existing drugs policy, grounded inprohibition, is failing. Drug use continues at significantlevels, the drug trade continues to flourish, and the socialconsequences of a thriving drugs black market - includingsignificant property crime and police corruption - continue tocause concern. We need to continue the process begun a decadeago with the introduction of legal needle and syringe exchanges.That is, we need to continue to shift the primary policy focusfrom prohibition to harm reduction: to rely less on the criminallaw to discourage drug use and supply, and more on education,treatment and research to make drug use as safe and responsibleas possible. Our current approach to drugs confuses legalstatus with questions of safety. Both alcohol and marijuana arewidely used in social situations, both methadone and heroin arehighly addictive, both Prozac and ecstasy induce comparablefeelings of well-being. Yet the differing legal status of each ofthese drugs skews social attitudes to their appropriate use, anddistorts accurate education messages about their effects and thedangers of misuse. There is a limit to the constructive harmreduction measures which can be undertaken without changes to thelaw. We have probably already reached the point at which the lawscriminalising drug use represent a real impediment to programmesaimed at minimising the personal and social harm which can becaused by drug use. Reducing Drug-related Harm Harm reduction means aiming at reducing theharm that drugs can cause to users and to the broader community.It involves accepting that drug use will never be eliminated,even if we do not approve of it. Harm reduction should be thestandard against which we measure the success or failure ofexisting drug laws, and proposals for change. Redfern Legal Centre has proposed that in thelong term, we should implement a system of controlledavailability for most currently illicit drugs. The Centre's HarmReduction Model of Controlled Drug Availability sets outprinciples for controlled availability which would produce thegreatest degree of harm reduction, and sketches some case studiesto illustrate what these principles might mean in practice. In the immediate future, we should take someless dramatic steps towards reducing drug related harm. Here weoutline some immediate steps we should take to implement harmreduction principles in the short term. Policy Objectives Although drugs policy could never be describedas uncontroversial, there is some common ground. Most would agreethat drugs policy should be framed in the context of healthobjectives and social policy, not with the criminal law as thestarting point. Where drug use is problematic, it should beaddressed as a health issue, not a legal issue. What does this mean in concrete terms? The changes we recommend here address what weconsider to be the most significant drug policy issues impactingon public health. The particular objectives of the proposals madehere are 1. To establish the legal environment for theimplementation of effective education and other health programsto: reduce overdose deaths reduce the number of new Hepatitis C infectionsassociated with injecting drug use at least maintain (and if possible reduce)existing low levels of new HIV infection through injecting druguse improve the level of responsible disposal ofused needles 2. Reduce socially harmful impact of criminaljustice system on users of currently illicit drugs. Taking the steps detailed below will not solveall the problems associated with drug use. Change to the existinglegal framework must of necessity be made gradually. Once theproposals for change outlined here are implemented and evaluated,we can consider what further changes to drug law and policy arenecessary. These measures would have only a small initialimpact on crime rates and police corruption. These social harmsresult directly from the drug laws particularly laws about drugsupply. We need to move towards greater regulation of the drugsmarket to enable us as a society to influence the size andoperation of the drugs market. Achieving the maximum publichealth benefits will require regulatory control over matters suchas purity, weight, recommended dosages, and labelling. The greatest source of social harm associatedwith drugs is the black market. The black market, with itsextraordinary profits, fuels police corruption, and generatesproperty crime. And the black market is an unregulated market,with no controls on drug quality, multiplying the dangers of druguse. The enormous profits to be made will always draw a steadystream of new entrepreneurs to the production and distribution ofdrugs. The size of the black market is determined bythe laws we make about drug supply. While it is likely that wewill never be able to completely eliminate the drugs blackmarket, changes to the legal approach to drugs can reduce andmarginalise the negative social impact of a contracted illicitmarket. We must explore alternative strategies tocontrol the size of the black market, including consideringalternative changes to the law about supply. But we cannotsensibly undertake that consideration without first resolvinglegal and policy issues about use and possession. Each of the measures outlined below wouldrepresent an important step on the way to creating the legalframework for a comprehensive harm reduction strategy. PROPOSALS FOR CHANGE 1 . Personal Use and Possession Penalising drug users for the activity of druguse does little if anything to discourage drug-taking. Criminalising drug using behaviour adds to thesocial and personal burden on drug users without anycorresponding social benefit. The current laws force drug useunderground, compounding health problems and making it moredifficult to implement effective public health programs. Police drugs strategy states that policeresources should be directed towards drug traffickers andlarge-scale suppliers, rather than drug users. However, the factis that 60% of drug matters prosecuted involve drug use orpossession offences. Because there is a distinct socioeconomic biasin the manner in which different communities are policed, thereis a differential outcome in how these charges are laid. Thismeans that the drug laws impact unfairly on the poor, thehomeless, Aborigines and the young - disproportionately to theiractual patterns of usage. Changing our approach to the legal treatment ofdrug use would assist in HIV/Hepatitis C prevention by allowinginjecting drug users to access (and dispose of) new needles andsyringes without fear of police harassment. It would also removeexisting disincentives for drug users (such as marijuana smokers)to openly discuss their use with doctors and other healthprofessionals. There are a number of constructive alternativesto the criminalisation of personal use and possession of drugs. The options are to: a. abolish the offences of use and possession; b. abolish the offence of self administrationonly; and/or c. vary enforcement practices We will briefly discuss the merits of thesealternative approaches. Option a. Abolish the offences of use andpossession The most straightforward solution is to removethe offence of drug using and possession. That is, it would nolonger be a criminal offence to use an illicit drug, nor topossess a small quantity for personal use (say 30 grams forcannabis, 1 gram for heroin, amphetamine and other powders). Inorder to minimise the number of cannabis users accessing theblack market, cultivation of up to five cannabis plants perhousehold should also be allowed. Removing these offences would remove the legalobstacle to drug users seeking appropriate health care, includingthe estimated 600,000 cannabis users in this State. It wouldreduce fear of police harassment by injecting drug usersaccessing needle and syringe exchanges and, especially,contribute to responsible disposal of used needles. Becausepossession of a used needle is evidence of the offence of druguse, the law currently creates incentives to dispose of usedneedles quickly rather than thoughtfully. Removing these offences would be consistentwith existing police strategy which states that police resourcesshould be directed towards drug traffickers, not drug users. Option b. Abolish the offence of selfadministration only Because drug use ("selfadministration") and drug possession are separate offencesunder the Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act, it is possible toremove the offence of use without any change to the lawprohibiting drug possession. Removing the criminality of the act of using adrug would improve the capacity of educators and researchers tocommunicate in direct and plain terms with people about theirpast and present levels of drug use, and use behaviours. In practical terms, it would mean that a personwho had recently consumed a drug but had no other drugs in theirpossession, would be not subject to arrest or criminal charges.This would encourage larger numbers of injecting drug users toresponsibly dispose of used needles and syringes, positivelycontributing to reduction in new HIV and hepatitis infections,and to community perceptions of public safety. Most self administration convictions resultfrom the person admitting having consumed a drug, without otherevidence (blood or urine tests are not undertaken to supportthese charges). This law is selectively enforced against thosewho are most vulnerable and least aware of their civil rights(especially the right to silence). If the self administration provision iswithdrawn, there would remain ample legal power for the police tocontrol offensive or anti-social behaviour which might accompanydrug use. Appropriate community policing strategies would addresscommunity concerns about unacceptable behaviour in public placesby people under the influence of illicit drugs, while alsoachieving desirable public health and social equity results. Option c. Vary enforcement practices The alternative to legislative amendment is tochange how these laws are enforced. There are several ways inwhich this might be done. (i) Better directed police discretion The police have the discretion not to arrest orlay a charge in a wide range of circumstances, subject to theirduty to protect the peace and to uphold the law. This exercise ofdiscretion applies in the enforcement of the drug laws. Inpractice this means that many police officers choose, in manycircumstances, not to lay charges where they become aware ofminor drug offences. The anecdotal evidence is that the policeare increasingly exercising their discretion in this way, perhapsespecially with cannabis. The exercise of police discretion in this wayis not only legitimate but desirable. It contributes positivelyto public health outcomes, and reduces what would otherwise be aliterally intolerable burden on criminal justice resources ifevery episode of drug use or possession which came to policenotice were prosecuted. It is desirable however that there be somestandardisation of this exercise of discretion, to achievegreater uniformity of police practice (and therefore socialequity) and to better target particular public health objectives. We propose that the Commissioner's Instructionsshould be amended to give guidance to police on the exercise oftheir discretion. Some suggestions are: Police guidelines should specificallydiscourage arrest in overdose and similar medical emergencysituations, of either the overdose patient or their associates.Knowing that there was no risk of arrest would encourage peopleexperiencing overdose, or their friends, to seek medical help asearly as possible. People suffering overdose, or other physical orpsychological distress, should be able to access medical serviceswithout fear of arrest. There are some 220 drug overdosefatalities in NSW each year. Many of these deaths arepreventable. Studies show that one in three heroin users reporthaving had at least one overdose experience. Police should be encouraged not to harassclients of methadone clinics, even if known drug users are likelyto congregate there. [This would be an extension of existingguidelines which discourage police harassment of clients ofneedle and syringe exchanges.] Existing Commissioner's Instructions(Instruction 16.02), say that police should not interruptinjection, nor deliberately break syringes. In fact, thesepractices still occur. Relevant police instructions should bemade the subject of training and greater management direction. The Police Service should undertake acomprehensive examination of its practices and protocols as theyimpact on drugs policy. The fact that there are existingCommissioner's Instructions which are not being applied raisesquestions about the capacity of the Police Service to respondflexibly and appropriately in this area, in the absence oflegislative reform. If measures are taken to develop theapplication of police discretion in drugs policy, it must beclosely monitored to assess the degree of compliance withguidelines. If this approach does not significantly improve thecurrent negative impact of law enforcement on effective drugspolicy, the only alternative is to legislate change to laws. (ii) Formal police cautions The recent Victorian Premier's Drug AdvisoryCouncil Report (the Pennington Report) recommended that the useand possession of illicit drugs be dealt with through a system ofautomatic formal police cautions for first offenders (withvoluntary referral to drug assessment and treatment services).Mandatory good behaviour bonds would be imposed as a sentence forsecond offenders. Third offenders would be dealt with by a courtin the normal way (ie, by decision of the magistrate to imposefines, community service orders, or other appropriate penalty). A mandatory caution/bond system for drug useand possession offences would make police contact with drug usersless negative than it is now (except for repeat offenders), andwould allow law enforcement to be accompanied by referral totreatment or counselling services in appropriate cases. If introduced, this system should be closelymonitored for its effect on the number and type of cases broughtbefore the courts. (It should be noted that introducing a systemof police referral to drug treatment services may result in anincreased demand for those services, which are now significantlyunder-researched.) (iii) On-the-spot fines Some jurisdictions (South Australia, theAustralian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory) haveintroduced a system of on-the-spot fines as a method of"decriminalising" the personal use and possession ofmarijuana. Since this system was implemented in SouthAustralia in 1987, there has been a 450% increase in the numberof fine notices issued (although research shows that marijuanausage has increased only slightly, in line with increases inother States). Half of the 18,000 people issued with notices lastyear did not pay their fine on time, exposing them to the risk ofarrest, prosecution and incurring a criminal record. In practice therefore, this initiative hasactually increased the cost of police and court time devoted tomarijuana law enforcement. In the ACT and NT, it is too early to saywhether there will be a similar escalation in the number ofnotices issued. There are few apparent advantages in adoptingthis measure. The other alternatives offer either more completeand systematic solutions, or the opportunity for more flexiblepolicing practices.  Remove prison as a sentencing option fordrug use or possession If the offences of drug use and possession arenot abolished, then at the least, imprisonment should be removedas an available sentencing option. Prison sentences are a completely inappropriatepenalty for minor drug possession and use offences. Imprisonmenthas never been evaluated for its effects on drug use orpossession recidivism, although anecdotal evidence suggests thatit does not deter ongoing drug use. Research into the questionshould be encouraged. About 150 people are gaoled each year in NSWfor drug use or possession of small quantities of drugs. In 1995(the most recent figures available), there were 62 people gaoledfor use or possession of marijuana, 61 were gaoled for use orpossession of heroin, and 44 were gaoled for use or possession ofother drugs. Although custodial sentences of up to eight monthswere imposed, the period of imprisonment for most was less thantwo months. In relative terms, these prison terms would beconsidered short. However, considering the minor nature of theoffences and prevailing social attitudes, they areextraordinarily harsh. 3 . Allow use of cannabis for medical purposes If the offences of drug use and possession areremoved, there is no need for separate treatment for those whouse cannabis for genuinely therapeutic purposes. However, ifthose offences remain, an exception should exist for the medicalapplications of cannabis. Cannabis in smokable form is a valuablealternative to other medical treatments for people living withAIDS and for some cancer and glaucoma patients. It is useful fornausea and pain relief, and to stimulate appetite. Smokablecannabis is now used in the community for these purposes withoutrecognition, support or medical supervision. Synthetic cannabis products in tablet form areavailable on prescription, but they are not satisfactory. Theyare expensive and reported to be less effective in achieving thedesired therapeutic results. Many patients who smoke marijuana tocontrol nausea are unable to swallow tablets. For some conditions(eg, weight loss associated with AIDS), there are no effectivealternatives. As well, numerous people living with hepatitisuse cannabis as a social alternative to alcohol. 4 Allow possession of drug equipment as well asneedles and syringes Possession of equipment intended for use ofprohibited drugs is illegal - needles and syringes are the onlyexception. It is anomalous to publicly fund thedistribution of needles and syringes, but not to allow thepossession of swabs, sterile water and tourniquets for thepurpose of using illegal drugs. Allowing the legal possession of allintravenous drug using equipment would assist in HIV prevention.It would also assist in preventing Hepatitis C infection, whichoften results from sharing equipment other than needles andsyringes., and it would assist in holistic harm reduction (eg,using sterile water to reduce the risk of injecting bacteriawhich can cause a range of illnesses). The sale and possession of bongs for thesmoking of cannabis is also illegal even though using a bong isprobably less harmful than smoking cannabis cigarettes. Furtherresearch should be undertaken into the relative physical harms ofdifferent methods of consuming cannabis (eg, in cigarettes,through bongs, or in foods). Legalising the sale and possession of cannabissmoking equipment would assist education strategies aimed atencouraging cannabis users to use in relatively safe ways. 5 . Provide safe injecting spaces Legal safe injecting spaces (or "shootingrooms") would considerably reduce the harm associated withinjecting drug use in public places like parks and laneways. Safeinjecting spaces could reduce drug overdose deaths, and shouldalso reduce the number of used syringes unsafely disposed of inpublic places. Publicly funded, safe injecting spaces shouldbe introduced on a trial basis in areas of existing highintravenous drug use. The trial should be conducted over twoyears, with an initial review after six months. Potential benefits include: i. Reduction in injecting drug use in publicplaces (such as parks and laneways), with the consequent publichealth dangers posed by used needles being left in those places. ii. Improved access and personal safety forambulance officers and other health workers treating overdoses. The difficulty with introducing such a trial isthat the authorities are wary of funding, even tolerating,facilities at which people would break the law (ie by selfadministration). We have made a number of suggestions above aboutreform of the law, or at least law enforcement practices, arounddrug use and possession. Introducing any of those proposals wouldclear the way legally for the introduction of safe injectingspaces. The proposal for safe injecting spaces is alogical extension of existing needle and syringe exchangeprograms. The legal framework to allow shooting rooms to operate(in the absence of more far-reaching changes to the law), wouldbe similar to the arrangements for needle and syringe exchangeprograms, namely: legislative amendment to make it not an offenceto inject a prohibited drug on site at an approved safe injectingplace (at least for the duration of a trial); instructions to police to not harass theclients of the facilities (just as existing instructions directpolice to not harass needle exchange clients) statutory amendment to protect workers in safeinjecting places from prosecution for aiding and abettingoffences. 6 Allow use, possession and supply of Narcanwithout prescription Narcan is an anti-narcotic used to revivepeople in the event of narcotic overdose. It has no pleasurableeffects, and no effect on someone who has not used heroin orother narcotics. Wider availability of Narcan has beenrecommended by researchers at the National Drug and AlcoholResearch Centre as an effective way to reduce fatal heroinoverdoses. If Narcan were to be made more readilyavailable, it should be accompanied by an appropriately targetededucation campaign to ensure that Narcan is understood to be afirst aid measure only. The person revived from the overdose by ashot of Narcan requires further medical attention, involvingeither calling an ambulance or attendance at a hospital. FUTURE CHANGE The implementation of these proposals should befollowed by continuing attention to laws and programmes whichimpact adversely on public health and other social programmes.Relevant government agencies should undertake a comprehensivereview to identify which laws require amendment to further reducedrug related harm. Key agencies to be involved in such a revieware the Departments of Health, Attorney-General's, Police, andSchool Education. In the longer term, the nature and pace offurther changes to drug law and policy will need to be consideredand debated. Implementing some or all of the above proposalswould significantly improve public health outcomes. Making thesechanges would allow the community to decide whether and how totake further steps. We should begin now, in a measured way, toexplore and implement workable alternatives to the failure ofdrugs prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-9IA031-000652-B048-208http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf3a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132538 text/html 18180HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:25:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:10 GMTContent-length: 17964 3. Comments on Steps to Harm Reduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 3. Comments on Steps to Harm Reduction A version of the Steps towards Harm Reductionsection of this report was provided to people and organisationswith expertise or interest in the area of drugs policy and drugslaw, together with a questionnaire (see Appendix 2) seekingcomments on the paper. Responses were sought from 55 individuals andorganisations (see Appendix 1). Written responses were receivedfrom 21 respondents and eight responses were obtained byinterview (29 responses in all). Given the low response rate andthe ways that respondents were selected, this survey is notdesigned to provide research evidence about support for oragainst changes to drug laws. However, the responses allow us tosee where support appears to be forming and what areas continueto be the subject of intense debate. Responses were received from the followingindividuals and organisations. Organisations are listed when theyprovided an organisational response: otherwise the individualslisted spoke only in a personal capacity and not on behalf of anyOrganisation: Uniting Church Board for Social ResponsibilityAnglican Church Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney AIDS Council of NSW Hepatitis C Council of NSW Australian Federation of AIDS OrganisationsAustralian IV League NSW Bar Council Australian Medical Association UN Association of Australia (NSW) Drug AbuseControl Committee HEMP Nimbin Dr Lisa Maher Meriel Schultz Garth Popple James Pitts Lory Price Greg Chilvers Don Weatherburn David McDonald Dr Alex Wodak Bill Stronach Professor Peter Baume Dr Robert Marks John Howard (lecturer, not PM) Dr Wendy Lox1ey Major Brian Watters Ken Marslew Angela and Tony Wood Dr Peter B Paisley (Total responses do not always add up to 29because some respondents did not answer all questions and somegave overall support or opposition, rather than provide detailson specific points.) Do you support some change in the legal currentapproach to personal use and possession? All respondents agreed that some change wasnecessary. The overwhelming majority favoured change in thedirection of some liberalisation of existing legal approaches.One respondent supported change in the form of higher penaltiesfor use and possession offences. One supported additionalintervention (eg, education) as well as police intervention. Comments: "There is (and has been for decades)overwhelming evidence that the current system not only does notwork but is cataclysmically harmful." "[Supported] for cannabis use/possessiononly. Population use of cannabis has reached the point whereprohibition does more harm than good." "Counterproductive and contrary toprinciples of harm minimisation and National Drugs Strategy tocriminalise users." "Should be less criminal records for theseoffences, shorter time for expungement of criminal records." It is important to note that almost allrespondents support some change, as one of the findings of thisprocess is that views are polarised on the points contained inthe Steps Towards Harm Reduction. While most respondentssupported the need for changes in all of the areas covered by thedocument, several respondents opposed most such changes. Thosegenerally in favour of change included some church groups,doctors, lecturers, researchers, drug educators, drug treatmentstaff and community based organisations. Those generally opposedincluded some church groups, doctors association, drug treatmentstaff and some community members. Several respondents chose to write letters insupport of their general position. These general commentsincluded: "Issues of dependency could be more easilyaddressed and the transmission of blood borne viruses could bemore efficiently reduced by taking the Steps Towards HarmReduction." "Too much attention is focused on thequestion of whether the present system of drug prohibition isworking. In my view, the answer is clearly that prohibition isnot working ... But accepting that prohibition has failed is notenough. Whether we should get rid of it depends on what we cancome up with as a replacement. Criminal law is not the only meansof regulation nor is its central presence in drug controlstrategy inevitable ... The real choice is about what type ofstate control is to replace prohibition as the dominantstrategy." (original emphasis) "The case here tends to be overstated byextrapolations and generalisations ... There cannot be a blanketapproach to encouraging safe and responsible drug use ... Thereis no clear evidence that either more restrictive or more liberalpolicies have achieved significant impact on the prevalence ofillicit drugs." "The (United Nations) conventions doreflect consensus and, with the problem of substance misuse,there has to be a line drawn somewhere. I believe that drug lawreform, at its worst, acts to destroy all the lines and to leaveonly confusion to those who desperately seek direction." Option a. Abolish the offences of use andpossession Eighteen respondents supported this change, sixwere opposed, three were unsure. Comments: "It's a victimless crime. What you do toyourself in the privacy of your own home is no-one'sbusiness." "[The current law is] counterproductivesocially and economically." "It would equal approval - a message thatdrug use is OK." "There needs to be community consultationsbefore progress can occur." Option b. Abolish the offence of selfadministration only The proposal to abolish the offence of selfadministration only was not included in the questionnairecompleted by respondents. However, one response noted that themost recent Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy meeting hadresolved to form a Working Party of the National Drug StrategyCommittee to examine the self administration laws in everyjurisdiction. This Working Party is chaired by Mr Neil Bridge ofthe NSW Police Service. Option c. Vary enforcement practices (i) Betterdirected police discretion The version of the paper circulated for commentdid not include this section, so most respondents did not havethe opportunity to comment on the proposals. The proposals werediscussed with a small number of respondents, who indicated somesupport. (ii) Formal Police cautions Twenty respondents favoured this proposal,three were opposed. Among the supporters, two indicated broadsupport for the concept, but disagreement with the detailsproposed. Two supporters expressed the view that this proposalwas a poor alternative to the repeal of the offences. Anotheradvocated this approach before considering legislative amendmentat a later time. Comments: "Police contact, if it is a deterrent,would be just as effective with a caution or bond as with aharsher penalty." "Diversion of users away from criminalcharges should be used wherever possible. Unfortunately [theDepartment of] Health does not resource sufficient treatment orcounselling services. Magistrates cannot refer if there are noservices. Neither can police." "Less intrusive and punitive. Gives someoption for the individual" "It should remain a court matter, but withno convictions recorded." (iii) On-the-spot fines Seven respondents were in favour of thisproposal, with another one "half in favour" and 15opposed. The respondent who was partially in favoursuggested that the South Australian experience was not a fairtest of the effectiveness of this approach because the law theredoes not allow the police to demand identification. Thisrespondent suggested a variation on the proposal, with no finesor other police attention for amount of less than 25 grams (forcannabis), and fines for quantities in the range of 25 grams to,say, 100 grams. Comments: "Although I favour legalisation, on thespot fines may be a half way house" "Fines are overused as a sanction." "They would just fill up the fines yardsand periodic detention centres." "It is too difficult,apparently, to prevent net-widening." V) Other suggestions Respondents were invited to make othersuggestions for legal change concerning personal use andpossession. Six respondents offered comments. Comments: "Policing priorities (I guess goes with(b)) Licensing of IV users (?), pot smokers(?)" "Some process for referral for assessmentfor treatment/ rehabilitation. Need to look at withdrawingdriving licences, eg for methadone patients." "Let people grow what they like. Let themarket place sort it out. Supply good quality seed - kill theblack market. Keep it cheap. Get away from needles." "Referral options - jobs - safehousing." "Legalise heroin and cannabis." "Continue education and encouragement ofnon-use, and not starting to use: eg, experiment." Remove prison as a sentencing option for druguse or possession Twenty respondents were in favour of thisproposal, and four were opposed. Two of those in favour of this change supportedthe establishment of secure, custodial rehabilitation facilitiesfor some drug users as an alternative to prison. Comments: "What's the point of putting users ingaol?" "[Yes] But it should be seldom if everused." "Minimise or modify prison sentence,deviation/direction to rehabilitation or treatment agencies whenpossible." 3 Allow use of cannabis for medical purposes Eighteen respondents were in favour of thisproposal, three were opposed. One of those in favour supportedcannabis for medical purposes on prescription only. Comments: "Even if it is only a third rate drug -why not allow some people to benefit?" "Cannabis in smokable form is not the bestavailable treatment for patients suffering from anyillness." "For some conditions (eg, AIDS relatedweight loss), there is no good alternative." 4. Allow possession of drug equipment as wellas needles and syringes Nineteen respondents favoured the proposal(including one who supported legal change for bongs, but wasuncertain about injecting equipment), four were opposed. One ofthose opposed to this proposal thought that a new offence shouldbe introduced for irresponsible disposal of used needles andsyringes. Comments: "Don't want to encourage drug use." "It's a proven public healthsuccess." "Present situation is patentlyludicrous." 5 Provide safe injecting spaces Eighteen respondents were in favour of thisproposal, five were opposed. Comments: "Definitely. Works towards increased safedisposal (by centralising use), decrease in overdoses (monitoreduse), takes away IV use from public facilities like publictoilets, provision of counselling, health monitoring. Highpriority change." "Safe for whom? These could assist incollection of used needles which a good thing. If illegalsupplies of drugs which are being trafficked, these may proveunsafe for users." "Socially unworkable. The practicalitiesof their location and operation are enormous." "Cannot assume beneficial public healtheffect especially if current prohibitions remain in place. Alsohave to ensure that such places are truly 'safe' and clients arefree from identification and police harassment." "What about non-metro towns? They may needthem more." 6 Allow use, possession and supply of Narcanwithout prescription Eleven respondents were in favour of thisproposal, four were against. Most others were unsure. Comments: "This is well supported in research. Thereare practical difficulties with its availability. Needs to beworked on rather than talked about!" "I don't want to see kids die." "100% for it." "I'm not sure about this, but I suppose Ishould logically support it." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-10IA031-000652-B048-228http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132552 text/html 29998HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:25:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:31 GMTContent-length: 29782 4. Harm Reduction Model of Controlled Drug Availability Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 4. Harm Reduction Model of ControlledDrug Availability (Second Edition) This paper is in two Parts. Part A sets outPrinciples which should apply to the social and legal managementof currently illicit drugs. Part B provides some examples of howthese Principles might be applied for particular drugs.Individuals and organisations are invited to endorse thePrinciples of Controlled Availability contained in this proposal.(An earlier version of this paper was published in May 1995.) PART A: PRINCIPLES Preamble Prohibition causes enormous social damageincluding: Vastly increased drug-related property crime bydrug users to pay prices inflated by the black market Law enforcement costs to apprehend drug usersand sellers, and those who commit drug-related crime, andincreased costs and delays in the court system to process thesecases Corruption flourishing at all levels and inmany forms: profits are so great that few police or otherofficials are able to resist the enormous sums offered as bribes Violent crime developing from suppliercompetition Thousands of Australians jailed for drugrelated crimes, leading to increased costs for correctiveservices and the need for more jails Prohibition contributes to the spread of HIVand other blood-borne diseases such as Hepatitis B and C in thefollowing ways: Needle sharing among injectors of somecurrently illicit drugs can spread these infections: many drugusers begin to inject to receive the greatest effect from thesmallest quantity of the expensive drug Some users of illicit drugs are forced intohigh-risk forms of sex to pay for drug use Needle and syringe supply programs aredifficult to establish and operate under regular threat ofclosure, despite significantly reducing the spread of HIV andother blood-borne diseases Unsafe disposal of used needles and syringesincreases because drug injectors believe that police will usethese articles as the basis for prosecution Drug injectors sent to prison continue to usedrugs but have virtually no means to protect themselves frominfection Laws prohibiting certain drugs have drivenusers of currently illicit drugs from their social supportnetworks, making it hard to reach them with education messagesabout protecting themselves and others from infection Marginalisation of drug users (encouraged byprohibition) has led most Australians to care little what happensto drug users Prohibition causes damage to the health of drugusers (and consequently increases health costs to society) by: Users paying black market prices for drugs,leading to increasing malnutrition and other health deficitsrelated to poverty Adulterants and inconsistent drug type or dose(caused by unregulated manufacturing due to prohibition) causinghealth damage, overdose and death among users of currentlyillicit drugs Marginalisation of drug users leads to lowerself esteem and decreases motivation for self-care Goals of Rational Drug Policy Drug policy should: Have realistic goals Take account of the different patterns andtypes of harms caused by specific drugs Be shown to be effective or be changed Separate arguments about the consequences ofdrug use from arguments about morals Be developed in the light of the costs ofcontrol as well as the benefits Ensure that the harms caused by the controlregimes themselves do not outweigh the harms prevented by them Recognise the existence of multiple goals, butensure that contradictory goals are minimised We believe that this proposal achieves each ofthese policy objectives. The specific goals of this proposal are tosimultaneously reduce the size and profits of the illicit drugmarket by the greatest amount; and provide the greatest level ofharm reduction for users of currently illicit drugs; and minimisethe number of users of these drugs who experience problemsrelated to their drug use Defining Harm Reduction We use the term "harm reduction" tomean: A policy or programme directed towards reducingthe adverse health, social and economic consequences of drug useto the community and to the individual user, even though the usermay continue to use psychoactive drugs at this time. Harm reduction policies and programmes must bepart of a public health approach to managing drug use. Protectingthe health of the community must include protecting the health ofdrug users. Principles of Controlled Availability Applying these policy goals under the abovedefinition of harm reduction, we propose that a system ofcontrolled availability of currently illicit drugs be introduced. Such a system should have the followingprinciples as its key elements: 1. The use and possession of currently illicitdrugs should be made legal, in an environment of controlledavailability. 2. The regulated manufacture, supply and saleof selected drugs should be allowed. 3. The drugs selected for controlledavailability should include cannabis, heroin, amphetamine,ecstasy and anabolic steroids. 4. The drugs selected for should be madeavailable either: a) Over the counter from licensed premises inspecified (generally low) dosages of known purity, clearlylabelled with ingredients shown; or b) By prescription. 5. The age limit for the regulated supply ofcurrently illicit drugs should be the same as it is for alcohol. 6. Advertising and marketing should be theminimum necessary (eg, for brand identification) to ensure thatnon-users are not attracted into drug use by marketing. 7. Prices of regulated drugs should be set sothat least harmful forms of the drug (usually lower dosages) aresubstantially less costly than more harmful forms of the drug. 8. Users must demonstrate adequate knowledgeabout the effects of the drug they intend to purchase, and aboutsafe usage. 9. Profits earned from the commercialproduction or supply of drugs should be taxed. Revenues obtainedfrom taxes and licence fees must be applied (in whole or in largepart) to education, and to treatment for those drug users whowant it. 10. Controlled availability should operate in aframework of: a) education in which doctors and other healthprofessionals, licensed drug sellers and drug users allparticipate in baseline and follow-up education based on validresearch; and b) widespread, easily accessible treatment fordrug-related problems, with funding to be provided to a widevariety of non-coercive options for positive change. 11. The prescription system should have thefollowing characteristics: a) Appropriate criteria for a drug to beprescribed to an individual would be: i. regular frequent use (usually daily); ii. clear evidence of dependence; iii. continued use having a severe effect onlifestyle; iv. the harms associated with non-prescribeduse being significantly greater than those associated withprescription. b) A variety of forms for oral, smokable orinjectable use be made available, in a range of doses up to anegotiated maximum dose. Users must also have access toappropriate drug using equipment. C) Users of the prescription system beregistered. d) The prescription system would operate in aframework of: i. Harm reduction and full consumerparticipation. ii. Entry assessment to ensure that theindividual wants to be maintained on the drug: this assessmentmust be carried out by a trained, qualified drugs worker and mustinclude a full and frank discussion of the likely consequences ofa range of options including maintenance, detoxification,selective detoxification, and controlled using. iii. Options for dispensing which may include: Pharmacy dispensing Drug clinic dispensing Home delivery or mobile van for long-termillness, palliative care or isolated individuals Safe injecting spaces ("shootingrooms") in areas with a high concentration of druginjectors, especially those who are homeless. iv. Reasonable cost to the consumer. Servicesto clients on low incomes would be delivered through the publichealth system. PART B: CASE STUDIES In this Part we propose some concrete examplesof how these Principles might be applied for particular drugs. We do not suggest that the proposals in thisPart describe the only possible application of these principles. Cannabis We use the term "cannabis" to referto the complete range of cannabis products including marijuana,hashish resin and oil, and other preparations, as well asindustrial hemp. It would be legal to grow up to 10 cannabisplants for personal use. It would be legal to consume cannabisproducts or to possess up to 50 grams (dry weight) of cannabisfor personal use. It would be legal to supply in small quantities(up to 50 grams) to people aged 18 and over for no payment. It would be legal to grow larger quantities ofcannabis under licence to a State Government Office of DrugRevenue (ODR). Officially sanctioned cannabis growers would beallowed to sell their products to cannabis shops or Kafes, or tomanufacturers of other cannabis products such as biscuits andcakes, rope, paper, textiles, etc. A regulation system wouldensure that grades of cannabis (principally by THC content) areadhered to, providing quality assurance for end users. Adifferential tax could operate with different grades beingsubject to different tax. A system of cannabis Kafes would be establishedfor retail sales of cannabis, both for consumption on thepremises and for take-away consumption to people aged 18 andover. A range of cannabis products from rolled cigarettes tobiscuits might be available, together with smoking implementsdesigned to reduce the level of harm associated with smokingcannabis products (eg bongs). Other retailers (eg tobacconists) would belicensed to sell take away cannabis products. Cannabis seeds, andinformation about home cultivation, would also be available. Commercial cannabis suppliers would be requiredto label their products with consumer information concerningweight, THC content, recommended dosage, and approved healthwarnings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of cannabis would be taxed. Prices for cannabis products should becomparable with prices of alcoholic spirits. Prices should be setto encourage users to eat cannabis products rather than smoke. Sales to people under 18 and unlicensed (ieuntaxed) sales would be illegal. Advertising and marketing of cannabis productswould be restricted to the minimum necessary (eg for brandidentification). It might include a statement outside and insideKafes that "cannabis products are sold here", orperhaps a discrete symbol indicating availability of cannabisproducts. Cannabis smoking would be banned in placeswhere tobacco smoking is banned. A realistic education campaign about thehazards of using cannabis, concentrating on safe cannabis use,"dope-driving", the effects of both shortterm andchronic use, and the use of cannabis and alcohol together, wouldbe carried out at regular intervals. The cost of this campaignand ongoing campaigns directed at school students, homeless andworking youth and visitors to the State would be paid for by taxrevenues from cannabis sales. Revenues from taxes and licence fees would beused to administer the regulatory system and to provide educationand treatment services through services funded by the HealthDepartment. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of cannabis, unless further research proves thatcannabis does not impair driving ability. Research should beconducted to determine what (if any) level of cannabisintoxication would not adversely affects drivers' ability. It would remain illegal to import or exportcannabis. Heroin & other opioids In this section, we refer to heroin and othercurrently illicit opioids such as opium, as well as currentlyrestricted drugs such as methadone. It would be legal to use heroin and allcurrently illicit opioid products, and to possess smallquantities (2 grams) for personal use. It would remain illegal to supply, manufactureor traffic in currently illicit opioid drugs except as follows: Opiated teas, tinctures, tonics and otherproducts, clearly showing the percentage of opioid per volumewould be manufactured under licence to a State Government Officeof Drug Revenue (ODR) and sold through pharmacies to people overthe age of 18. All ingredients of these products would be listedon their packaging. Taxes raise from the sale of these productswould be used to fund treatment and education programs. Smokable opium and heroin would be manufacturedunder licence to the ODR and sold in pharmacies to people overthe age of 18, together with smoking implements designed toreduce the level of harm associated with opium and heroin smoking(ie. smoke cooling equipment such as hookahs and long pipes).Prices of these products would be set so that they would: (a) encourage opium use over heroin use, butwhich (b) encourage opioid smoking over opioidinjecting. Sales of these products would be in smallquantities only (enough for 3-4 episodes of intoxication). Taxesraised from sales would be used to fund treatment and educationprograms, and to subsidise the prescription system. By prescription (see below). The pharmacy sales of opiated products, opiumand heroin would be regulated by officers of the ODR, not by thepolice. The retail system would be accompanied by aneducation, information and referral system. A general educationcampaign would be carried out to provide the rationale for thissystem and to explain its workings. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning weight,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of heroin and other opioids would be taxed. There would be no advertising or marketing ofopioid products except for the minimum necessary for brandidentification. Realistic education materials would be availablein a range of formats to opioid product buyers. Training would also be provided to pharmacistsin early identification of opiate-related problems, assessment ofthese problems, and referral for assistance via prescribedopioids, drug treatment or other help as negotiated with theconsumer. Part of this training would be in obtaining informationfrom new buyers about their level of knowledge of opioid use, andensuring that new buyers especially have access to appropriateeducation materials. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of heroin or other opioids. Prescription The prescribing system should be establishedfor registered "dependents" (people who are or believethat they are dependent on a drug). Such a prescription systemwould have the following as its essential elements: The system should have as its core values harmreduction and full consumer participation. The system should havean entry assessment to ensure that the individual wants to bemaintained on an opioid drug. Assessment must be carried out by atrained, qualified drugs worker. A full and frank assessment ofthe likely consequences of a range of options includingmaintenance, detoxification, selective detoxification, controlledusing, etc should be negotiated with the individual. The prescription system should make available achoice of the five most popular opioid drugs in a variety offorms for oral or injectable use, in a range of doses up to anegotiated maximum dose when they so desire. To avoid "double" prescribing, acomputerised register would be kept of the dependent person'sname, address, preferred drug(s) and maximum dose(s). Options for dispensing should also benegotiated. They may include: Pharmacy dispensing Drug clinicdispensing Home delivery for long-term illness or palliativecare. Safe injecting spaces ("shooting rooms") in areaswith a high concentration of drug injectors, especially those whoare homeless. The system should be costed at a reasonable feeto the consumer. Services to clients on low incomes should bedelivered through the public health system. Operating costs willbe supplemented by some of the revenues from the ODR. It would remain illegal to import or exportheroin and opioids. Amphetamine It would be legal to consume amphetamine and topossess small quantities (2 grams) for personal use. It would remain illegal to manufacture, supplyor traffic in currently amphetamine except as follows: Amphetamine would be manufactured under licenceto a State Government Office of Drug Revenue (ODR) and sold inpharmacies to people over the age of 18. Prices of these productswould be set so that they are much higher than cannabis products.Sales of amphetamine would be in small quantities only (enoughfor 3-4 episodes of intoxication). Taxes on sales would be usedto fund treatment and education programs and to subsidise thatprescription program. By prescription. The pharmacy sales of amphetamine would beregulated by officers of the ODR, not by the police. The retail system would be accompanied by aneducation, information and referral system. A general educationcampaign would be carried out to provide the rationale for thissystem and to explain its workings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of amphetamine would be taxed. Realistic education materials would beavailable in a range of formats to amphetamine buyers. There would be no advertising or marketing ofamphetamine except for strictly limited brand identification. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning weight,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. It would remain illegal to import or exportamphetamine. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of amphetamine. Training would also be provided to pharmacistsin early identification of amphetamine-related problems,assessment of these problems, and referral for assistance viaprescribed amphetamine, drug treatment or other help asnegotiated with the consumer. Part of this training would be inobtaining information from new buyers about their level ofknowledge of stimulant use, and ensuring that new buyersespecially have access to appropriate education materials. The prescription system should be establishedfor registered "dependents" (people who are or whobelieve they are dependent on a drug). Such a system should havethe same essential elements as the opioid prescribing systemdescribed above. Ecstasy It would be legal to consume ecstasy and topossess up to 2 grams or 10 tablets. Ecstasy may be manufactured and sold underlicence in pharmacies to people over the age of 18. Licences tomanufacturers, distributors and pharmacists would be issued by aState Government Office of Drug Revenue (ODR). Pharmacists licensed to sell ecstasy would berequired to complete suitable training in the pharmacologicaleffects of MDMA. Part of this training would in obtaininginformation from new buyers about their level of knowledge ofecstasy use, and ensuring that new buyers especially have accessto appropriate education materials. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning ingredients,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Ecstasy shouldbe manufactured for sale in standardised doses. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of ecstasy would be taxed. Rave parties would be allowed subject topromoters obtaining a licence. To qualify for a licence,promoters must demonstrate that arrangements have been made toprovide adequate supplies of free water, chill out rooms, andother appropriate health measures. [If a significant black marketpersists, it may be necessary to have a pharmacologist on-site toanalyse tablets and powders on the request of patrons.] Health information should be made available inappropriate formats at places where ecstasy use is predictable(eg raves). This information would include advice to drinkadequate water and to rest and cool down regularly. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of ecstasy. It would remain illegal to import or exportecstasy. Anabolic Steroids Steroids represent a separate and differentphenomenon of drug use to traditional psychoactive drugs. Therelationship between effect desired and effect obtained isspecific, and has less to do with the social and environmentalcontext of drug use. A harm reduction approach to steroid usewould include medical supervision of training and diet, as wellas psychological and physical monitoring (such as testing forliver and kidney function). It would be legal to use or possess smallquantities of anabolic steroids, provided the user holds acurrent prescription from a medical practitioner authorisingtheir use. Prescriptions may be issued for a maximumsingle period of one month. Prescriptions could be renewed onlyafter consultation with the prescriber. Training in the physical and psychologicaleffects of steroid use would be provided to those medicalpractitioners who wish to be steroid prescribers. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning ingredients,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Education campaigns should be undertaken aimedat encouraging steroid users to moderate the quantities anddosages used, and to use steroids only under medical supervision. Research should continue into the physical andpsychological effects of use of anabolic steroids, especiallylong term use. The results of this research should be promotedwidely among steroid users. Sporting organisations would be able tocontinue to ban steroid users from competition, and to testcompetitors for steroid use. It would remain illegal to import or exportanabolic steroids. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-11IA031-000652-B048-249http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132600 text/html 9035HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:25:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:14 GMTContent-length: 8820 5. Comments on the Harm Reduction Model Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 5 Comments on the Harm Reduction Model Respondents were asked to comment in broadterms about the desirability of controlled availability, andabout the Principles for Controlled Availability outlined in thepaper. Responses were received from the same groupunder the same conditions outlined in Chapter 3. General remarks General comments on the Model included: "I would argue that we need to examinespecific regulatory options in terms of their potential for harmminimisation and, in particular, to assess the relationshipbetween drug-related harm and particular forms of markets andsystems of distribution. As Nicholas Dorn and Nigel South haverecently suggested in the UK context, we need to ask: 'What sortof markets do we least dislike, and how can we adjust the controlmix so as to push markets in the least undesired (harmful)direction." "Some of the specific goals proposed forrational drug policy have still to be tested. The means ofimplementing controls on age, advertising and marketing, andadequate knowledge about safe use are unknown. There shouldcertainly be a framework of treatment for drug related problems.The prescription system is untested, as is the assessmentprocess." "I wish to endorse (the Model's) contents,especially the point that prohibition has had no positiveresults. I am not competent to suggest any amendments except toadd that I was a registered nurse for about thirty-fiveyears." "Unfortunately, the (Model) goes muchfurther than the harm minimisation principles of the NationalDrug Strategy, to the point of having few controls onavailability at all." "In general, harm reduction strategiespresuppose the impossibility of addressing the undesirablebehaviour and hence direct attention to the consequences. What isnot clear, in my mind, is how we define the I undesirablebehaviour' with which we are dealing. In other words, is drug usea cause or result of other social or behavioural problems?" Controlled availability Should we adopt a "controlledavailability" approach in the long term as the best policydirection for currently illicit drugs? Fourteen were in favour of the concept ofcontrolled availability as outlined in the paper, six wereagainst. Comments: "Supported, because it's sensible." "(Controlled availability) is needed asthe next step in harm minimisation." "We need education about drug effects, andresearch too. Controlled availability provides a means both ofgenerating data and of informing users." "Sends the wrong message to youngpeople." "Supported, provided that: it isresearched for each drug group research is open and rigorous onlymove to next group if research is favourable" "Controlled availability as defined seemsmore like 'uncontrolled availability' when over-the-counteroptions are included. All drugs with a medical purpose that canhelp people with an addiction problem should be available onprescription, but not over-the-counter." "Can't answer for all drugs at this stage.Support idea for cannabis." "I am unconvinced as to the merits of a'blanket' approach to controlled availability. More convinced asto the merits of controlled availability of cannabis, perhapsecstasy, and favour prescribing system for heroin." Internal consistency Is the Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability internally coherent? For example, are the principlesconsistent with the stated goals? Seventeen said yes, four said no. Comments: "Good effort in putting all this together... the way you've done it contains a lot of common sense." "I don't think the mechanisms ofcontrolled availability have been spelt out in enough detail tomake a judgment about harm minimisation for all drugs." "They're the best considered proposalsI've yet seen coming from an Australian source ... May theseproposals enjoy wide readership." "Raises all the right questions which needto be addressed. The current system needs to be challenged." "The document could be strengthened bydescribing the pros and cons of each method of delivery (Eg,prescription and over the counter)." Principles Do you broadly support the Principles ofControlled Availability set out in the Harm Reduction Model ofrug Availability? Eighteen were in favour, five were opposed. Comments: "The closest to the mark we've seen sofar." "It is this kind of extremism that offersopponents of harm minimisation strategies a platform from whichto jump." "You should be congratulated for doing theexercise. By being specific about details, you give everybody achance to tear it apart. But that is positive." "We congratulate the Drug Law ReformProject on the production of such a positive and practical Model,one that if fully and successfully implemented by governments andother decision makers, would most certainly contribute to asubstantial reduction of hepatitis C transmission. We lookforward to hearing of progress on its implementation." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-12IA031-000652-B048-266http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/redfern/rf6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132609 text/html 8918HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:25:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:18 GMTContent-length: 8703 6. Future Drug Law Reform Activities Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 6. Future drug law reform activities Future -activities for the Redfern Drug LawReform Project are -likely to include closer links to othercommittees and organisations working on drug law reform in NewSouth Wales. These groups are growing in number and diversity andinclude in their members the parents, siblings and friends ofpeople who have died from overdose, AIDS or other drug-relatedcauses, doctors, lawyers, professors and emeritus professors ofmedicine and pharmacology, drug users, health care workers,clerks, needle exchange workers, historians and artists. In turn, these NSW groups are working closelywith groups in other States and with the Australian Drug LawReform Foundation to address issues of drug policy and relatedlaw reform in every jurisdiction in Australia. The documentscontained in this report will be examined again next year to seewhether further changes and refinements are needed. Anotherreport of people's comments on the documents will also bereleased at some point in 1997. Individuals and organisations are invited toendorse, abuse or otherwise comment on the documents and to sendthese comments to: Drug Law Reform Project Redfern Legal Centre 73 Pitt St Redfern 2016 New South Wales Australia Fax: 61-2-9310-3586 Acknowledgments The main author of this report was Steve Bolt,who served as project officer from mid-1994 until August 1996.Dave Burrows, was the main author of the Harm Reduction Model ofControlled Drug Availability, and assisted Steve in finalisingthis report and preparing it for publication. Timothy Mooreassisted in writing the report and Harriet Grahame of RedfernLegal Centre carried out crucial work in facilitating manyaspects of the Project. Members of the Redfern Legal CentreManagement Committee assisted the Project in many ways from itsinitial funding to monitoring its activities, providinginstitutional support and attending Project committee meetings.Thanks also go to the many people who provided comments for thisreport, and to the many people who participated in the Projectcommittee over the past two years. Appendix 1 Comments were sought from the followingorganisations/individuals (asterisk means a response wasreceived). Where individuals are identified, they spoke asindividuals and not necessarily as representing theirorganisations: Hepatitis C Council of NSW* AIDS Council of NSW* Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations* NSW Users and AIDS Association Australian IV League* HEMP Nimbin* National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre: Dr Lisa Maher* Professor Wayne Hall Paul Dillon Dr Shane Darke Centre for Education and Information on Drugsand Alcohol: Meriel Schultz* We Help Ourselves Garth Popple* Odyssey House* NSW Law Society NSW Bar Association* Lawyers Reform Association Australian Medical Association* Doctors Reform Society Pharmacy Guild of Australia NSW Police Service Supt Frank Hansen Chief Supt Mal Brammer Lory Price* Police Association of NSW Greg Chilvers* Justice Action David Heilpern, solicitor Don Weatherburn* David McDonald* Peter Homel Dr Alex Wodak* Dr Nick Crofts Mike Lodge Owen Westcott Frank Quinlan Corrections Health Service Dr Peter B Paisle * Australian Drug Foundation Bill Stronach* University of NSW School of Community Medicine Professor Peter Baume* University of NSW Graduate School of Management Dr Robert Marks Macquarie University, School of Drug DependenceStudies John Howard* Professor Bill Saunders National Centre for Research into thePrevention of Drug Abuse Dr Wendy Loxley* Salvation Army Major Brian Watters* Ken Marslew* Angela and Tony Wood* United Nations Association* South Sydney Community Aid Cabramatta Community Centre Aboriginal Medical Service Youth Advocacy and Policy Association Parents and Citizens Federation Local Government Association Catholic Church* Uniting Church* Anglican Church* NSW Ambulance Service NSW Ambulance Officers Association Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT01-B33-13IA030-000641-B028-163http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/NONMED.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122141655 text/html 5933HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:16:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:16 GMTContent-length: 5716 Canadian Government Commission - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Le Dain Commission Report The Report of the Canadian GovernmentCommission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs This report, the largest study ever conducted by theGovernment of Canada, is coming soon to these pages. CONTENTS Chapter 1 - THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2 - THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Alcohol Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines LSD Cannabis Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Volatile Solvents References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3 - THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USEIN CANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4 - SOME CAUSES OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5 - PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6 - THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among Canadian HighSchool and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and Other Drugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND 'TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B33-14IA086-000619-B005-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/ophs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033415 text/html 91308HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:33:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:59 GMTContent-length: 91090 History of Legislative Control Over Opium, Cocaine, andTheir Derivatives Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE HISTORY OF LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM, COCAINE, ANDTHEIR DERIVATIVES by David F. Musto, MD Legislative control over dangerous drugs may be dated fromattempts in the nineteenth century to prevent acute poisoning bycertain substances that might be purchased in ignorance of theirlethal potential or might be too easily available to would-besuicides. Opium was being sold in a crude form containing about10 percent morphine, as well as in concoctions derived from crudeopium: paregoric, laudanum, and a solution in acetic acid knownas "black drop." Morphine had been isolated from opiumin 1805 by the German pharmacist, F. W. Serturner, but productionof the powerful active ingredient of opium on a large scale wasdelayed until the 1830s.1 From that time onward, in factories inGermany, Great Britain, and the United States, morphine wasproduced in great quantities. Thus when in 1868, Great Britaincame to enact pharmacy laws to control dangerous substances,"opium and all preparations of opium or of poppies" waslisted alongside such substances as oxalic acid as commoditiesthat could not be sold without being labeled "poison."' The Pharmacy Act of 1868 is an important symbol of legislativecontrol in a Western country. The act was not the most strictamong nations; perhaps the Prussian regulations were stricter andmore comprehensive, but establishment by the British of somelimitation on the availability of dangerous drugs-drugs thatwould eventually become more serious a problem for society asaddictive agents than as tools for suicide-was a policy alsofollowed by other European nations. It had an apparentlydiscouraging effect on the per capita consumption of opium,opiates, and cocaine in the late nineteenth century andcontributed to the low level of British consumption (at leastcompared to the American) right up to the 1960s.3 The experience of the United States stands in contrast toBritain's. The Pharmacy Act of 1868 was regulated in large partby the organized association of pharmacists, the PharmaceuticalSociety (established 1841). In order to retail, dispense, orcompound "poisons," or to assume the title of chemist,druggist, pharmacist, or dispensing druggist or chemist, theindividual had to be registered by the Pharmaceutical Society. Aswell as being the testing and registering body, the Society wasalso given the initial responsibility for adding new drugs to thepoison list. Thus the law, which ultimately would be enforced inBritish courts, was monitored by local members of thePharmaceutical Society as a tool in competition with unregistereddruggists, grocers, and anyone else who might attempt to purveythese drugs to the public. While the act presumably aided the public health by havingdangerous drugs sold or dispensed by individuals knowledgeableabout their qualities, it was also a convenient aid to the tradeof registered pharmacists. Although the drugs could be obtainedwith no specific restraint on the amount or frequency of sale,the bottles had to be labeled "poison." A strictercategory of substances also required that the purchaser be anacquaintance of the pharmacist or someone the pharmacist knew.This list included arsenic and "strychnine and all poisonousalkaloids and their salts." The impact of this modestobstacle to the acquirement of dangerous drugs should not beunderestimated. Further, the self-interest that would motivateregistered pharmacists to monitor breaches of the law provided anunpaid, but interested, drug enforcement cadre scatteredthroughout Great Britain. "Patent medicines" wereexcepted from these controls, and this led to a campaign againstthem later in the century, but the pure forms of the drugs, e.g.,morphine suitable for injection, were restricted in availabilityfrom the time of the Pharmacy Act onward.' In the United States,throughout the nineteenth century, both medicine and pharmacyremained essentially unorganized, although there were somephysicians and pharmacists attempting to organize theirprofessions. The American Medical Association, which was foundedin 1847 and which we now might think of as the dominant medicalorganization, was a small and nationally unrepresentative groupuntil about World War 1.5 The American PharmaceuticalAssociation, founded four years later, grew slowly and, like theAMA, lacked the authority to license practitioners. The pharmacyestablishment was divided sharply among drug manufacturers,wholesalers, and retailers, whose divergent interests the APhAtried to coordinate, but each segment of the profession came towork through its own organization: the National WholesaleDruggists' Association (1882), the National Association of RetailDruggists (1898), and many other groups.6 There was no nationalgroup for the health professions to which government could turnfor regulation, even if the American constitutional system hadpermitted such an arrangement. Licensing of pharmacists and physicians, which was the centralgovernment's responsibility in European nations, was, in theUnited States, a power reserved to each individual state. In theera of Andrew Jackson, any form of licensing that appeared togive a monopoly to the educated was attacked as a contradictionof American democratic ideals. State after state repealed themedical licensing laws adopted in earlier days. Practicalconcerns also supported repeal: Legislators preferred to leave itto the patients to decide which of the many competing theories ofmedicine was the best. Instead of moving toward a national systemof licensing for health professionals, therefore, individualstates were deregulating the professions. American medicalschools were similarly unregulated, and many flourished-some nobetter than diploma mills. The states did not beginreestablishment of medical licensing until the 1880s, and eventhen the movement was spotty, with a wide range of standards.'Pharmacists, also seeking to raise standards and limitcompetition, likewise fought at the state level for licensing,since the U.S. Constitution placed in the hands of states theregulation of the health professions. Although some requirementsfor labeling of over-the counter medicines would come with thePure Food and Drug Act of 1906 as an exercise of the federalright to regulate interstate commerce, in general, the nineteenthand early twentieth century interpretation of the Constitutionfavored a strict division between state and federal powers. The status of legislative control of dangerous drugs duringthe nineteenth century may be summed up as follows: The UnitedStates had no practical control over the health professions, norepresentative national health organizations to aid thegovernment in drafting regulations, and no controls on thelabeling, composition, or advertising of compounds that mightcontain opiates or cocaine. The United States not only proclaimeda free marketplace, it practiced this philosophy with regard tonarcotics in a manner unrestrained at every level of preparationand consumption. Through a slower pace of professional development, the UnitedStates also lagged behind Britain and other European countries inestablishing broadly based organizations representing thenation's physicians or pharmacists to which the centralgovernment could turn for regulation. Second, the form ofgovernment adopted in the United States, a federation of partlyindependent states, was a conscious attempt to preventestablishment of an all-powerful central governmentcharacteristic of Europe. In the nineteenth century, thisremarkably successful form of government entailed each statemaking its own regulation if it wished to; the result was anarray of controls that varied from one state to another. In fact,states made little attempt to control addictive drugs until quitelate in the last century, and those efforts did not prove veryeffective. During the first part of the nineteenth century, the amount ofopiates used in the United States may have been comparable tothat used in Britain, where some areas, notably the fen counties,had a fairly large per capita consumption. Inhabitants thereoften took a dose of laudanum or some form of opium daily to keepaway the fevers associated with the marshlands.8 More generally,parents reputedly purchased one or another form of opium to rubon the gums of teething infants or to spoon-feed a child toinduce sleep so that the mother without provision for child carecould work in the local factory. These accounts are anecdotal,but recent historical studies do suggest that the taking of someform of opium for pain, sleep, or to ward off illness was notuncommon. The occasional death of an infant from an overdose ofopium or the suicide of an adult by means of opium promptedparliamentary interest in the distribution and labeling of thedrug. In large measure, the 1868 Pharmacy Act was the result. Oneshould note however, that through the provisions of the act andthe designation of the Pharmaceutical Society as the mostresponsible body, the pharmacists also achieved some control overthe profession and a lead on the other health professions. Asomewhat similar victory for U.S. pharmacy would be found in thedetails of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914.9 In nineteenth-century America, the unimpeded importation ofopium and the free economy in opiates do give an advantage to thehistorian, for estimates of per capita consumption are morereliable when there are few restrictions on the importation,sale, and consumption of a product. Because the growth of poppieswithin the country and preparation of opium from them seem tohave been a minor contributor to American use, the importstatistics, begun in 1840 and continued to the present day, arereliable as a guide to domestic consumption until the HarrisonAct of 1914. Certainly the minimum level and the trend can beobserved. After the Harrison Act, these statistics grew lessreliable, for smuggling becomes a more uncertain variable, but wecan say that at least during the nineteenth century the annualper capita consumption rose steadily from about 12 grains in 1840(an average single dose being one grain) until the mid-1890s,when it reached 52 grains annually per capita. Then statisticsshow that average individual consumption gradually subsided up to1914, by which time the per capita rate had fallen back to thelevel of about 1880." In Great Britain, the per capitaconsumption declined during the latter half of the nineteenthcentury." During that same period, opium use in the UnitedStates rose dramatically. The peak of opiate addiction in theUnited States occurred about the turn of the century, when thenumber probably was close to 250,000 in a population of 76million, a rate so far never equaled or exceeded. 12 Heroin hadbeen introduced into the pharmacy in 1898 and had contrastingimpacts in Britain and the United States. In New York City, theaddiction capital of the United States, heroin became the drug ofchoice for recreational addicts, and the number of addicts wasmeasured in the tens of thousands by 1920. In Britain, theaddiction rate for heroin addicts by 1920 was minuscule. 13 Ofcourse, the use of drugs is determined by many factors, but Iwould like to suggest that the contrast in easy availability ofnarcotics in America and Britain-created by political and socialfactors removed from considerations of addiction-underlay thestrikingly different rates of addiction each country experiencedwell into this century. The rise in addiction with which we aremore familiar, that of the 1950s and more recently, appears to beassociated with additional factors that will be discussed later. Americans have something to learn from their earlier andextensive consumption of opiates, including heroin, and alsomassive consumption of cocaine, which occurred before World WarI. This era is forgotten. We commonly act as if the heroin"epidemic" of the 1960s or the current cocaine"epidemic" is a new phenomenon in the United States,that the widespread use of a drug implies that legalization or"decriminalization" is the only reasonable response.The history of attempts at legislative control in the UnitedStates suggests that other courses may be effective and thatthese alternatives to legalization appear to have reducedenormous opiate and cocaine consumption in the United Statesearlier in this century. Therefore, it is worthwhile to considerthese early efforts at narcotic limitation if we are to approachcontemporary policy issues with an appreciation of the range ofpolicy options that reduce or encourage ingestion of thesesubstances. For in spite of the great difference in addictionrates between the United States and Great Britain in 1920, theUnited States did reduce its addiction rate to a relatively smallnumber. On the other hand, the low heroin addiction rate in GreatBritain prior to the 1950s did not prove a protection againstdrug problems in that nation, although the level of use inBritain has not reached the proportions to which we areaccustomed in the United States. Clearly the social and legalfactors affecting drug use are complex, and there is no singleinfluence that determines a particular level of drug use andabuse. AMERICAN LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM AND OPIATES TO 1914 The role of opium and its derivatives in the United States canbe traced independently from cocaine until 1914, when thesesubstances were linked together as "narcotics" throughthe Harrison Act. Technically, only the opiates are narcotics,that is, sleep-inducing, and they all have different effects.Nevertheless, most dangerous drugs, including cannabis, weregrouped under the rubric "narcotics" from at least the1920s until the 1960s. As mentioned above, opium was available in many forms derivedfrom crude opium long before the nineteenth century. In America,the two developments that spurred both consumption and concernabout opium were (1) the isolation of morphine and its injectioninto the body with hypodermic syringes and (2) the introductionof smoking opium, which had been brought to the United Statesmainly by a feared minority, Chinese laborers imported to helpbuild western railroads. The much greater ease of addictionthrough use of morphine compared to the more dilute formsemployed previously focused attention on the drug, medicalpractitioners, and modern technology in the form of thehypodermic syringe. Consumption of opium in the United States rose steadily beforeand after the Civil War. There had been complaints before the warabout "opium drunkards" by such prominent andprogressive physicians as Oliver Wendell Holmes, but in thesecond half of the century, physicians, as well as the generalpublic, widely deplored opium and morphine addiction. To beaddicted to morphine was to harbor a shameful secret to be hiddenfrom others at whatever cost, a point illustrated in EugeneO'Neill's moving play about his own family, Long Day's Journeyinto Night. Written in his later years, it was based on hismother's addiction by a thoughtless physician, and the pain ofthis memory had remained so great that O'Neill would not permitthe play's production during his lifetime. The leading Americansurgeon and the first professor of surgery at The Johns HopkinsHospital, William Stewart Halsted, was a morphine addict for thelast several decades of his life. His secret was kept hiddencarefully until the publication of Sir William Osler's privatediary in 1969." Osler had been Halsted's physician whileOsler was on the Hopkins faculty. Halsted's addiction did notappear to interfere with his work. Americans received opium and morphine not only from theirphysicians for pain; they could receive what they wanted, forwhatever reason they chose, over the counter or from mail ordercatalogues. The American free enterprise system, coupled with thefederal system of government, meant that a bottle heavily lacedwith morphine could be sold across state lines as an"addiction cure" and affirmed on the label to containno morphine whatsoever, quite within the law. States could passlaws restricting such advertising, but they were not inclined todo so. Patent medicine companies were the leading advertisers inAmerican newspapers. They developed an ingenious protection fromprying investigations or public pressure to reveal secretformulas, or from any state requirement to make only valid claimsfor effectiveness: The proprietary manufacturers included intheir lucrative contracts with newspapers a proviso that theadvertising agreement would be void if the state in which thenewspaper was published enacted any laws affecting the sale ormanufacture of the nostrums. 11 In the nation's capital, the manufacturers also fought offrequirements that their nostrums be labeled as to contents. Billsto enact such a law under the interstate commerce clause of theConstitution were defeated repeatedly, but in the 1890s a newreforming spirit was evident in the nation. These reforms wereextensive, ranging from control over the use of forest land, togovernment inspection of meat and other comestibles and lawsrelating to adulterants in foods, and to drugs considered unsafe.Attention to the danger of narcotics using the termbroadly-accompanied the peak of per capita consumption in theUnited States. It is clear that what were regarded as the mostnegative aspects of drug use led to the passage of the newlegislation. The simplest reform, correct labeling, was part ofthe Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Any over-the-counter medicine- commonly these would be "patent medicines"-had to belabeled correctly as to inclusion of any of the following drugs:morphine, cocaine, cannabis, or chloral hydrate. A long-desiredreform, it simply informed the purchaser whether any of thesedrugs were present; it did not prevent purchase or restrict theamount of the drug. 16 Nevertheless, reports at the time indicatethat the amount of these substances dropped from a third to ahalf as a response to public concern.17 Although the newspapersremained quiet, widely read magazines such as Collier's andLadies Home Journal railed against patent medicines, especiallyagainst morphine and cocaine. Even after passage of thetruth-in-labeling laws, the magazines continued their exposesunabated until the next major step, which was restriction on theavailability of the drugs themselves." Tracing the movement to restriction, as opposed to labelingaccuracy, requires a step back to the mid-nineteenth century.Patent medicines are thought to have created some addiction, butthe number of addicts is difficult to estimate. That physiciansaddicted or assisted in the addiction of patients is morecertain. The problem of iatroaddiction initially was approachedby limiting renewal of prescriptions for opiates. These legalcontrols were mostly in the form of additions to the healthstatutes and depended for their efficacy on the judgments ofphysicians and pharmacists. These controls would not, of course,affect interstate commerce in narcotics or the familiar patentmedicines, which still could be bought over the counter. Noconsistent police efforts to enforce these laws appear to havebeen undertaken.18 As the public and leaders of the health professions becamemore aware of the growing number of those addicted to opiates,chiefly morphine, state laws were amended to be more stringent,and the police occasionally staged crackdowns. As will berecalled, however, the professions were pretty much unorganizedand struggling to achieve mandatory licensing; a threat to takeaway a license could not hold much fear until a license wasrequired to begin with. Legislators also felt, or at leastclaimed, a helplessness when neighboring states did not enactstrict laws-a circumstance more familiar to us with variationsin- the legal drinking age between states-with the result thatenforcement was weak. This circumstance, combined with a poorlytrained medical profession, a lack of professional organization,and an absence of laws controlling either patent medicine orinterstate commerce in drugs, left local controls more symbolicthan effective. The nineteenth century's last decade brought the rise of whatwould come to be called the Progressive Movement, a set ofreforms usually taking the form of federal laws affecting theentire nation with the ostensible purpose of improving thenation's morals or resisting the selfish actions of the rich andpowerful. Alongside it grew a temperance, soon a prohibition,movement that would eventuate in the Eighteenth Amendmentmandating prohibition of alcohol distribution for nonmedicalpurposes in the United States. In many ways, of course, theantialcohol movement was part of the Progressive Era; itsstartling success and later dramatic repeal have given thealcohol issue a somewhat separate development in our minds, butthe interrelation between the battles against alcohol and againstnarcotics is an important one. The antialcohol crusade helpedestablish the attitude that there could be no compromise with theforces of evil, that "moderation" was a false conceptwhen applied to alcohol: Prohibition was the only logical ormoral policy when dealing with this great national problem. Bythe nineteenth century a new wave of state prohibition laws wasenacted. These were tempered by the contemporary constitutionalunderstanding that a state prohibition law did not preventpurchase of liquor from a "wet" state, for that wouldbe a form of interstate commerce and not subject to the states'powers. This assumption helped placate some doubters aboutprohibition, but the staunch fighters against alcohol also soughtto remove that loophole. This they did through the Webb-KenyonAct of 1913. Without going into the details of the broad andinvolved movement that led to national prohibition, we shouldnote that the significance for the control of narcotics is thatanother dangerous substance, over which there was even moredispute as to the means of control, progressed inexorably towarda policy of "no maintenance" and no compromise. Themoral question of how to deal with a dangerous substance wasbeing fought out over alcohol, but the case would be strongereven with narcotics when that issue was brought to nationaldeliberation. The means by which the narcotics issue arose at the federallevel was accidental. Certainly it would have come to theattention of Congress and the president eventually as a corollaryto the alcohol prohibition movement or as a way of controllingaddiction, which was becoming a target of journalist reformersand physicians. It was acquisition of the Philippines through theSpanish-American War that occasioned action by the federalgovernment. Again, in order to understand how the Philippines forced thecentral government to take action on opium, it is necessary toappreciate the divisions between federal and state powers thatwere so marked until the last half-century. The Philippines,unlike a state, came directly and wholly under the control of thefederal government. At last, Congress could not avoid makingdecisions on such matters as the local availability of opium.Opium had been provided to Chinese on the Philippine Islandsthrough a Spanish government monopoly. Civil Governor WilliamHoward Taft considered whether the monopoly should bereinstituted. It was his judgment that this would be reasonableand that the profits from the opium monopoly could be used tohelp educate Filipinos, a task the United States eagerly acceptedas it sought to provide a model government for its first colony.20 It was at the point in 1903, when this reinstitution waspassing through the Philippine government under the eye of CivilGovernor Taft, that the moral question of compromising with"evil" affected the future of opium's legalavailability in that land. Missionaries in Manila and in theUnited States had learned that "tainted money" fromopium sales was to be employed for education, and they besoughtPresident Theodore Roosevelt to prevent this moral wrong. Heordered Taft to stop the bill, and that was the end of it. Themood of moral leaders in the United States was sufficient duringthe first few years of this century to prevent any such"maintenance" program, even if it was restricted, aspromised, to the Chinese in the Philippines. This immediatereaction to allowing opium to be used for purely"recreational" purposes, coming even before the Foodand Drug Act, gave a signal as to how the federal governmentwould respond to later questions regarding the legal supply ofopium to individuals, not for medical reasons but for enjoymentor to satisfy their addiction. In response to the veto from Washington, Governor Taftappointed an Opium Investigation Committee to consider how otherAsian territories handled the opium problem. This committeeintroduces us to Bishop Charles Henry Brent, the ProtestantEpiscopal bishop of the Philippines, who had come out with Taftto help in Americanization of this new possession. Bishop Brentlater would become world famous for his pioneer efforts to launchthe ecumenical movement among Christian churches, but his secondclaim to fame was as a world leader against nonmedicinal uses ofnarcotics. He was appointed to the committee, which traveled toJapan, Formosa, Shanghai, Saigon, and Singapore examining howother nations dealt with the opium user. He and the other membersof the committee found the Japanese policy in Formosa, a Japanesepossession since its seizure from China in 1895, to be the mosteffective and enlightened. Japan opposed smoking opium but didnot try to stop confirmed addicts abruptly from indulging intheir habit. Japan, hoped to "mature out" the opiumsmokers and leave an opium-free colony. In Japan, itself, opiumuse was controlled stringently by the government, rare even amongChinese aliens, and strongly deprecated by Japanese society. The Philippine Opium Investigation Committee recommended that(1) male opium smokers over 21 should be registered in order toreceive opium from a reinstituted government monopoly and (2)after a three-year period, the amount provided the smokers bereduced gradually until the smokers had been completely weanedfrom the drug. 1 But Congress reacted more sternly. Congressdecreed immediate opium prohibition, except for medicinalpurposes, for all native Filipinos; non-Filipinos-mostlyChinese-were allowed a three-year period of use. Over 12,000non-Filipino opium users were registered, and their usual dosagewas maintained for two-and-onehalf years. During the final sixmonths of the three-year leniency period ending March 1908, theopium provided was gradually reduced to zero. For officialpurposes, opium smoking had stopped in the Philippine Islands.One additional point: The opium dispensing stations establishedunder these laws were the first American narcotic clinics,although their goal was not long-term maintenance but ratherregistration and detoxification. The Philippine situation forced the federal government to takea stand on opium use for nonmedicinal purposes, and the decisionwas to prohibit. To Congress, once the question was posed,compromise with narcotics was not a politically practicalalternative. The Philippines also gave the United Statesleadership of the international control of narcotics, a role itstill holds. It was apparent to the Opium Investigating Committeethat the solution to the Philippine opium problem lay in thecontrol of international trafficking in opium, as well as in thecurtailment of opium production in the original producing states,such as India, China, Burma, Persia, and Turkey, to name some ofthe most prominent sites for the cultivation of the opium poppy. At the time that the Philippines were perceived to be a victimof external sources of opium, the United States was havingincreasing problems with the Chinese Empire. Owing tomaltreatment of Chinese in the United States, merchants in Chinaplanned a voluntary embargo on American goods. This worriedAmerican industrialists, wholesalers, exporters, and the federalgovernment. China had also embarked on a vigorous effort to riditself of opium use and, employing draconian methods, was havingsome success. As a means to indicate good will to China, to aidthe Philippine opium problem, and to take an internationalleadership position on a moral issue of the times, the UnitedStates proposed, following Bishop Brent's suggestion to PresidentRoosevelt, to convene an international meeting at Shanghai toconsider the opium traffic among nations and to suggest ways inwhich China's antiopium campaign might be aided. Thus, the Shanghai Opium Commission came into being. It wouldmeet during February 1909, with Bishop Brent as its electedpresident. The group was designated a "commission"because the United States was unable to gain approval for a morepowerful convocation, a "conference," which underinternational law could draft a treaty that would, if ratified,bind the signatory states. A "commission," on the otherhand, could make findings of only fact or opinion. In addition tothe United States and China, those who accepted invitations toShanghai were Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, Persia,Japan, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Portugal, Siam, andRussia. Turkey accepted but did not send a representative. Persiawas represented by a local merchant. The resolutions adopted by the commission were merelyrecommendations and, even as such, had a comfortable vaguenessthat allowed a latitude of interpretations. For example,Resolution Three, taking cognizance of the near unanimousagreement that opium for nonmedicinal uses should be prohibitedor "carefully regulated," called upon nations to"reexamine" their laws. This could hardly be considereda clarion call for prohibition of nonmedical uses, but it wasBrent's goal to achieve a series of resolutions that at leastpointed in the direction of action to control traffic innarcotics, with the hope that a future conference would enact atreaty initiating such control." The road from the Shanghai Opium Commission to the Hague OpiumConference, which convened in December 1911 and resulted in theOpium Convention of 1912, was a tortuous one, but after theShanghai meeting, the United States continued to press for asecond and more significant gathering. Eventually, the nationsgathered in The Hague, and once again Bishop Brent was electedthe presiding officer. The Hague Opium Convention (which concerned cocaine as well asopium) placed the burden of narcotic control on the domesticlegislation of each nation. Chapter Three of the conventioncalled for control of each phase of the preparation anddistribution of medicinal opium, morphine, heroin, cocaine, andany new derivative that could be shown to have similar properties.24 The convention was not put into force by the dozen nations whoattended the First Opium Conference, for it was agreed that therequirements would be held in abeyance until all forty-six worldpowers had signed and ratified the convention. Eventually threeconferences were held, the second in 1913 and the third in 1914,only weeks before the outbreak of World War 1. A compromise wasreached regarding the implementation of the treaty: Any ratifyingnation was permitted to put the treaty into effect in 1915, evenif ratification had not been unanimous. But only seven nationsdid this by the end of the World War and the beginning of theVersailles treaty negotiations in 1919. The United Statessupported incorporating the Hague Convention into the Versaillestreaty, so that ratification of the treaty ending World War Iwould at the same time bring the nation under the requirements ofthe Hague Convention, which required national and domesticlegislation to control the preparation and distribution ofopiates and cocaine. Of course, the United States never didratify the Versailles treaty, but it had already ratified theHague Convention in 1913 and had put it into effect in 1915. Onesignificant result of the inclusion of the Hague Convention inthe Versailles treaty was the passage in Britain of the DangerousDrugs Act of 1920, an action taken not because of any seriousproblem with addiction but because, by ratifying the Versaillestreaty, Britain had committed itself to comprehensive domesticlegislation. 25 DOMESTIC NARCOTIC LEGISLATION IN THE UNITED STATES During the year or so prior to the Shanghai Opium Commission,the United States suggested topics to be discussed in 1909, andone of the topics was a report on domestic antinarcoticlegislation. Americans understood that strong and enforceddomestic legislation in other nations would result in diminishingthe flow of drugs into the United States, but would other nationsunderstand why the United States had no national antinarcoticlegislation whatsoever? Americans knew that federal-stateseparation of powers made a national antinarcotic law ratherdifficult, but the State Department decided that something shouldbe on the books when the U.S. delegation arrived in Shanghai. The simplest law that could be framed and stand a chance ofpassage by the U.S. Congress before the commission opened was onethat excluded from the United States opium not intended forlegitimate medical uses or, in other words, opium prepared forsmoking. Here there was an ironic combination of politicalfactors. The United States hoped one of the major effects of theShanghai Commission would be to placate China with regard to thepoor treatment given Chinese nationals in the United States. Suchtreatment was in violation of our treaty obligations with China.The impetus for banning smoking opium from the United States,however, had developed from the fear and loathing of the Chinese,who were associated intimately with this particular manner ofingesting opium. Thus, the negative American attitude towardChinese aliens gave the push that passed a "facesaving" law designed to show China the good will of theUnited States. After the law was enacted on February 9, 1909, it wasannounced dramatically in Shanghai to the other nations as proofof American sincerity.26 And yet no one in the Americandelegation or within the State Department had any illusions thatthis law would control domestic narcotic use. Additionallegislation was seen as imperative both to curtail the Americannarcotics problem and to display an American example to othernations where the implementation of narcotics control programswas essential to the solution of the American domestic problem. Dr. Hamilton Wright, a physician with political interests whohad been appointed opium commissioner by the State Department in1908, oversaw the State Department's preparation for the Shanghaimeeting, which included culling information from policedepartments, physicians, pharmaceutical houses, etc., regardingthe narcotic problem and consumption in the United States. BishopBrent was the chairman of the delegation, but after his elevationto the commission's presidency, Wright became the acting head.Back in Washington after the commission meeting, Wright took upthe battle for an international meeting that could frame a treatyand played a leading role in the preparation of domesticantinarcotic legislation. He had opposition within the StateDepartment on both questions, but he finally won the assent ofPhilander C. Knox, the secretary of state, and moved ahead. Wright, who combined an aggressive personal style withself-righteousness and a thirst for political preferment, wasless effective than he otherwise might have been. He never gotthe prize plum for which he yearned, the ministry to China, andhis chief claim for notability, the Anti-Narcotic Act of 1914,known even then as the "Harrison" Act, left him at themoment of achievement with almost no further role in theantinarcotic movement. Eventually, he volunteered to help thewounded on the western front during World War 1, was injured 27there in an automobile accident, and died in 1917 in Washington.His indomitable wife, Elizabeth Washburn Wright, carried on his28 battle for world control of narcotics until her death in 1952. In late 1909 Dr. Wright proposed a domestic law that would bebased on the federal government's power of taxation. Thealternative federal power was that over interstate commerce, butWright believed that taxation would result in a detailedaccounting of narcotics from their introduction into the UnitedStates to their distribution to manufacturers, wholesalers, andretailers, including pharmacists and physicians. Heavy fineswould be levied on anyone not keeping records accurately orselling and transferring these products without proper reportingand payment of taxes. Wright tried to solve the federal/state dichotomy in thismanner: The information obtained by this proposed law would bemade available to state boards of pharmacy and medicine, whichwould then take appropriate action to ensure that "theproper relations . . . should exist between the physician, thedispensing druggist, [and] those who have some real need of thedrugs.' "29 So it is evident that at this early stage, twoyears before the Hague Convention, Wright and the StateDepartment did not envision a federal role in policing therelationships between, say, an addict and his or her supplyingpharmacist or physician. The sanctity of the state's policepowers would be maintained; the federal government would supplyonly information. Reformers believed that the information,however, could lead a responsible state agency to take only oneaction, that is, to curb the supply of narcotics to those who didnot have a medical need for it-and "mere" addicts didnot fall into that category. The Foster Anti-Narcotic Bill (1910-1911) Republican Congressman David Foster of Vermont introducedWright's bill in April 1910. In addition to opium and cocaine, asin the eventual Harrison Act, the bill was aimed at cannabis(marijuana) and chloral hydrate, the same substances the Food andDrug Act of 1906 required to be revealed on labels. It did notallow small amounts of the drugs in mild remedies such as coughsyrup to be exempt from the stringent reporting requirements andtheir severe penalties. Druggists feared the multitude of stampsand labels at each stage; the fines, which would range from $500to $5,000; and the one-to-five-year jail sentences. The word"knowingly" did not qualify the prohibited actions,making it likely that simple errors without any intention todeceive would result in horrendous punishments. Although supportfor the bill could be found, the individuals in the drug tradewould not endorse the detailed and hazardous provisions of theFoster Bill. It never came to a vote in the Sixty-first Congress,which ended in March 1911.30 The next Congress was marked by a significant change: For thefirst time in almost two decades, the Democrats gained control ofthe House of Representatives. The South now had achieved newimportance, in that committee chairmanships changed hands. In theSixty-second Congress the Foster Bill became the Harrison Bill,named after Francis Burton Harrison, a New York City Democrat whoserved on the Foreign Relations Committee. Dr. Wright continuedhis difficult task of trying to obtain the most stringent billconsistent with winning essential political support from themedical and pharmaceutical interests and now from the DemocraticParty. In order to mitigate the severity of the original FosterBill, the drug trades established the National Drug TradeConference, which would represent the major trade associationsand try to reach a compromise position on the complexantinarcotic bill. The NDTC, which first met in Washington, D.C.,in January 1913, provided the most powerful influence on thewriting of what would become known as the Harrison Act." The attitude of the newly influential southern Democratstoward any potential invasion of states' rights now had to betaken more seriously. These politicians feared an interferencewith the South's local laws, which enforced racial segregationand Negro disenfranchisement. They remembered the era of"reconstruction," when the North ruled the Southfollowing 1865, and wanted to maintain the authority the whitecitizenry had subsequently won with the withdrawal of troops and"carpetbaggers." The narcotic control proposalsthreatened to intrude federal authority into the states,affecting local pharmacists and physicians and threatening toreach right into a neighborhood and send an individual to federalprison. Furthermore, this example of using the federal tax powerprimarily to achieve a moral end-for the taxes were not intendedto bring in a significant revenue but rather to force disclosureand compliance with rules of narcotics distribution-could be aprecedent for other concerns brewing in the United States, suchas protecting Negro voting rights in the South. Dr. Wright, therefore, faced a new set of attitudes in theDemocratic-controlled House. He reacted by stressing the impactof narcotics, especially cocaine, on Negroes. He attributedattacks on whites to the crazed Negro cocaine fiend. He alsoargued that many poor Negroes would not have the energy orknowledge to send away for the cocaine, so the conclusion must bethat northern businessmen who did not care about the South'sconcerns were shipping-via interstate commerce-cocaine toNegroes. Further, unscrupulous or ignorant employers were said tobe supplying cocaine to their Negro workers .32 One further concern about the precedent the antinarcotic lawwould provide related to the flourishing prohibition movement. Asprohibition was achieved in state after state, the loophole forat least the upper and middle classes was that alcohol could beordered across state lines and shipped into a dry state, forinterstate commerce was regulated by the federal government,which so far was not teetotal. The Webb-Kenyon Act of 1913,however, was passed to close this loophole, survived PresidentTaft's veto, and, much to the surprise of many, was declaredconstitutional by the Supreme Court. This occurrence removed oneof the stumbling blocks to the Harrison Bill, for now a nationalantinarcotic law could not serve as a precedent for curtailinginterstate commerce in a dangerous substance. In the course of all this maneuvering, no one rallied to thedefense of any of the drugs named for control except thatoccasionally cannabis was described by someone as nothabit-forming or not as serious as opium or cocaine. Perhapsbecause the cannabis problem was not seen to be serious orbecause the drug did not seem so dangerous, it was dropped fromthe proposed law. Chloral hydrate, a sleeping medicine, was alsodropped. The attitude toward opium and cocaine, however, wasalmost totally condemnatory. The only question was how to controltheir distribution most efficiently, since they had medicinalvalue but were also considered dangerously addicting. This was insharp contrast with alcohol; its use divided the nation, and hugelegitimate industries depended upon its continued consumption. The government and the trades eventually reached agreement onthe proposed law by moderating the record-keeping provisions,reducing penalties, and allowing the sale of patent medicineswith small amounts of narcotics in them. Representative Harrisonintroduced it in June 1913, and it was passed quickly by theHouse. In the Senate some amendments were offered, a few with anapparent goal of destroying the bill's chances of passage. InAugust of 1914, though, the Senate passed the bill, albeit with afew modifications that were compromised in Conference Committee.Finally, on December 17, 1914, President Wilson signed it intolaw, to become effective March 1, 1915. At last the United Stateshad redeemed its pledge to other nations that it would enact astringent law, as it had urged every other nation to do. The significance of the Harrison Act to strategists like Dr.Wright, though, was more than just the satisfaction of redeemingpledges made to questioning representatives of other nations. Forhim, the Harrison Act was the implementation of the HagueConvention of 1912, which called upon signatories to enactdomestic legislation controlling narcotics supplies anddistribution. Understood as the fulfillment of treatyobligations, the Harrison Act would have the authority to usurpthe states' police powers, for the Constitution in Article Sixgives treaties concluded by the United States supremacy over thelaws of states. This would resolve the problem of states' rightsinterfering with the ability of a national law to require auniform compliance with strict narcotics control .33 Unfortunately, the Supreme Court at first did not give a verystrict interpretation to the Harrison Act. In the first Jin FueyMoy case (1916), the Court declared by a six-to-two majority thatthe Harrison Act could not be understood as having been requiredby the Hague Convention and that physicians could prescribe asthey saw fit, even to simple addicts. 34 This decision was astunning blow to federal enforcement, which, from the first dayof the act's implementation, was directed at pharmacists andphysicians who sold prescriptions or treated addicts without anyintent to cure them. World War 1, arriving at almost the same time as the HarrisonAct, profoundly affected American attitudes, creating an intensedesire to purify the nation as it girded itself to fight fordemocracy against the barbarism of the Kaiser. The fall of Russiaand the spread of Bolshevism intensified fears of contagion andthe desire to be sure that the United States remained pure andstrong. Prohibition took giant strides during World War 1. TheProhibition Amendment in an early form nearly passed the House inDecember 1914, a week after the passage of the Harrison Act. In1916 it did pass, and by January 1919 Prohibition had become partof the Constitution as the Eighteenth Amendment. Earlier,Congress had passed wartime prohibition, which was intended tosave grain for the war effort as well as to promote efficiency inwar production plants. Similarly, a battle was being fought tooverturn the Jin Fuey Moy decision, which had weakened thegovernment's intention for the Harrison Act. A TreasuryDepartment committee reported that the number of addicts in thenation was over a million." These exaggerated figures, aswell as a fear about returning veterans having become addicted onthe battlefield and the specter of alcohol prohibition, whichmight drive alcoholics to morphine and cocaine, led to a newattempt to put teeth into the Harrison Act. This time thegovernment was successful. In March 1919, two months after the ratification of theEighteenth Amendment (which would go into effect a year later),the Supreme Court ingeniously decided, five to four, that to calla prescription for narcotics intended to supply a"mere" addict with maintenance doses was an error, forsuch a script could not be considered a true prescription givenin the proper conduct of medical practice. Since it was not aprescription, the issuing physician had conveyed narcoticswithout the required tax; he had therefore violated the HarrisonAct and could be arrested. The four dissenting justices were theconservatives, who argued that this was an invasion of states'police powers, while the majority, including Holmes and Brandeis,felt that more power had to be given the government if it was tocarry out its duty to protect the public from such an insidiousevil .36 At last, the intent of the reformers had been achieved:Simple maintenance was outlawed, and the federal government couldtake action nationwide to arrest and convict health professionalswho practiced it. Narcotics now had a no-maintenance policy,which a few months later would also be the policy for alcohol.Enforcement of both prohibitions would be the responsibility of aunit in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, reflecting the similarityof the two conceptions. Enforcement During the 1920s Several additional laws completed the early legislativestructure of American control of opium and cocaine. Some wereminor, such as a stipulation that no finished products such asheroin or morphine could be imported into the United States.37The law stated that only coca leaves and crude opium could beimported and that the finished products, cocaine, morphine,heroin, codeine, etc., were to be manufactured in Americanpharmaceutical factories, which were given a monopoly to producethese substances. This may have made up for revenues lost, as theamounts sold legally in the United States fell after the HarrisonAct. Other laws dealt with transshipment of drugs 38 across theUnited States for foreign markets. Heroin Perhaps the most important addition to the Harrison Act'scontrol of opiates and cocaine came in 1924, when the UnitedStates banned the importation of opium to be used for themanufacture of heroin.39 The observance of federal-stateboundaries is evident in this law, for it does not ban themanufacture of heroin altogether but only the importation ofcrude opium for that purpose. Just that much seemed to be withinthe power of the federal government. Also, this did not requirethe seizure of heroin legally available in the United States forcough medicines (the original claim for heroin's value) or forcertain other purposes, chiefly pain control or "twilightsleep" during child birth. Heroin had been made available commercially by the BayerCompany of Germany in 1898 as a superior cough suppressant.40 TheBayer Company believed that the addition of acetyl groups to thebasic molecule would make morphine more palatable, and thisproduct, diacetylmorphine, the company named Heroin, a trademarkthat was protected until Germany lost such protections as aresult of losing the First World War. Similarly, by adding anacetyl group to salicylic acid to make it less irritating to thestomach when taken for joint pains, the Bayer Company launchedanother successful venture. In 1899 the company named sodiumacetyl salicylic acid Aspirin, which similarly was protected bytrademark until World War 1. Few pharmaceutical firms can takecredit for naming and distributing two drugs that remain amongthe most popular in Western society even after nearly a hundredyears. Heroin essentially had been unrestricted in the United Statesprior to the Harrison Act, and by 1912 in New York City it hadreplaced morphine as the drug of recreational choice amongyouthful males, according to the records of Bellevue Hospital.The addictive nature of heroin had been recognized ratherquickly, for the AMA issued a warning in 1902. Heroin was popularbecause it could be inhaled by sniffing, like cocaine, as well asinjected by needle. When injected into the bloodstream, heroincrossed the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine andtherefore gave a more intense, but briefer, "high."During the years of intense concern over social control, whichbegan with the First World War, heroin became linked with malegang violence and the commission of crimes. Some believed thatheroin stimulated the user to commit crimes or at least providedthe courage to pull off a bank robbery or mugging. In the early1920s most of the crime in New York City was blamed on drug use,chiefly the opiates, including heroin.41 The preference for heroin over morphine by recreational users,and the belief that other opiates could fulfill heroin's role asa painkiller and cough suppressant, led to a move to ban heroinfor medical purposes. The heroin problem also contributed toAmerican fear of foreign nations after World War 1, for the drugwas being manufactured in other countries and then smuggled intothe United States. The Swiss drug industries, for example,produced large amounts of heroin, which found its way into thiscountry. Heroin's image as a foreign product popular with feareddomestic groups helped support an isolationist stance,illustrated by the American refusal to join or even recognize theLeague of Nations. Influential congressmen, such as Stephen G.Porter, Republican chairman of the House Committee on ForeignRelations, urged that all heroin production in the United Statesbe stopped. As an example he would try to get other nations 42 tofollow at the Geneva Opium Conferences of 1924 and 1925. The United States did enact the legislation sought byCongressman Porter, but it failed to achieve its goals at themeetings in Geneva. In fact, in disgust at the refusal of othernations to agree to curb production of poppies and coca bushes,the ultimate source of heroin 43 and cocaine, the United Stateswalked out of the conference. The United States, which hadfounded the world antinarcotic movement in Shanghai and TheHague, now saw it taken over by the League of Nations (as theVersailles treaty had mandated) and controlled by the verynations the United States sought to shame or force into anarcotics policy that the United States viewed as responsible.American participation in the worldwide effort then fell to a lowpoint until the 1930s, when participation was resumed ininternational meetings. By the outbreak of World War II, theUnited States was again achieving significant participation ininternational antidrug activities. AMERICAN DOMESTIC CONTROL TO THE MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 The use of cocaine, which had been in "soft" drinkslike Coca-Cola until 1903 and was available easily to sniff as atreatment for sinusitis or hay fever, fell precipitously afterreaching a peak somewhere around 1905. By the 1930s cocaine usehad receded, and during the 1950s physicians and narcotics agentsalike described cocaine use as a problem that once was serious inthe United States but now was practically absent. Several reasonsfor its reduced use can be suggested. The drug had beenintroduced as a wonder substance-Freud had called it the firstmedicine that worked as an antidepressant. The Parke-DavisCompany manufactured it after 1885 in many forms for drinking,smoking, inhaling, or rubbing on the skin. Within about a decade,warnings surfaced. Consumption peaked about twenty years afterits initial distribution, and around the same time the accountsof its effect on the lives of its users and its popularlybelieved-although questionable-special link with southern blackscreated in the public's mind an image so fearful that cocaine'seffects became the extreme against which other drugs would becompared. Cocaine's association with violence, paranoia, andcollapsed careers made laws against it by 1910 a popular matter.The first strict antinarcotic law in New York State was passed in1913 and was directed at cocaine. Al Smith, later to be ananti-Prohibition candidate for president and critic ofProhibition in his state while he was governor, drew the strictanticocaine measure in his early years as a state assemblyman.44The combination of strict laws and intense public support ofcontrol measures brought on a reduction in consumption, which, atthe peak of its popularity, must have seemed most unlikely if notimpossible. The effect of the Harrison Act, its court interpretations, andsupplementary legislation also appear to have reduced greatly thenumber of opiate addicts. The medical and pharmacy professionswere denied an easy way of providing drugs. Although it is clearthat only a fraction of either profession was liberal in theirprovision, this nevertheless had been enough to maintain a largenumber of users. It had been argued recently that therecreational users began to stand out more prominently, as themedically addicted and more sedate group declined in numbers, andthat the relatively small number of addicts in the United States,about 50,000 in 1940, would have had an "underworld" orunsavory character even without the Harrison 45 Act'scriminalization of drug use. This point of view contrasts sharplywith the argument that the Harrison Act changed citizens who werenormal except for their addiction into criminals who had 46 toviolate the law to obtain their daily supply of opiates. Whateverthe reason, the number of those addicted fell from about aquarter million around 1900 to much less than half that number byWorld War II. The war effectively reduced supplies of narcoticsto the United States, and in 1945 the United States probably hadits lowest number of opiate addicts since the mid-nineteenthcentury. The rise of addiction after World War 11 may have builton the core of addicts left in the nation, but the dynamics ofthe addiction epidemic that began in the 1960s appear in certainrespects to have had a different character. NARCOTIC CLINICS, 1913-1925 In order to close the story of the decline in addiction after1900, it is necessary to consider the legendary narcotic clinicsthat, like the Philippine opium dispensaries, were intended todeal with addicts who no longer could receive opiate or cocainesupplies from local physicians .47 The first in the United Stateswas opened in 1912 by Charles Terry, the public health officer ofJacksonville, Florida, where he provided both opiates and cocaineto men and women, blacks and whites. Dr. Terry went on to becomea student of the opium problem in the United States and compileda classic book of reports, excerpts from articles, andstatistical information in The Opium Problem,published in 1928 and co-authored by Mildred Pellens. Other clinics followed, particularly after the TreasuryDepartment, in enforcement of the Harrison Act, prosecuted orthreatened with prosecution health professionals who suppliedaddicts indefinitely. A series of clinics in New England wereestablished at the suggestion of officials of the InternalRevenue Bureau. In New York State, the crackdown on druggists andphysicians emanated from state law, and clinics were establishedin upper New York State through state planning and authorization.Registration of addicts was permitted so that physicians wouldrestrict maintenance to those already addicted. In New York City, the Health Department did not wish toprovide opiates, morphine, and heroin on an indefinite basis butdid open a clinic at the city Health Department headquarters.This clinic provided heroin, but only as an inducement toregistration and eventual detoxification and rehabilitation.About 7,500 addicts registered, received their drug of choice indosages gradually decreased until uncomfortably small, usuallythree to eight grains of morphine daily, and were offeredcurative treatment. Most declined to be cured. Those who didreceive treatment, at North Brother Island, seemed bothunappreciative and very liable-the estimate was 95 percent - toreturn to narcotics available on the street or from a physicianor druggist. The Treasury Department, armed with fresh Supreme Courtdecisions of March 1919, started to close down the clinics, alongwith prosecuting the dispensing physicians and druggists. Oneargument was that the availability of easy maintenance inhibitedcures and also that giving legal permission for maintenanceclinics undercut the Treasury Department's position when itbrought action against a professional for reckless provision ofdrugs. From a legal point of view, the "reckless"provider was obeying the tax laws, as was the clinic, unless thefederal government wanted to get into the question of medicalcompetence, which was a state, not a federal, concern. Gradually the clinics were closed, the last one in 1925 inKnoxville, Tennessee. Some had been operated poorly, others quiteresponsibly with community support. Yet, because of theintricacies of the tax powers under which the federal lawoperated, all were closed, even if unfair harassment wasnecessary to discourage the operation. The number of registrantswas not large, about 3,000 if we exclude the New York Cityclinic, which was not intended for maintenance but for bait toget addicts into detoxification. The number of addicts registeredunder the New York State law, which provided for maintenance notonly in clinics but also from private physicians and pharmacists,eventually totaled about 13,000 in 1920. It can be assumed,therefore, that the clinics were not a major element in themaintenance of addiction in the United States. One side note: The13,000 addicted registrants in New York State in 1920 add up tothe largest number of legally supplied addicts recorded in anyWestern country this century, a number not approached yet byBritain under the socalled "British System." Althoughthe "American System" preceded and surpassed in sizeany scheme attempted then or subsequently in Britain, it was infact the large number of addicts in America that made maintenanceso unwieldy and unpopular. The demise of the clinics left drug peddlers and individualmembers of the health professions as the major targets of thefederal government. Generally, the physicians did not wish totreat addicts, nor did they have any sympathy with addicts. Thosephysicians who, for whatever reason, did continue to treataddicts with maintenance doses were threatened and arrested,unless the maintenance had been approved by the local narcoticagent. Some maintenance was permitted, but only on a case-by-caseevaluation. From reports prepared by agents upon investigatingnarcotic clinics, it appears that an acceptable life-style was arequirement for permission to be maintained.48 A theory had been advocated, mostly among maintainingphysicians in New York City, that longstanding addiction changedthe body's physiology in such a way that opiates were necessaryfor the patient to remain normal.49 Too little opiate and thepatient would experience withdrawal, too much and the patientwould be "high," but just the right amount would allownormal feelings and behavior. This, of course, is close to the argument made in the 1950s byDrs. Dole and Nyswander to justify methadone maintenance. After aseries of scientific studies shortly after World War 1, thegovernment concluded otherwise .50 Those physicians who insistedon maintaining patients without approval from a narcotics agentran a serious risk of arrest and, if convicted, loss of a medicallicense and time in a federal penitentiary. In spite of thedanger, of course, some physicians supplied narcotics withoutrestraint or with very poor judgment, but evidence shows thatother, responsible physicians were entrapped without good reasonin order to boost the number of an agent's arrests and therebybolster his chances for promotion.51 An aura of fear, therefore,accompanied a physician's decision to give an opiate to apatient, especially a new patient. On the other hand, thecasualness with which physicians once handed out morphine or someother opiate was reduced considerably. Along with the rejection of maintenance, physiciansunfortunately had no effective medical cure available foraddiction. Several had been promoted in many forms in thenineteenth and early twentieth century, but each had been foundto have no scientific merit .52 The problem devolved into adecision of whether to stop opiates abruptly and thereby causethe patient to go directly into full Withdrawalthe so-called"cold turkey" approach-or gradually to reduce theopiate over a few days or a few weeks. Because the addictedperson frequently has a threshold of average daily consumptionbelow which the user becomes acutely uncomfortable, and because ayearning for heroin or morphine often persists for months oryears after the beginning of withdrawal, the decision to detoxifyabruptly or gradually usually was a difficult path for thepatient. Nevertheless, detoxification was the preferred route forlegal reasons. Two ancient warnings about detoxification, thatthe patient would die in withdrawal, or that a supply cutoffwould precipitate a rash of suicides, did not materialize. During the 1920s and 1930s the number of addicts diminished inthe United States. Grossly exaggerated estimates came fromantidrug entrepreneurs like Captain Richmond Pearson Hobson, whohad been a Prohibition advocate before unleashing his energiesagainst heroin and later marijuana as the head of severalnational and international voluntary groups." Captain Hobsonattacked heroin in a most melodramatic manner, claiming therewere 4 million addicts in the United States and comparing themall to lepers. In spite of Hobson, the concern over opiateaddicts and cocaine users declined during the two decades afterWorld War I. MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF1937 With the battle against opiate addiction apparently at a morestable, less alarming level in the 1930s and the use of cocainehaving declined dramatically, a new dangerous drug appeared onthe American horizon: marijuana. Marijuana smoking arrived in theUnited States with Mexican farm workers who had crossed theborder, mostly to labor in agricultural fields in the Southwestand in sugar beet fields as far north as Montana and Michigan.During the prosperous 1920s, about half-a-million farm workerscame to the United States, but as the Depression's widespreadunemployment laid an increasingly heavy burden on the country'scitizens, the Mexicans became an unwelcome group, encouraged inall ways to return to Mexico. Entwined with the troubles theywere said to cause local citizens was the Mexicans' custom ofgrowing marijuana for their own use. Hence, marijuana was linkedto violence, dissolute living, and Mexican aliens.53 The greatest fear of marijuana in the United States lay in theWest and Southwest. The government was importuned to take action,but the recent experience with alcohol prohibition (which hadended in 1933) made the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) and itshead, Harry J. Anslinger, formerly of the Prohibition Bureau,hesitant to get involved in a drug that grew domestically andprolifically. Cocaine and heroin were both foreign imports andtherefore, at least theoretically, could be regulated moreeasily, but marijuana appeared to be almost impossible to curb,let alone eradicate. The FBN tried to address this drug byincluding it in a recommended uniform state narcotic law thatwould leave to localities the question of prosecution andallocation of enforcement resources. Then a curious law intendedto reduce the number of machine guns provided the federalgovernment with a mechanism to attack marijuana nationally and atthe federal level. The Firearms Act of 1934 decreed that a machine gun could notbe transferred in any way without the payment of a transfer tax(from which law enforcement personnel were exempted). As odd asthis mechanism may sound, the law was upheld by the Supreme Courtin 1937 as a legitimate use of the power of taxation for a moralobjective. Within weeks of this decision, the TreasuryDepartment, which housed the FBN, appeared before Congress askingfor a transfer tax for marijuana. Without a stamp permit and theproper tax stamps, marijuana could not be sold, bartered, orgiven away. Congress quickly approved the bill, and PresidentFranklin Roosevelt signed it into law later in 1937.Unfortunately for the enforcement of this law, the FBN did notreceive any more money or agents. Therefore, the FBN relied onobnoxious descriptions of marijuana to do the job. The substancewas described to the public as a danger at least equal to cocaineor morphine, and the penalties for its illegal use or possessionwere severe. Because use of marijuana does not seem to have beengreat in the 1930s, the law's extraordinary severity did notconcern the general public until the 1960s, when thousands ofusers were arrested as marijuana's popularity burgeoned.Furthermore, the contrast between the effects of marijuanaobserved in the 1960s and the longstanding claims of the FBNregarding marijuana led to a problem concerning the credibilityof official statements, which still affects popular perceptions. WORLD WAR II TO THE PRESENT The Second World War ended with relatively few opiate addictsand very little use of cocaine or marijuana in the United States.The only closely controlled drug rising in use was alcohol,consumption of which had increased in per capita rates since therepeal of Prohibition. During all this period, sleeping pills andother barbiturates were prescribed widely but did not appear tobe a similar problem. The same holds true for the amphetamines,which had been made available in the 1930s and continued to bemanufactured and prescribed without restriction. Treatment of hard-core addicts did take place at the twofederal narcotics hospitals in Lexington, Kentucky, and FortWorth, Texas. Each was, in fact, a prison in which addicts weretreated and forced to detoxify, but the patients/prisonersfrequently resumed their drug habits when they returned to theirprevious environments. Around 1950 a younger age group began tobe admitted for heroin addiction, an abuse that reached a veryhigh level in 1970 and remains high today. This threat elicitedtwo responses. First, the federal government enacted more severelaws that levied mandatory sentences for conviction of dealing innarcotics. The laws, enacted in 1951 and 1956, are the peak oflegal penalties against narcotics, including marijuana, in theUnited States.55 The second response reflected the domestic and internationaltensions of the time. The heroin menace-and it should bereemphasized that cocaine and marijuana were not seen as anythingbut potentially major problems in the 1950s-was ascribed to theinfiltration of the drug trade by Chinese Communists who hadtaken over the China mainland in 1949. The Red Chinesepurportedly sent heroin to the United States to undermine ourdemocracy and at the 56 same time obtain specie, for which theyhad a desperate need. By the 1970s, however, the United Stateswas defending the People's Republic of China against the samecharge, now levied by Soviet newspapers.57 Such are the vagariesof international relations and the domestic drug problem. Heroin addicts in the 1950s mainly were young malesconcentrated in black and Hispanic urban ghettos. These addictsconcerned the federal government, as well as reform-mindedlawyers, academics, and physicians. The latter groups found theharsh penalties and the loathing attitude toward the addicts tobe inhumane. Leaders of this countermovement included sociologistProfessor Alfred Lindesmith and the attorney Rufus King. Theybelieved a more relaxed approach would be much more successful,as well as more kind. Rather than depriving addicts of heroin,heroin should be provided them. Rather than jailing addicts, theyshould be hospitalized, if necessary, or just left alone.58 This alternative view competed with the more hard-line styleof law enforcement exemplified by Commissioner Anslinger. Afterforty or more years, treating addicts medically, which had beenpopular before World War I and had then been found inadequate tothe task of reducing addiction, became part of public policy inthe 1960s. Methadone, a synthetic opiate developed in Germany inWorld War 11, was used by Dole and Nyswander to providemaintenance under theories similar to those which had justifiedmaintenance prior to the restrictive Supreme Court decisions in1919. This marked a major break in American narcotic controlpolicies; maintenance again was legal, although not with heroinor morphine. Along with the possibility of maintenance, other milder formsof control were invoked by the federal government. Civilcommitment to a narcotic treatment center,, thought more humanethan prison sentences, became possible legally in 1966, althoughin subsequent years this did not prove a practical method eitherto reduce addiction or to cure addicts in any marked number.59 Also in the 1960s, an enthusiasm for drug consumption of allkinds, polydrug abuse, replaced the habitual use of one or twodrugs, which had been more common in the past. Marijuana becamevery popular with young people, and then gradually its popularityexpanded in both directions to even younger and to older ages.Psychedelic drugs, such as LSD, appeared on the scene, along withinjectable methedrine or "speed." Drugs came tosymbolize opposition to the government and older mores. Theturmoil and dissension caused by the Vietnam War added to thesense of alienation many young people already felt from the oldergeneration, which frowned on drug use other than alcohol andtobacco. In addition to cultural alienation and the rapidincrease in multidrug use, the drug problem in the 1960s wasintensified by the extraordinarily large number of young peoplein the ages most likely to experiment with drugs; the post-WorldWar 11 "baby boom" generation had reached the teenageyears. By 1970, marijuana was used commonly, and research was showingthat it did not have the awful effects ascribed to it from the1930s onward. Various groups and individuals initiated movementsto legalize the substance, perhaps along the lines of tobacco.The drug situation was perceived by the public and the federalgovernment to be so bad and yet so difficult to control that thisseemed a good time to reevaluate the nation's entire policy. ANational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse was establishedin 1971. In general, the members of the commission reflectedtraditional views on the subject of drug control, and thereforeit was with even greater impact that the commission recommendedin its first report, "Marijuana: A Signal ofMisunderstanding," that the substance be"decriminalized." By decriminalization was not meantlegalization but a step short of that position: Marijuanapossession for individual use no longer would be a crime, but itssale and distribution would be against the law. The purpose ofcontrol at this stage would be to relieve law enforcementagencies of the nuisance of arresting individual users andthereby allow more resources to be concentrated on investigatinglarge-scale crime and more dangerous drugs.6o The notion of"decriminalization" proved difficult for all tounderstand. Some foreign nations considered it to meanlegalization. President Nixon refused to receive the report inpublic or to comment on it except to affirm that marijuana wasnot going to be legalized if he had anything to say about it. The second and final report, published in 1973, dealt withdrugs more broadly.60 It attempted to draw attention to theactual, measurable damage done by drugs, reflected in hospitaladmissions and drug-related deaths, as opposed to the myths thathad evolved around many of them. Heroin, for example, wasmisperceived as causing more deaths annually than barbiturates.This approach intended to make more rational the discussion overdrug policy, but it also laid the groundwork for the inclusion ofcigarettes and alcohol in the antidrug crusade. It de-emphasized,however, the effects a drug such as cocaine has on judgment andefficiency, the less quantifiable but still real aspects of druguse. The enforcement of laws against individual possession or useof marijuana has fallen in the United States to a very low level.Moreover, dealers in relatively small amounts are reportedly notprosecuted either, because the largest dealers and smugglers, whoare involved with tons, not ounces or pounds of marijuana,require all the time of officials. There has been a de factodecriminalization throughout large parts of the country, even iflaws against individual use remain on the books. Possession ofmarijuana in some states is a small-scale misdemeanor, and thepenalty is a ticket, like a parking violation. Yet, the frequencyof marijuana use by high school seniors has been dropping since1978, and this reduction, coupled with a more conservativenational mood, has slowed further moves toward formal federaldecriminalization or more liberality in the drug laws. The rise in cocaine's availability and popularity, for thesecond time this century, has further complicated the control ofdrugs in the United States. The fact that first millions shoulduse marijuana, then millions more take cocaine raises questionsabout the ability of local and national governments to controlnarcotics. The corruption that follows the drug traffic and therestraints on resources that may be allocated to drug controlcombine to leave a sense of frustration with enforcement policy.What will be the result of these trends? It all remainsuncertain. We appear to be in an era of widespread drug use thatwould seem to make reasonable the revocation of antidrugstatutes. We should recall, however, that a similar conditionprevailed around 1900, shortly before an onslaught against druguse led to a substantial reduction in the use of opiates, heroin,cocaine, and alcohol. That such a national response could occurmust make us pause before offering predictions for the future. Footnotes 1. Rudolf Schmitz, "Friedrich Wilhelm Serturner and theDiscovery of Morphine," Pharmacy in History 27 (1985):61-74. 2. 31 and 32 Vict. ch. 121, 1868: Act to Regulate the Sale ofPoisons and Alter and Amend the Pharmacy Act 1852 (1868 PharmacyAct). 3. Virginia Berridge and Griffith Edwards, Opium and thePeople: Opiate Use in Nineteenth-Century England (New York: St.Martin's, 1981), pp. 147-49, 227, 254. 4. Ibid., pp. 113-31. 5. James G. Burrow, AMA: Voice of American Medicine(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1963), pp. 51-52, 62ff. 6. Glenn Sonnedecker, Krerners and Urdang's History ofPharmacy, 4th ed. (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1976), pp. 198-212. 7. R. H. Shryock, Medical Licensing in America, 1650-1965(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1967), p. 32ff. 8. Virginia Berridge, "Fenland Opium Eating in theNineteenth Century," British Journal of Addiction 72 (1977):275-84. David F. Musto, The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic Control (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973), p. 54ff. 10. Ibid., p. 3 11. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 14517f. 12. Musto, American Disease, p. 5; David T. Courtwright, DarkParadise: Opiate Addiction in America before 1940 (Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 1982), chap. 1, "The Extent ofOpiate Addiction," pp. 9-34. Opiate addiction is the regularuse of opiates to prevent painful and uncomfortable bodily andpsychic symptoms that would occur if the drug's use were abruptlystopped. Estimates of the number of addicts in the United Stateshave often been susceptible to ideological and politicalinfluences. After carefully considering contemporary surveys,importation statistics, and other estimates, and subjecting hisfindings to modern statistical analysis, Professor Courtwrightconcluded that the highest rate of addiction in the United Statesoccurred in the 1890s at the maximum rate of 4.59 per 1,000.Today that rate would result in 1. I million addicts, about twicethe current official estimate. 13. Musto, American Disease, p. 236. 14. Wilder Penfield, "Halsted of Johns Hopkins: The Manand His Problem as Described in the Secret Records of William0sler," Journal of the American Medical Association 210(1969): 2214-18. 15. James Harvey Young, The Toadstool Millionaires: A SocialHistory of Patent Medicines before Federal Regulation,(Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press,1961), p. 21 1 ff. 16. Public Law No. 384, 59th Congress, Session 1, 30 June1906. Section 8 names the drugs that need to be listed on thelabel. 17. J. P. Street, "The Patent Medicine Situation,"American Journal of Public Health 7 (1917):1037-42. Young, Toadstool Millionaires, p. 213ff. 19. Martin 1. Wilbert and Murray Gait Metter, Digest of Lawsand Regulations in Force in the United States Relating to thePossession, Use, Sale and Manufacture of Poisons andHahit-Forming Drugs, Public Health Bulletin no. 56, Nov. 1912(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1912). 20. Musto, American Disease, p. 25ff. 21. Report of the Committee Appointed by the PhilippineCommission to Investigate the Use of Opium and the TrafficTherein .... Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, 1905. 22. Musto, American Disease, pp. 261-62. 23. Arnold H. Taylor, American Diplomacy and the NarcoticsTraffic, 1900-1939 (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1969),pp. 47-81. 24. Ibid., p. 82ff. 25. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 268. 26. United States 60th Congress, Public Law No. 221. An Act toprohibit the importation and use of opium for other thanmedicinal purposes. Approved 9 February 1909. 27. Musto, American Disease, pp. 31-37, 40-45, 61-62. 28. Ibid., pp. 31, 198, 202. 29. Ibid., p. 41. 30. Ibid., pp. 40-48. 31. Ibid., pp. 54-68. 32. Hamilton Wright, "Report on the International OpiumQuestion as Seen within the United States and ItsPossessions," in Opium Problem: Message from the Presidentof the United States, Senate Document no. 377, 61st Congress, 3rdSession, 21 February 1910, p. 49. 33. Hamilton Wright to Charles Evans Hughes, 28 June 1916, inPapers of Dr. Hamilton Wright, U.S. National Archives, RecordGroup 43, entry 36. 34. U.S. v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241 U.S. 394 (1916). 35. Special Committee of Investigation, Appointed March 25,1918, by the Secretary of the Treasury: Traffic in Narcotic Drugs(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1919). 36. Webb et al. v. U.S., 249 U.S. 96 (1919); U.S. v. Doremus,249 U.S. 86 (1919). 37. 67th Congress, Public Law No. 227. To amend the act ofFebruary 9, 1909, as amended, to prohibit the importation and useof opium for other than medicinal purposes. Approved 26 May 1922. 38. 68th Congress, Public Law No. 274. Prohibiting theimportation of crude opium for the purposes of manufacturingheroin. Approved 7 June 1924, Section 2. 39. Ibid., Section 1. 40. David F. Musto, "Early History of Heroin in theUnited States," in P. G. Bourne, ed., Addiction (New York:Academic Press, 1974), pp. 175-85. 41. Gerhard Kuhne, "Statement of Gerhard Kuhne, Head ofthe Identification Bureau, New York City Department ofCorrection," in Conference on Narcotic Education: Hearingsbefore the Committee on Education of the House ofRepresentatives, December 16, 1925 (Washington, D.C.: GovernmentPrinting Office, 1926), p. 175. 42. Prohibiting the Importation of Opium for the Manufactureof Heroin: Hearings on HR 7079, House of Representatives,Committee on Ways and Means, 68th Congress, Ist Session, 3 April1924 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1924), p.41ff. 43. Taylor, American Diplomacy and Narcotics Traffic, p.2OOff. 44. Musto, American Disease, pp. 6-8; Laws of New York, 1913,ch. 470, pp. 9984-91, approved 9 May 1913. 45. Courtwright, Dark Paradise, pp. 146-47. 46. Alfred R. Lindesmith, The Addict and the Law (New York:Vintage Books, 1965), pp. 3-34. 47. Musto, American Disease, pp. 151-81. 48, Ibid., p. 167ff. 49. Ernest Bishop, The Narcotic Drug Problem (New York:Macmillan, 1920); see also, David F. Musto, "Social andPolitical Influences on Addiction Research," in SeymourFisher and Alfred M. Freedman, eds., Opiate Addiction: Originsand Treatment (Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1973), pp. 93-98. 50. David F. Musto, "The American Antinarcotic Movement:Clinical Research and Public Policy," Clinical Research 19(1970): 601-5. 51. H. T. Nugent, Field Supervisor of the Fl3N, Fourth AnnualConference of Pharmaceutical Law Enforcement Officials, Toronto,Canada, 25 August 1932, Stenographic typescript of Proceedings,Archives of the American Pharmaceutical Association, Washington,D.C., box 31, pp. 86-87. 52. Musto, American Disease, pp. 69-90. 53. Ibid., pp. 190-94. 54. David F. Musto, "Marijuana Tax Act of 1937,"Archives of General Psychiatry 26 (1972):101-8. 58. Lindesmith, Addict and the Law; Rufus King, The DrugHang-up: America's Fifty Year Folly (New York: Norton, 1972). 59. Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966, Public Law89-273, 89th Congress, approved 8 November 1966. 55. 82nd Congress, Public Law No. 255, approved 2 November 1951; 84th Congress, Public Law No. 728, approved 18 July 1956. 56. H. J. Anslinger and W. F. Tomkins, Traffic in Narcotics(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), pp. 69-116. 57. For example, "Poisoners: How the Maoists SmuggleOpium," Literaturnaya gazeta, 19 March 1969, translated andreprinted in Current Digest of Soviet Press (Ann Arbor, Mich.:Joint Committee on Slavic Studies, 1969), vol. 21, p. 7. 60. Marijuana: ASignal of Misunderstanding: First Report of the NationalCommission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office, 1972), p. 150ff. 61. Drug Usein America: Problem in Perspective, Second Report of theNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington,D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-15IA086-000619-B006-28http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/histsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033617 text/html 50558HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:35:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:05 GMTContent-length: 50340 Some Events in the History of Drugs A Summary of Historical Events Some Events in the History of Drugs 5000 B.C. The Sumerians use opium, suggested by thefact that they have an ideogram for it which has been translatedas HUL, meaning "joy" or "rejoicing." [AlfredR. Lindesmith, *Addiction and Opiates.* p. 207] 3500 B.C. Earlist historical record of the productionof alcohol: the description of a brewery in an an Egyptianpapyrus. [Joel Fort, *The Pleasure Seekers*, p. 14] 3000 B.C. Approximate date of the supposed origin ofthe use of tea in China. 2500 B.C. Earlist historical evidence of the eating ofpoppy seeds among the Lake Dwellers on Switzerland. [AshleyMontagu, The long search for euphoria, *Refelections*, 1:62-69(May-June), 1966; p. 66] 2000 B.C. Earliest record of prohibitionist teaching,by an Egyptian priest, who writes to his pupil: "I, thysuperior, forbid thee to go to the taverns. Thou art degradedlike beasts." [W.F. Crafts *et al*., *Intoxicating Drinksand Drugs*, p. 5] 350 B.C. Proverbs, 31:6-7: "Give strong drink tohim who is perishing, and wine to those in bitter distress; letthem drink and forget their poverty, and remember their misery nomore." 300 B.C. Theophrastus (371-287 B.C.), Greek naturalistand philosopher, records what has remained as the earliesundisputed reference to the use of poppy juice. 250 B.C. Psalms, 104:14-15: "Thou dost causegrass to grow for the cattle and plants for man to cultivate,that he may bring forth food from the earth, and wine to gladdenthe heart of man. 350 A.D. Earliest mention of tea, in a Chinesedictionary. 4th century St. John Chrysostom (345-407), Bishop ofConstantinople: "I hear man cry, 'Would there be no wine! Ofolly! O madness!' Is it wine that causes this abuse? No, for ifyou say, 'Would there were no light!' because of the informers,and would there were no women because of adultery." [Quotedin Berton Roueche, *The Neutral Spirit*, pp. 150-151] 450 Babylonian Talmud: "Wine is at the head ofall medicines; where wine is lacking, drugs are necessary."[Quoted in Burton Stevenson (Ed.), *The Macmillan Book ofProverbs*, p. 21] c. 1000 Opium is widely used in China and the farEast. [Alfred A. Lindensmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 194] 1493 The use of tobacco is introduced into Europe byColumbus and his crew returning from America. c. 1500 According to J.D. Rolleston, a British medicalhistorian, a medieval Russian cure for drunkenness consisted in"taking a piece of pork, putting it secretly in a Jew's bedfor nine days, and then giving it to the drunkard in a pulverizedform, who will turn away from drinking as a Jew would frompork." [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. p. 144] c. 1525 Paracelsus (1490-1541) introduces laudanum, ortincture of opium, into the practice of medicine. 1600 Shakespeare: "Falstaff. . . . If I had athousand sons the / first human principle I would teach themshould / be, to foreswear thin portion and to addict themselvesto sack." ("Sack" is an obsolete term for"sweet wine" like sherry). [William Shakespeare,*Second Part of King Henry the Forth*, Act IV, Scene III, lines133-136] 17th century The prince of the petty state of Waldeckpays ten thalers to anyone who denounces a coffee drinker.[Griffith Edwards, Psychoactive substances, *The Listener*, March23, 1972, pp. 360-363; p.361] 17th century In Russia, Czar Michael Federovitchexecutes anyone on whom tobacco is found. "Czar AlexeiMikhailovitch rules that anyone caught with tobacco should betortured until he gave up the name of the supplier." [Ibid.] 1613 John Rolf, the husband of the Indian princessPocahontas, sends the first shipment of Virginia tobacco fromJamestown to England. c. 1650 The use of tobacco is prohibited in Bavaria,Saxony, and in Zurich, but the prohibitions are ineffective.Sultan Murad IV of the Ottoman Empire decrees the death penaltyfor smoking tobacco: "Whereever there Sultan went on histravels or on a military expedition his halting-places werealways distinguished by a terrible rise in executions. Even onthe battlefield he was fond of surprising men in the act ofsmoking, when he would punish them by beheading, hanging,quartering or crushing their hands and feed. . . . Nevertheless,in spite of all the horrors and persecution. . . the passion forsmoking still persisted." [Edward M. Brecher et al., *Licitand Illicit Drugs*, p. 212] 1680 Thomas Syndenham (1625-80): "Among theremedies which it has pleased the Almighty God to give to man torelieve his sufferings, none is so universal and efficacious asopium." [Quoted in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, *ThePharmacological Basis of Theraputics*, First Edition (1941), p.186] 1690 The "Act for the Encouraging of theDistillation of Brandy and Spirits from Corn" is enacted inEngland. [Roueche, op. cit. p. 27] 1691 In Luneberg, Germany, the penalty for smoking(tobacco) is death. 1717 Liquor licenses in Middlesex (England) aregranted only to those who "would take oaths of allegianceand of belief in the King's supremacy over the Church"[G.E.G. Catlin, *Liquor Control*, p. 14] 1736 The Gin Act (England) is enacted with the avowedobject of making spirits "come so dear to the consumer thatthe poor will not be able to launch into excessive use ofthem." This effort results in general lawbreaking and failsto halt the steady rise in the consumption of even legallyproduced and sold liquor. [Ibid., p. 15] 1745 The magistrates of one London division demandedthat "publicans and wine-merchants should swear that theyanathematized the doctrine of Transubstantiation." [Ibid.,p. 14] 1762 Thomas Dover, and English physician, introduceshis prescription for a diaphoretic powder," which herecommends mainly for the treatment of gout. Soon named"Dover's powder," this compound becomes the most widelyused opium preparation during the next 150 years. 1785 Benjamin Rush publishes his *Inquiry into theEffects of Ardent Spirits on the Human Body and Mind*; in it, hecalls the intemperate use of distilled spirits a"disease," and estimates the annual rate of death dueto alcoholism in the United States as "not less than 4000people" in a population then of less than 6 million. [Quotedin S. S. Rosenberg (Ed.), *Alcohol and Health*, p. 26] 1789 The first American temperance society is formedin Litchfield, Connecticut. [Crafts et. al., op. cit., p. 9] 1790 Benjamin Rush persuades his associates at thePhiladelphia College of Physicians to send an appeal to Congressto "impose such heavy duties upon all distilled spirits asshall be effective to restrain their intemperate use in thecountry." [Quoted in ibid.] 1792 The first prohibitory laws against opium in Chinaare promulgated. The punishment decreed for keepers of opiumshops is strangulation. 1792 The Whisky Rebellion, a protest by farmers inwestern Pennsylvania against a federal tax on liquor, breaks outand is put down by overwhelming force sent to the area by GeorgeWashington. Samuel Taylor Coleridge writes "Kubla Khan"while under the influence of opium. 1800 Napoleon's army, returning from Egypt, introducescannibis (hashish, marijuana) into France. Avante-garde artistsand writers in Paris develop their own cannabis ritual, leading,in 1844, to the establishment of *Le Club de Haschischins.*[William A. Emboden, Jr., Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L.: Ahistorical-ethnographic survey, in Peter T. Furst (Ed.), *Fleshof the Gods*, pp. 214-236; pp. 227-228] 1801 On Jefferson's recommendation, the federal dutyon liquor was abolished. [Catlin, op. cit., p. 113] 1804 Thomas Trotter, an Edinburgh physician, publishes*An Essay, Medical, Philosophical, and Chemical on Drunkennessand Its Effects on the Human Body*: "In medical language, Iconsider drunkenness, strictly speaking, to be a disease,produced by a remote cause, and giving birth to actions andmovements in the living body that disorder the functions ofhealth. . . The habit of drunkenness is a disease of themind." [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] 1805 Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Serturner, a Germanchemist, isolates and describes morphine. 1822 Thomas De Quincey's *Confessions of an EnglishOpium Eater* is published. He notes that the opium habit, likeany other habit, must be learned: "Making allowance forconstitutional differences, I should say that *in less that 120days* no habit of opium-eating could be formed strong enough tocall for any extraordinary self-conquest in renouncing it, evensuddenly renouncing it. On Saturday you are an opium eater, onSunday no longer such." [Thomas De Quincey, *Confessions ofan English Opium Eater* (1822), p. 143] 1826 The American Society for the Promotion ofTemperance is founded in Boston. By 1833, there are 6,000 localTemperance societies, with more than one million members. 1839-42 The first Opium War. The British force uponChina the trade in opium, a trade the Chinese had declaredillegal.. [Montagu, op. cit. p. 67] 1840 Benjamin Parsons, and English clergyman,declares: ". . . alcohol stands preeminent as a destroyer. .. . I never knew a person become insane who was not in the habitof taking a portion of alcohol every day." Parsons listsforty-two distinct diseases caused by alcohol, among theminflammation of the brain, scrofula, mania, dropsy, nephritis,and gout. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] 1841 Dr. Jacques Joseph Moreau uses hashish intreatment of mental patients at the Bicetre. 1842 Abraham Lincoln: "In my judgment, such of usas have never fallen victims, have been spared more from theabsence of appetite, than from any mental or moral superiorityover those who have. Indeed, I believe, if we take habitualdrunkards as a class, their heads and their hearts will bear anadvantageous comparison with those of any other class."[Abraham Lincoln, Temperance address, in Roy P. Basler Ed.), *TheCollected Works of Abraham Lincoln, Vol. 1, p. 258] 1844 Cocaine is isolated in its pure form. 1845 A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor isenacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. 1847 The American Medical Association is founded. 1852 Susan B. Anthony establishes the Women's StateTemperance Society of New York, the first such society formed byand for women. Many of the early feminists, such as ElizabethCady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and Abby Kelly, are also ardentprohibitionists. [Andrew Sinclar, *Era of Excess*, p. 92] 1852 The American Pharmaceutical Association isfounded. The Association's 1856 Constitution lists one of itsgoals as: "To as much as possible restrict the dispensingand sale of medicines to regularly educated druggests andapothecaries. [Quoted in David Musto, *The American Disease*, p.258] 1856 The Second Opium War. The British, with help fromthe French, extend their powers to distribute opium in China. 1862 Internal Revenue Act enacted imposing a licensefee of twenty dollars on retail liquor dealers, and a tax of onedollar a barrel on beer and twenty cents a gallon on spirits.[Sinclare, op. cit. p 152] 1864 Adolf von Baeyer, a twenty-nine-year-oldassistant of Friedrich August Kekule (the discoverer of themolecular structure of benzene) in Ghent, synthesizes barbituricacid, the first barbiturate. 1868 Dr. George Wood, a professor of the theory andpractice of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, presidentof the American Philosophical Society, and the author of aleading American test, *Treatise on Therapeutics*, describes thepharmacological effects of opium as follows: "A sensation offullness is felt in the head, soon to be followed by a universalfeeling of delicious ease and comfort, with an elevation andexpansion of the whole moral and intellectual nature, which is, Ithink, the most characteristic of its effects. . . . It seems tomake the individual, for the time, a better and greater man. . .. The hallucinations, the delirious imaginations of alcoholicintoxication, are, in general, quite wanting. Along with thisemotional and intellectual elevation, there is also increasedmuscular energy; and the capacity to act, and to bear fatigue, isgreatly augmented. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit. pp. 71-72] 1869 The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith,twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of JohnBrown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: "Ourinvoluntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntaryslaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, ofhim whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one;nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him whohas enslaved himself to alcohol." [Quoted in Sinclar, op.cit. pp. 83-84] 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is foundedin Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U.forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 1882 The law in the United States, and the world,making "temperance education" a part of the requiredcourse in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes sucheducation mandatory in the District of Columbia, and interritorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the stateshave similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] 1882 The Personal Liberty League of the United Statesis founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements forcompulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] 1883 Dr. Theodor Aschenbrandt, a German armyphysician, secures a supply of pure cocaine from thepharmaceutical firm of Merck, issues it to Bavarian soldiersduring their maneuvers, and reports on the beneficial effects ofthe drug in increasing the soldiers' ability to endure fatigue.[Brecher et. al. op. cit. p. 272] 1884 Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine,and reports feeling "exhilaration and lasting euphoria,which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of thehealthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control andpossess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In otherwords, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believethat you are under the influence of a drug." [Quoted inErnest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82] 1884 Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teachingcompulsory in public schools in New York State. The followingyear similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other statessoon following suit. 1885 The Report of the Royal Commission on Opiumconcludes that opium is more like the Westerner's liquor than asubstance to be feared and abhorred. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit.p. 29] 1889 The John Hopkins Hospital, in Baltimore,Maryland, is opened. One of its world-famous founders, Dr.William Stewart Halsted, is a morphine addict. He continues touse morphine in large doses throughout his phenomenallysuccessful surgical career lasting until his death in 1922. 1894 The Report of the Indian Hemp Drug Comission,running to over three thousand pages in seven volumes, ispublished. This inquiry, commissioned by the British government,concluded: "There is no evidence of any weight regarding themental and moral injuries from the moderate use of these drugs... . . Moderation does not lead to excess in hemp any more thanit does in alcohol. Regular, moderate use of ganja or bhangproduces the same effects as moderate and regular doses ofwhiskey." The commission's proposal to tax bhang is neverput into effect, in part, perhaps, because one of thecommissioners, an Indian, cautions that Moslem law and Hinducustom forbid "taxing anything that gives pleasure to thepoor." [Quoted in Norman Taylor, The pleasant assassin: Thestory of marihuana, in David Solomon (Ed.) *The MarijuanaPapers*, pp. 31-47, p. 41] 1894 Norman Kerr, and English physician and presidentof the British Society for the study of Inebriety, declares:"Drunkenness has generally been regarded as . . . a sin avice, or a crime. . . [But] there is now a consensus ofintelligent opinion that habitual and periodic drunkenness isoften either a symptom or sequel of disease . . . . The victimcan no more resist [alcohol] than an man with ague can resistshivering. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit., pp. 107-108] 1898 Diacetylmorphine (heroin) is synthesized inGermany. It is widely lauded as a "safe preparation freefrom addiction-forming properties." [Montagu, op. cit. p.68] 1900 In an address to the Ecumenical MissionaryConference, Rev. Wilbur F. Crafts declares: "No Christiancelebration of the completion of nineteen Christian centuries hasyet been arranged. Could there be a fitter one than the generaladoption, by separate and joint action of the great nations ofthe world, of the new policy of civilization, in which GreatBritian is leading, the policy of prohibition for the nativeraces, in the interest of commerce as well as conscience, sincethe liquor traffic among child races, even more manifestly thanin civilized lands, injures all other trades by producingpoverty, disease, and death. Our object, more profoundly viewed,is to create a more favorable environment for the child racesthat civilized nations are essaying to civilize andChristianize." [Quoted in Crafts, et. al., op. cit., p. 14] 1900 James R. L. Daly, writing in the *Boston Medicaland Surgical Journal*, declares: "It [heroin] possesses manyadvantages over morphine. . . . It is not hypnotic; and there isno danger of acquiring the habit. . . ." [Quoted in Henry H.Lennard et. al. Methadone treatment (letters),*Science*,179:1078-1079 (March 16), 1973; p. 1079] 1901 The Senate adopts a resolution, introduced byHenry Cabot Lodge, to forbid the sale by American traders ofopium and alcohol "to aboriginal tribes and uncivilizedraces." Theses provisions are later extended to include"uncivilized elements in America itself and in itsterritories, such as Indians, Alaskans, the inhabitants ofHawaii, railroad workers, and immigrants at ports of entry."[Sinclar, op. cit. p. 33] 1902 The Committee on the Acquirement of the DrugHabit of the American Pharmaceutical Association declares:"If the Chinaman cannot get along without his 'dope,' we canget along without him." [Quoted in ibid, p. 17] 1902 George E. Petty, writing in the *Alabama MedicalJournal*, observes: "Many articles have appeared in themedical literature during the last two years lauding this newagent . . . . When we consider the fact that heroin is a morphinederivative . . . it does not seem reasonable that such a claimcould be well founded. It is strange that such a claim shouldmislead anyone or that there should be found among the members ofour profession those who would reiterate and accentuate itwithout first subjecting it to the most critical tests, but suchis the fact." [Quoted in Lennard et. al., op. cit. p. 1079] 1903 The composition of Coca-Cola is changed, caffeinereplacing the cocaine it contained until this time. {Musto, op.cit. p. 43] 1904 Charles Lyman, president of the InternationalReform Bureau, petitions the President of the United States"to induce Great Britain to release China from the enforcedopium traffic. . . .We need not recall in detail that Chinaprohibited the sale of opium except as a medicine, until the salewas forced upon that country by Great Britian in the opium war of1840." [Quoted in Crafts et al., op. cit. p. 230] 1905 Senator Henry W. Blair, in a letter to Rev.Wilbur F. Crafts, Superintendent of the International ReformBureau: "The temperance movement must include all poisonoussubstances which create unnatural appetite, and internationalprohibition is the goal." [Quoted in ibid.] 1906 The first Pure Food and Drug Act becomes law;until its enactment, it was possible to buy, in stores or by mailorder medicines containing morphine, cocaine, or heroin, andwithout their being so labeled. 1906 *Squibb's Materia Medical* lists heroin as"a remedy of much value . . . is is also used as a mildanodyne and as a substitute for morphine in combatting themorphine habit. [Quoted in Lennard et al., op. cit. p. 1079] 1909 The United States prohibits the importation ofsmoking opium. [Lawrence Kolb, *Drug Addiction*, pp. 145-146] 1910 Dr. Hamilton Wright, considered by some thefather of U.S. anti-narcotics laws, reports that Americancontractors give cocaine to their Negro employees to get morework out of them. [Musto, op. cit. p. 180] 1912 A writer in *Century* magazine proclaims:"The relation of tobacco, especially in the form ofcigarettes, and alcohol and opium is a very close one. . . .Morphine is the legitimate consequence of alcohol, and alcohol isthe legitimate consequence of tobacco. Cigarettes, drink, opium,is the logical and regular series." And a physician warns:"[There is] no energy more destructive of soul, mind, andbody, or more subversive of good morals than the cigarette. Thefight against the cigarette is a fight for civilization."[Sinclar, op. cit., p. 180] 1912 The first international Opium Convention meets atthe Hague, and recommends various measures for the internationalcontrol of the trade in opium. Supsequent Opium Conventions areheld in 1913 and 1914. 1912 Phenobarbital is introduced into therapeuticsunder the trade name of Luminal. 1913 The Sixteenth Amendment, creating the legalauthority for federal income tax, is enacted. Between 1870 and1915, the tax on liquor provides from one-half to two-thirds ofthe whole of the internal revenue of the United States,amounting, after the turn of the century, to about $200 millionannually. The Sixteenth Amendment thus makes possible, just sevenyears later, the Eighteenth Amendment. 1914 Dr. Edward H Williams cites Dr. Christopher Kochs"Most of the attack upon white women of the South are thedirect result of the cocaine crazed Negro brain." Dr.Williams concluded that " . . Negro cocaine fiends are now aknown Southern menace." [New York Times, Feb. 8, 1914] 1914 The Harrison Narcotic Act is enacted, controllingthe sale of opium and opium derivatives, and cocaine. 1914 Congressman Richard P. Hobson of Alabama, urginga prohibition amendment to the Constitution, asserts:"Liquor will actually make a brute out of a Negro, causinghim to commit unnatural crimes. The effect is the same on thewhite man, though the white man being further evolved it takeslonger time to reduce him to the same level." Negro leadersjoin the crusade against alcohol. [Ibid., p. 29] 1916 The *Pharmacopoeia of the United States* dropswhiskey and brandy from its list of drugs. Four years later,American physicians begin prescribing these "drugs" inquantities never before prescribed by doctors. 1917 The president of the American Medical Associationendorses national prohibition. The House of Delegates of theAssociation passes a resolution stating: "Resolved, TheAmerican Medical Association opposes the use of alcohol as abeverage; and be it further Resolved, That the use of alcohol asa therapeutic agent should be discourages." By 1928,physicians make an estimated $40,000,000 annually by writingprescriptions for whiskey." [Ibid. p. 61] 1917 The American Medical Association passes aresolution declaring that "sexual continence is compatiblewith health and is the best prevention of venerealinfections," and one of the methods for controlling syphilisis by controlling alcohol. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Danielsprohibits the practice of distributing contraceptives to sailorsbound on shore leave, and Congress passes laws setting up"dry and decent zones" around military camps."Many barkeepers are fined for selling liquor to men inuniform. Only at Coney Island could soldiers and sailors changeinto the grateful anonymity of bathing suits and drink withoutmolestation from patriotic passers-by." [Ibid. pp. 117-118] 1918 The Anti-Saloon League calls the "liquortraffic" "un-American," pro-German,crime-producing, food-wasting, youth-corrupting, home-wrecking,[and] treasonable." [Quoted in ibid. p. 121] 1919 The Eighteenth (Prohibition) Amendment is addedto the U.S. Constitution. It is repealed in 1933. In the sameyear, violent crime drops two-thirds and does not reach the samelevels again until after World War II. 1920 The U.S. Department of Agriculture publishes apamphlet urging Americans to grow cannabis (marijuana) as aprofitable undertaking. [David F. Musto, An historicalperspective on legal and medical responses to substance abuse,*Villanova Law Review*, 18:808-817 (May), 1973; p. 816] 1920-1933 The use of alcohol is prohibited in theUnited States. In 1932 alone, approximately 45,000 personsreceive jail sentences for alcohol offenses. During the firsteleven years of the Volstead Act, 17,971 persons are appointed tothe Prohibition Bureau. 11,982 are terminated "withoutprejudice," and 1,604 are dismissed for bribery, extortion,theft, falsification of records, conspiracy, forgery, andperjury. [Fort, op. cit. p. 69] 1921 The U.S. Treasury Department issues regulationsoutlining the treatment of addiction permitted under the HarrisonAct. In Syracuse, New York, the narcotics clinic doctors reportcuring 90 per cent of their addicts. [Lindesmith, *The Addict andthe Law*, p. 141] 1921 Thomas S. Blair, M.D., chief of the Bureau ofDrug Control of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, publishesa paper in the *Journal of the American Medical Association* inwhich he characterizes the Indian peyote religion a "habitindulgence in certain cactaceous plants," calls the beliefsystem "superstition" and those who sell peyote"dope vendors," and urges the passage of a bill inCongress that would prohibit the use of peyote among the Indiantribes of the Southwest. He concludes with this revealing pleafor abolition: "The great difficulty in suppressing thishabit among the Indians arises from the fact that the commercialinterests involved in the peyote traffic are strongly entrenched,and they exploit the Indian. . . . Added to this is thesuperstition of the Indian who believes in the Peyote Church. Assoon as an effort is made to suppress peyote, the cry is raisedthat it is unconstitutional to do so and is an invasion ofreligious liberty. Suppose the Negros of the South had CocaineChurch!" [Thomas S. Blair, Habit indulgence in certaincactaceous plants among the Indians, *Journal of the AmericanMedical Association*, 76:1033-1034 (April 9), 1921; p. 1034] 1921 Cigarettes are illegal in fourteen states, andninety-two anti-cigarette bills are pending in twenty-eightstates. Young women are expelled from college for smokingcigarettes. [Brecher et al., op. cit. p. 492] 1921 The Council of the American Medical Associationrefuses to confirm the Associations 1917 Resolution on alcohol.In the first six months after the enactment of the Volstead Act,more than 15,000 physicians and 57,000 druggests and drugmanufacturers apply for licenses to prescribe and sell liquor.[Sinclair, op. cit., p. 492] 1921 Alfred C. Prentice, M.D. a member of theCommittee on Narcotic Drugs of the American Medical Association,declares "Public opinion regarding the vice of drugaddiction has been deliberately and consistently corruptedthrough propaganda in both the medical and lay press. . . . Theshallow pretense that drug addiction is a 'disease'. . . . hasbeen asserted and urged in volumes of 'literature' by self-styled'specialists.'" [Alfred C Prentice, The Problem of thenarcotic drug addict, *Journal of the American MedicalAssociation*, 76:1551-1556; p. 1553] 1924 The manufacture of heroin is prohibited in theUnited States. 1925 Robert A. Schless: "I believe that most drugaddiction today is due directly to the Harrison Anti-NarcoticAct, which forbids the sale of narcotics without a physician'sprescription. . . . Addicts who are broke act as *agentprovocateurs* for the peddlers, being rewarded by gifts of heroinor credit for supplies. The Harrison Act made the drug peddler,and the drug peddler makes drug addicts." [Robert A.Schless, The drug addict, *American Mercury*, 4:196-199 (Feb.),1925; p. 198] 1928 In a nationwide radio broadcast entitled"The Struggle of Mankind Against Its Deadlist Foe,"celebrating the second annual Narcotic Education Week, RichmondP. Hobson, prohibition crusader and anti-narcotics propagandist,declares: "Suppose it were announced that there were morethan a million lepers among our people. Think what a shock theannouncement would produce! Yet drug addiction is far moreincurable than leprosy, far more tragic to its victims, and isspreading like a moral and physical scourge. . . . Most of thedaylight robberies, daring holdups, cruel murders and similarcrimes of violence are now known to be committed chiefly by drugaddicts, who constitute the primary cause of our alarming crimewave. Drug addiction is more communicable and less curable thatleprosy. . . . Upon the issue hangs the perpetuation ofcivilization, the destiny of the world, and the future of thehuman race." [Quoted in Musto, *The American Disease*, p.191] 1928 It is estimated that in Germany one out of everyhundred physicians is a morphine addict, consuming 0.1 grams ofthe alkaloid or more per day. [Eric Hesse, *Narcotics and DrugAddiction*, p. 41] 1929 About one gallon of denatured industrial in tenis diverted into bootleg liquor. About forty Americans permillion die each year from drinking illegal alcohol, mainly as aresult of methyl (wood) alcohol poisoning. [Sinclare, op. cit. p.201] 1930 The Federal Bureau of Narcotics is formed. Manyof its agents, including its first commissioner, Harry J.Anslinger, are former prohibition agents. 1935 The American Medical Association passes aresolution declaring that "alcoholics are validpatients." [Quoted in Neil Kessel and Henry Walton,*Alcoholism*, p. 21] 1936 The Pan-American Coffee Burreau is organized topromote coffee use in the U.S. Between 1938 and 1941 coffeeconsumption increased 20%. From 1914 to 1938 consumption hadincreased 20%. [Coffee, *Encyclopedia Britannica* (1949), Vol. 5,p. 975A] 1937 Shortly before the Marijuana Tax Act,Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger writes: "How many murders,suicides, robberies, criminal assaults, hold-ups, burglaries, anddeeds of maniacal insanity it [marijuana] causes each year,especially among the young, can only be conjectured."[Quoted in John Kaplan, *Marijuana*, p. 92] 1937 The Marijuana Tax Act is enacted. 1938 Since the enactment of the Harrison Act in 1914,25,000 physicians have been arraigned on narcotics charges, and3,000 have served penitentiary sentences. [Kolb, op. cit. p. 146] 1938 Dr. Albert Hoffman, a chemist at SandozLaboratories in Basle, Switzerland, synthesizes LSD. Five yearslater he inadvertently ingests a small amount of it, and observesand reports effects on himself. 1941 Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek orders the completesuppression of the poppy; laws are enacted providing the deathpenalty for anyone guilty of cultivating the poppy, manufacturingopium, or offering it for sale. [Lindesmith, *The Addict and theLaw*, 198] 1943 Colonel J.M. Phalen, editor of the *MilitarySurgeon*, declares in an editorial entitled "The MarijuanaBugaboo": "The smoking of the leaves, flowers, andseeds of Cannibis sativa is no more harmful than the smoking oftobacco. . . . It is hoped that no witch hunt will be institutedin the military service over a problem that does not exist."[Quoted in ibid. p. 234] 1946 According to some estimates there are 40,000,000opium smokers in China. [Hesse, op. cit. p. 24] 1949 Ludwig von Mises, leading modern free-marketeconomist and social philosopher: "Opium and morphine arecertainly dangerous, habit-forming drugs. But once the principleis admitted that is the duty of government to protect theindividual against his own foolishness, no serious objections canbe advanced against further encroachments. A good case could bemade out in favor of the prohibition of alcohol and nicotine. Andwhy limit the governments benevolent providence to the protectionof the individual's body only? Is is not the harm a man caninflect on his mind and soul even more disastrous than any bodilyevils? Why not prevent him from reading bad books and seeing badplays, from looking at bad paintings and statues and listening tobad music? The mischief done by bad ideologies, surely, is muchmore pernicious, both for the individual and for the wholesociety, than that done by narcotic drugs." [Ludwig vonMises, *Human Action*, pp. 728-729] 1951 According to United Nations estimates, there areapproximately 200 million marijuana users in the world, the majorplaces being India, Egypt, North Africa, Mexico, and the UnitedStates. [Jock Young, *The Drug Takers*, p. 11] 1951 Twenty thousand pound of opium, three hundredpounds of heroin, and various opium-smoking devices are publiclyburned in Canton China. Thirty-seven opium addicts are executedin the southwest of China. [Margulies, China has no drugproblem--why? *Parade*, 0ct. 15 1972, p. 22] 1954 Four-fifths of the French people questioned aboutwine assert that wine is "good for one's health," andone quarter hold that it is "indispensable." It isestimated that a third of the electorate in France receives allor part of its income from the production or sale of alcoholicbeverages; and that there Is one outlet for every forty- fiveinhabitants. [Kessel and Walton, op. cit. pp. 45, 73] 1955 The Prasidium des Deutschen Arztetages declares:"Treatment of the drug addict should be effected in theclosed sector of a psychiatric institution. Ambulatory treatmentis useless and in conflict, moreover, with principles of medicalethics." The view is quoted approvingly, as representativeof the opinion of "most of the authors recommendingcommitment to an institution," by the World HealthOrganization in 1962. [World Health Organization, *The Treatmentof Drug Addicts*, p. 5] 1955 The Shah of Iran prohibits the cultivation anduse of opium, used in the country for thousands of years; theprohibition creates a flourishing illicit market in opium. In1969 the prohibition is lifted, opium growing is resumed understate inspection, and more than 110,000 persons receive opiumfrom physicians and pharmacies as "registered addicts."[Henry Kamm, They shoot opium smugglers in Iran, but . . ."*The New York Times Magazine*, Feb. 11, 1973, pp. 42-45] 1956 The Narcotics Control Act in enacted; it providesthe death penalty, if recommended by the jury, for the sale ofheroin to a person under eighteen by one over eighteen.[Lindesmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 26] 1958 Ten percent of the arable land in Italy is underviticulture; two million people earn their living wholly orpartly from the production or sale of wine. [Kessel and Walton,op. cit., p. 46] 1960 The United States report to the United NationsCommission on Narcotic Drugs for 1960 states: "There were44,906 addicts in the United States on December 31, 1960 . .." [Lindesmith, *The Addict and The Law*, p. 100] 1961 The United Nations' "Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs of 10 March 1961" is ratified. Among theobligations of the signatory states are the following: "Art.42. Know users of drugs and persons charges with an offense underthis Law may be committed by an examining magistrate to a nursinghome. . . . Rules shall be also laid down for the treatment insuch nursing homes of unconvicted drug addicts and dangerousalcoholics." [Charles Vaille, A model law for theapplication of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,*United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics*, 21:1-12 (April-June),1961] 1963 Tobacco sales total $8.08 billion, of which $3.3billion go to federal, state, and local taxes. A news releasefrom the tobacco industry proudly states: "Tobacco productspass across sales counters more frequently than anythingelse--except money." [Tobacco: After publicity surge SurgeonGeneral's Report seems to have little enduring effect, *Science*,145:1021-1022 (Sept. 4), 1964; p. 1021] 1964 The British Medical Association, in a Memorandumof Evidence to the Standing Medical Advisory Committee's SpecialSub- committee on Alcoholism, declares: "We feel that insome very bad cases, compulsory detention in hospital offer theonly hope of successful treatment. . . . We believe that somealcoholics would welcome compulsory removal and detention inhospital until treatment is completed." [Quoted in Kesseland Walton, op. cit. p. 126] 1964 An editorial in *The New York Times* callsattention to the fact that "the Government continues to bethe tobacco industry's biggest booster. The Department ofAgriculture lost $16 million in supporting the price of tobaccoin the last fiscal year, and stands to loose even more because ithas just raised the subsidy that tobacco growers will get ontheir 1964 crop. At the same time, the Food for Peace program isgetting rid of surplus stocks of tobacco abroad."[Editorial, Bigger agricultural subsidies. . .even more fortobacco, *The New York Times*, Feb. 1, 1964, p. 22] 1966 Sen. Warren G. Magnuson makes public a program,sponsored by the Agriculture Department, to subsidize"attempts to increase cigarette consumption abroad. . . .The Department is paying to stimulate cigarette smoking in atravelogue for $210,000 to subsidize cigarette commercials inJapan, Thailand, and Austria." An Agriculture Departmentspokesman corroborates that "the two programs were preparedunder a congressional authorization to expand overseas marketsfor U.S. farm commodities." [Edwin B. Haakinsom, Senatorshocked at U.S. try to hike cigarette use abroad, *SyracuseHerald-American*, Jan. 9, 1966, p. 2] 1966 Congress enacts the "Narcotics AddictRehabilitation Act, inaugurating a federal civil commitmentprogram for addicts. 1966 C. W. Sandman, Jr. chairman of the New JerseyNarcotic Drug Study Commission, declares that LSD is "thegreatest threat facing the country today . . . more dangerousthan the Vietnam War." [Quoted in Brecher et al., op. cit.p. 369] 1967 New York State's "Narcotics AddictionControl Program" goes into effect. It is estimated to cost$400 million in three years, and is hailed by GovernmentRockefeller as the "start of an unending war . . ."Under the new law, judges are empowered to commit addicts forcompulsory treatment for up to five years. [Murray Schumach, Planfor addicts will open today: Governor hails start, *The New YorkTimes*, April 1, 1967] 1967 The tobacco industry in the United States spendsan estimated $250 million on advertising smoking. [Editorial, Itdepends on you, *Health News* (New York State), 45:1 (March),1968] 1968 The U.S. tobacco industry has gross sales of $8billion. Americans smoke 544 billion cigarettes. [Fort, op. cit.p. 21] 1968 Canadians buy almost 3 billion aspirin tabletsand approximately 56 million standard does of amphetamines. About556 standard doses of barbituates are also produced or importedfor consumption in Canada. [Canadian Government's Commission ofInquiry, *The Non-Medical Uses of Drugs*, p. 184 1968 Six to seven percent of all prescriptions writtenunder the British National Health Service are for barbituates; itis estimated that about 500,000 British are regular users.[Young, op. cit. p. 25] 1968 Brooklyn councilman Julius S. Moskowitz chargesthat the work of New York City's Addiction Services Agency, underits retiring Commissioner, Dr. Efren Ramierez, was a"fraud," and that "not a single addict has beencured." [Charles G. Bennett, Addiction agency called a"fraud," *New York Times*, Dec. 11, 1968, p. 47] 1969 U.S. production and value of some medicalchemicals: barbituates: 800,000 pounds, $2.5 million; aspirin(exclusive of salicylic acid) 37 milliion pounds, value"withheld to avoid disclosing figures for individualproducers"; salicylic acid: 13 million pounds, $13 million;tranquilizers: 1.5 million pounds, $7 million. [*StatisticalAbstracts of the United States*, 1971 92nd Annual Edition, p. 75] 1969 The parents of 6,000 secondary-level students inClifton, New Jersey, are sent letters by the Board of Educationasking permission to conduct saliva tests on their children todetermine whether or not they use marijuana. [Saliva tests askedfor Jersey youths on marijuana use, *New York Times*, Apr. 11,1969, p. 12] 1970 Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Laureate inMedicine and Physiology, in reply to being asked what he would doif he were twenty today: "I would share with my classmatesrejection of the whole world as it is--all of it. Is there anypoint in studying and work? Fornication--at least that issomething good. What else is there to do? Fornicate and takedrugs against the terrible strain of idiots who govern theworld." [Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, in *The New York Times*, Feb.20, 1970, quoted in Mary Breastead, *Oh! Sex Education!*, p. 359] 1971 President Nixon declares that "America'sPublic Enemy No. 1 is drug abuse." In a message to Congress,the President calls for the creation of a Special Action Officeof Drug Abuse Prevention. [The New Public Enemy No. 1, *Time*,June 28, 1971, p. 18] 1971 On June 30, 1971, President Cvedet Sunay ofTurkey decrees that all poppy cultivation and opium productionwill be forbidden beginning in the fall of 1972. [Patricia M Waldet al. (Eds.), *Dealing with Drug Abuse*, p. 257] 1972 Myles J. Ambrose, Special Assistant AttorneyGeneral of the United States: "As of 1960, the Bureau ofNarcotics estimated that we had somewhere in the neighborhood of55,000 addicts . . . they estimate now the figure is 560,000.[Quoted in *U.S. News and World Report*, April 3, 1972, p. 38] 1972 The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsproposes restricting the use of barbituates on the ground thatthey "are more dangerous than heroin." [Restrictionsproposed on barbituate sales, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, Mar 16,1972, p. 32] 1972 The house votes 366 to 0 to authorize "a $1billion, three-year federal attack on drug abuse." [$1billion voted for drug fight, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, March16, 1972, p. 32] 1972 At the Bronx house of corrections, out of a totalof 780 inmates, approximately 400 are given tranquilizers such asValium, Elavil, Thorazine, and Librium. "'I think they [theinmates] would be doing better without some of the medication,'said Capt. Robert Brown, a correctional officer. He said that ina way the medications made his job harder . . . rather thanbecoming calm, he said, an inmate who had become addicted to hismedication 'will do anything when he can't get it.'" [RonaldSmothers, Muslims: What's behind the violence, *The New YorkTimes*, Dec. 26, 1972, p. 18] 1972 In England, the pharmacy cost of heroin is $.04per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In the United States, thestreet price is $30 to $90 per grain, or $.50 or $1.50 per mg.[Wald et al. (Eds.) op. cit. p. 28] 1973 A nationwide Gallop poll reveals that 67 percentof the adults interviewed "support the proposal of New YorkGovernor Nelson Rockefeller that all sellers of hard drugs begiven life imprisonment without possibility of parole."[George Gallup, Life for pushers, *Syracuse Herald-American*,Feb. 11, 1973] 1973 Michael R. Sonnenreich, Executive Director of theNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, declares:"About our years ago we spent a total of $66.4 million forthe entire federal effort in the drug abuse area. . . . This yearwe have spent $796.3 million and the budget estimates that havebeen submitted indicate that we will exceed the $1 billion mark.When we do so, we become, for want of a better term, a drug abuseindustrial complex.: [Michael R. Sonnenreich, Discussion of theFinal Report of the National Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse, *Villanova Law Review*, 18:817-827 (May), 1973; p. 818] 1972 Operation Intercept. All vehicles returning fromMexico are checked by Nixon's order. Long lines occur and, asusual no dent is made in drug traffic. 1977 The Joint Committee of the New York BarAssociation concludes that the Rockefeller drug laws, thetoughest in the nation, have had no effect in reducing drug usebut have clogged the courts and the criminal justice system tothe point of gridlock. 1981 Congress ammends the 1878 Posse Comitatus Act,which forbids the armed forces to enforce civil law, so that themilitary could provide surveillance planes and ships forinterdiction purposes. 1984 U.S. busts 10,000 pounds of marijuana on farms inMexico. The seizures, made on five farms in an isolated sectionof Chihuahua state, suggest a 70 percent increase in estimatesthat total U.S. consumption was 13,000 to 14,000 tons in 1982.Furthermore, the seizures add up to nearly eight times the 1300tons that officials had calculated Mexico produced in 1983. [theSan Francisco Chronicle, Saturday, November 24, 1984] 1985 Pentagon spends $40 million on interdiction. By1990, the General Accounting Office will report that themilitary's efforts have had no discernible impact on the flow ofdrugs. 1986 The Communist Party boss, Boris Yeltsin said thatthe Moscow school system is rife with drug addiction, drunkennessand principles that take bribes. He said that drug addiction hasbecome such a problem that there are 3700 registered addicts inMoscow. [The San Francisco Chronicle, Sept. 22, 1986, p. 12] Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B33-16IA086-000619-B006-46http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/baum1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033702 text/html 17310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:36:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:24 GMTContent-length: 17092 Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors Excerpts from Smoke and Mirrors by Dan Baum, 1996 Dan Baum has written what may be the best modern history ofthe political doings behind the War on Drugs over the last 30years. You can find a copy through your local bookstore, or visitDan Baum's Website: http://members.aol.com/danbaum/baum.html. William Bennett When William Bennett moved across town from the Department ofEducation to be "czar" at the Office of National DrugControl Policy, he brought his people with him. All white, allmale, none with law enforcement or social-service experience,some had been with Bennett the entire eight years since his debutat the National Endowment for the Humanities. Bennett's men held themselves above the mere budget-cutters,tax-slashers, regulation-busters, and states-rightsers thatcomprised the broader executive branch. John Walters, Bennett'schief of staff at Education and author of the punitive SchoolsWithout Drugs, had been to meetings of Ed Meese's Drug PolicyBoard and had been appalled at their inanity. Everybody was sobusy jockeying for position that nobody ever ventured an honestopinion or original idea. Bennett's office, on the other hand,prided itself on being one continuous philosophy forum, withgreat questions of political theory and national purpose thestuff of daily conversation. Envisioning themselves a kind ofideological Bennettista cavalry to the Republican infantry,Bennett's crew saw their mission at the drug office asfundamentally identical to that at Education or the Endowment: Toreform America's character, by force if necessary. It would have been okay with them to be assigned teenpregnancy, abortion, welfare -- any platform from which toharangue the public about values and exact punishment fortransgression. "Drugs are the hill we're fighting over atthe moment, but the war is much bigger than that," BruceCarnes, Bennett's budget director, would say. "Our fight isany issue that has a shade on character." The "hill" they'd just been given to fight over,though, wasn't just any piece of political turf, but was thehottest hot-button issue of the decade. More than half thecountry believed drugs to be the America's worst problem.Majorities favored mandatory drug tests for all citizens,warrantless police searches of suspected dealers' homes, androadblocks to search cars randomly. This wasn't mere nakedpaintings or politically correct social studies textbooks. Thiswas a chance to preach and kick ass on the nation's brightly litcenter stage. Even before Bennett's Senate confirmation, his men beganplotting their course. The same 1988 law that created the drugczar's office also required it to produce a drug-control strategyby September, and there was no time to waste. Bennett himselfwasn't around much. He'd checked himself into a $700-a-weektherapeutic resort to kick his two-pack-a-day cigarette habit. But in the lofty and freewheeling style to which they'dbecome accustomed, Bennett's core group of advisors began layingout the assumptions on which national drug policy would hereafterbe based. At this point, the United States had been fighting its War onDrugs for twenty years. Despite the billions spent, the millionsimprisoned, and the loss of liberties to both drug user andnon-user alike, drugs were cheaper, more potent, and used byyounger children than when Nixon started the War. The drugcartels were wealthier and more sophisticated than ever. Thenumber of cocaine dependents had grown. Drug violence, unheard ofat the start of the Drug War, now terrorized poor neighborhoods.Drug combatants died daily; just the number of slain innocentbystanders had tripled in the two years prior to Bush'sinauguration. Rather than evaluate the efficacy of the War onDrugs and the wisdom of pursuing it, Bennett and his men merelyshuffled the deck one more time. Under Nixon, heroin was the big bad drug. Halfway throughCarter's reign, marijuana nudged it aside. As the public'spassion to fight marijuana waned, cocaine was thrust forward todraw fire. Then crack. The Drug War front shifted endlessly too,from the border to the streets to Bolivia to the money-launderingbanks to the suburbs and back to the border again. Now it was the Bennettistas' turn, and they achieved the mostradical recasting of the country's "drug problem" yet:Drugs would no longer be discussed as a health problem. The physical dangers of illegal drugs had always been theDrug War's causa belli. Even the "zero tolerance"policy of the late Reagan years was couched in the rhetoric of"instantaneous addiction" and "the poisoning ofour children": health terminology. That had to stop. Because if the drug issue was going toserve the Bennettistas' decade-long crusade to police thenation's character, drug abuse needed to be placed in the samecategory as offensive art, multicultural teaching, and ethicalrelativism: a matter of morality. "The simple fact is that drug use is wrong,"Bennett decreed. "And the moral argument, in the end, is themost compelling argument." Terence Pell, Bennett's personallawyer from Education and now the drug office's chief counsel,put it this way: "We have to believe. If you think drugs arebad, that they make people bad neighbors, horrible parents,dangerous drivers and what have you, then you think drugs arebad. There's a moral dimension." If drugs are a health problem then addicts are"sick," and that cast them in a sympathetic light theBennettistas felt addicts didn't deserve. The decision to takedrugs that first time, after all, is voluntary. Walters directlyattacked the old approach. "The health people say 'nostigma,'" he would say, "and I'm for stigma." The medical model of drug abuse was to Bennett's men aphilosophic and practical morass. If you base prohibition ondrugs' health effects, what do you say to the millions ofoccasional users who convincingly claim to be uninjured by thedrugs they took? If you acknowledge that heavy drug users aresick, you create an expectation that the government will treatthem. The biggest problem with basing a prohibitive drug policy onthe health risks, though, was the invitation to comparisons. Theyear the chain-smoking Bennett became drug czar, tobacco killedsome 395,000 Americans -- more than died in both world wars.Alcohol directly killed 23,000 and another 22,400 on thehighways. The Natural Resources Defense Council in Marchpublished a report, widely praised by medical authorities,estimating that as many as 5,500 Americans would develop cancerfrom the pesticides they ate during their preschool years. Theincidence of breast cancer in American women had more thandoubled since World War II, owing largely to dioxin and otherpollutants. Cocaine, on the other hand, killed 3,308 people thatyear, slightly less than died from anterior horn cell disease.Heroin and other opiates killed 2,743. And no death frommarijuana has ever been recorded. Drugs damage without killing, of course, but even here otherpreventable health problems put illegal drugs in deep shade. TheGeneral Accounting Office, Congress's non-partisan investigativeagency, estimated that some 350,000 people were using cocainedaily in 1989. While that's a big number, 15 times that manychildren were going to bed hungry at least once a month thatyear, 50 times that many Americans were sleeping on the streets,and 100 times that many had no health insurance. Discussing drugs as a moral problem obviated suchcomparisons. If the case could be made that drug use is simplywrong, then it wouldn't matter that some people use drugs safely,that alcohol and tobacco kill more people than reefer and smack,that more American than European children know hunger. The Bennettistas worked hard to address the inconsistenciesof their approach. Their most glaring problem was the new drugczar himself. By any medical definition, Bennett was a drugaddict, so dependent on nicotine after giving up the drug in itssmokable form that he now carried everywhere a pack of nicotinechewing gum and was up to 40 milligrams of nicotine a day --about as much as in two packs of cigarettes. Alcohol was another problem. Bennett's drug office had noCongressional mandate to address it, his mainstream constituencyenjoyed it, and the alcohol industry's mulitmillion-dollar lobbywouldn't stand for further restrictions on booze. So the drugoffice needed somehow to place alcohol on the "moral"side of the line. No small trick. Aside from the cirrhosis andhighway deaths, booze was implicated in violent crime to a muchgreater degree than any illegal drug. The Justice Departmentfound that half of those convicted of homicide in 1989 were usingalcohol at the time of the killing, while fewer than six percentsaid they were on drugs alone. Bennett's men tiptoed through the minefield of alcohol andtobacco. John Walters took the position that marijuana, cocaine,and heroin, "enslave people" and "prevent themfrom being free citizens" in a way that alcohol and tobaccodo not. Bruce Carnes decided that drug taking was"life-denying," and "inward," but thatalcohol and tobacco were not. Illegal drugs, Bennett said in aspeech that May, "obliterate morals, value, character, ourrelations with each other and our relation to God." None ofthese conclusions was based on science, but collectively they hadthe effect of royal fiat. The Bennettistas also relied on a neat bit of tautology:marijuana, heroin, and cocaine are immoral because they areillegal. Why are they illegal? Because they are immoral.Compliance, not health, was the real issue. "Now that thegovernment has spoken to the subject that drugs areunlawful," said Paul McNulty, a Bennettista soul-matedirecting communications at the Justice Department, "aperson who disobeys the law has made a moral choice and should bedealt with appropriately." Bennett freely admitted drugenforcement was but an instrument of a wider agenda, calling for"the reconstitution of legal and social authority throughthe imposition of appropriate consequences for drug dealing anddrug use." "The drug crisis," he told theWashington Hebrew congregation, "is a crisis of authority,in every sense of the term, 'authority." Consequently, "a massive wave of arrests is a toppriority for the War on Drugs," Bennett announced.Washington, D.C. had arrested 45,000 of its citizens for drugs inthe two years prior to Bennett's appointment, "withoutmaking an appreciable dent in either the drug trade or the murderrate," Newsweek noted. But Bennett wanted more of the same.On the day he was sworn in, he declared the city a "highintensity drug trafficking area" and unveiled a massive planto fight drugs in the nation's capital. More than eighty federalagents would bolster the city's drug squad. A curfew would sweepthe streets of minors after 11 p.m. A judge ruled the curfewunconstitutional, but the mood was infectious. Some members ofCongress suggested declaring de facto martial law -- placing theD.C. police under federal control and sending in the Army andNational Guard. Of the $100 million Bennett wanted spent in D.C.,95 percent was for law enforcement. Of that, more than half wouldgo to a new prison, and until that could be built, Bennettproposed converting abandoned military buildings into makeshiftdrug prisons. As for the purpose of all this new incarceration,Bennett was characteristically blunt: "I'm not a person whosays that the first purpose of punishment isrehabilitation," he told Congress. "The first purposeis moral, to exact a price for transgressing the rights ofothers." Elvis Presley The year ended on an odd note for the War on Drugs. Four daysbefore Christmas 1971, Egil Krogh's phone rang. It was DwightChapin, from Bob Haldeman's staff. "The King is here," Chapin said. "King who?" Krogh asked. "No kings on thepresident's schedule today." "Not just any two-bit king," Chapin answered."The King. Elvis. The King of Rock." Elvis Presley had appeared that morning at the Northwest Gateof the White House and handed the guard a nearly illegiblesix-page letter on American Airlines stationery. He was anadmirer of the president, Presley wrote, and he wanted to helpspread Nixon's anti-drug message. He was well positioned, too:."The drug culture, the hippie elements, the SDS, BlackPanthers, etc. do not consider me as their enemy or as they callit The Establishment." To dispel any doubts as to his ownloyalty, Presley added in bold underline, "I call it Americaand I love it!" Then Presley made his pitch. "I can and will do moregood if I were made a Federal Agent at Large. . . . All I need isthe Federal credentials." Presley was registered at a nearby hotel under the name JonBurrows. "I will be here for as long as it takes to get thecredentials of a Federal Agent," Presley wrote. "I havedone an in-depth study of drug abuse and Communist brainwashingtechniques and I am right in the middle of the whole thing whereI can and will do the most good." Though he didn't mention it in the note to Nixon, Presley wasa collector of police badges. And he was a dopehound of legendaryexcess. But in the squareball Nixon White House, Presley foundperhaps the only people in the United States who didn't knowthat. Krogh certainly didn't. He took the letter at face value. At 12:30, the King was relieved of his present for the chiefexecutive - a nickel-plated .45 automatic, complete withammunition -- and ushered into the office of the president. Nixon was dressed like Nixon: blue suit, white shirt, tie.Elvis was dressed like Elvis: black velvet jacket, chest hair,gold medallions, sunglasses and a belt buckle big as a dinnerplate. He pulled up a sleeve to exhibit cufflinks the size ofhamsters. As Nixon bent close to examine them, Elvis launchedinto a tirade against the Beatles, who he accused of beinganti-American. "You know," Nixon said. "Those who use thedrugs are the protesters. You know, the ones who get caught up indissent and violence. They're the same group of youngpeople." "Mr. President," Elvis said, "I'm on yourside. I want to be helpful. And I want to help get people torespect the flag because that's getting lost." Then Elvis got to the point. "Mr. President, can you getme a badge from the Narcotics Bureau?" Krogh was afraid of this. He'd already called the number-twoman at BNDD who earlier that day had thrown Elvis out. Elvis hadgone there before stopping at the Northwest gate, and offered a$5,000 "donation" to BNDD in return for a badge. Nixon, not knowing any of that, looked uncertainly at Krogh."Bud, can we get him a badge?" "If you want to give him a badge, I think we can get himone." "I'd like to do that. See that he gets one." Elvis then did something nobody had ever done in the NixonOval Office; he gathered the president up in his arms and gavehim a big bear hug. The staff was stunned; the photographerdidn't even get a picture. Nixon endured it stiffly, handed outpresidential tie clasps, and dismissed the King with a hearty paton the shoulder. And so it came to pass that on the day Elvis Presley died ofa drug overdose in 1977, he was a credentialed Special Assistantin the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-17IA086-000619-B006-67http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/drug_law_timeline.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033720 text/html 15425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:37:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:05 GMTContent-length: 15207 Drug Law Timeline Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Drug Law Timeline Significant Events in the History of our Drug Laws Year Event 1600s Colonial laws required farmers to grow hemp because it was used for ropes and sails on ships. A good hemp industry was important to the shipping industry. 1700s Hemp was the primary crop grown by George Washington at Mount Vernon, and a secondary crop grown by Thomas Jefferson at Monticello. 1844 Cocaine was synthesized 1845 A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor is enacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. 1847 The American Medical Association is founded. 1860s Opiates see widespread use as a pain killer for injured soldiers during the Civil War. Opiates were the first real miracle drugs because they allowed the patient to be anesthetized while the doctor performed surgery. Before the advent of opiates, the most common surgery was a simple amputation. That is, the doctor got several big strong people to hold the patient down and then literally sawed off an arm or a leg while the patient screamed in pain. For this reason, a good doctor was a fast doctor. Battlefield hospitals during the Civil War commonly had large piles of severed arms and legs. The use of opiates as anesthesia gave doctors time to work on the patient and actually made modern surgery possible. 1869 The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith, twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of John Brown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: "Our involuntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntary slaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, of him whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one; nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him who has enslaved himself to alcohol." [Quoted in Sinclar, op. cit. pp. 83-84] 1870s The first laws against opium smoking were passed in San Francisco and Virginia City. Opium itself was not outlawed and remained available in any number of over-the-counter products. Only the smoking of opium was outlawed, because that was a peculiarly Chinese habit and the laws were specifically directed at the Chinese. The white people in the communities feared that Chinese men were luring white women to have sex in opium dens. The patent medicine industry started its rise. Because there were no restrictions on advertising, labeling, or contents of any products the patent medicine industry made up all sorts of concoctions including the opiates, cocaine, and other drugs, and sold them with the most extravagant advertising claims. This led to a rise in addiction. Addiction was poorly understood. Morphine and heroin were recommended as remedies for alcohol addiction. French Wine of Coca: Invigorating Tonic became a popular soft drink because it contained cocaine. It went on to become Coca-Cola and, together with other similar drinks like Pepsi-Cola, made the soda fountain a common part of the neighborhood pharmacy. 1874 The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is founded in Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U. forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. 1882 The law in the United States, and the world, making "temperance education" a part of the required course in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes such education mandatory in the District of Columbia, and in territorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the states have similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] The Personal Liberty League of the United States is founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements for compulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] 1884 Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine, and reports feeling "exhilaration and lasting euphoria, which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of the healthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control and possess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In other words, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believe that you are under the influence of a drug." [Quoted in Ernest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82] Freud later died of effects of tobacco-induced cancer. He was able to break his addiction to cocaine, but could not break his addiction to cigar smoking even though most of the lower part of his face had been removed by cancer surgery. Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teaching compulsory in public schools in New York State. The following year similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other states soon following suit. 1906 The Pure Food and Drug Act was passed, forming the Food and Drug Administration and giving it power to regulate foods and drugs, and requiring labeling of contents on foods and drugs. The most important effect on the drug problem was the demise of the patent medicine industry. Drug addiction began a dramatic drop. 1914 The Harrison Tax Act was passed, effectively outlawing the opiates and cocaine. 1915 Utah passed the first state anti-marijuana law. Mormons who had gone to Mexico in 1910 returned smoking marijuana. It was outlawed at a result of the Utah legislature enacting all Mormon religion prohibitions as criminal laws. 1922 Narcotic Drug Import and Export Act - Intended to eliminate use of narcotics except for legitimate medicinal use 1924 Heroin Act -Makes it illegal to manufacture heroin 1937 Marijuana Tax Act Applies controls over marijuana similar to narcotics 1938 Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act FDA given control over drug safety, Drugs redefined: effect body even in absence of disease, Establishes class of drugs available by Prescription (Company determines status) 1942 Opium Poppy Control Act Prohibits growing poppy w/o license 1951 Durham-Humphrey Amendment Established more specific guidelines for prescription drugs: habit forming, safety, and evaluation of new drugs 1951 Boggs Amendment to the Harrison Narcotic Act Mandatory sentences for narcotic violations 1956 Narcotics Control Act Intends to impose even more severe penalties for narcotics violations 1965 Drug Abuse Control Amendments (DACA) Strict controls over amphetamines, barbiturates, LSD, etc. 1966 Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act (NARA) Allows treatment as an alternative to jail 1968 DACA Amendments Provides that sentence may be suspended and record expunged if no further violations within 1 year 1970 Comprehensive Drug Abuse and Control Act Replaces and updates all previous laws concerning narcotics and other dangerous drugs. Empasis on law enforcement. 1972 Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act Establishes federally funded programs for prevention and treatment 1973 Methadone Control Act Regulates methadone licensing 1973 Heroin Trafficking Act Increases penalties for distribution 1973 Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA) Consolidates NIMH, NIDA, and NIAAA under umbrella organization 1973 Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) Remodels Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs into DEA 1974 and 1978 Drug Abuse Treatment and Control Amendments Extends 1972 act 1978 Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Amendments Sets up education programs within Department of Education 1980 Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Amendments Extends prevention education and treatment programs 1984 Drug Offenders Act Sets up special programs for offenders and organizes treatment 1986 Analogue (Designer Drug) Act Makes use of substances with similar effects and structure to existing illicit drug illegal 1988 Anti-Drug Abuse Act Establishes oversight office: National Drug Control Policy 1992 ADAMHA Reorganization Transfers NIDA, NIMH, and NIAAA to NIH and incorporates ADAMHA's programs into the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-18IA086-000619-B006-86http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/soldis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033736 text/html 87163HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:37:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:28 GMTContent-length: 86945 Mythical Roots of US Drug Policy - Soldier's Disease andAddicts in the Civil War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVIL WAR by Jerry Mandel* 1779 Haight St. San Francisco, CA 94117 Special thanks to Marvin Scott for kind encouragement andsuperb editing. THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTION IN THECIVIL WAR Abstract Soldier's Disease -- widespread addiction following massiveadministration of opiates during the Civil War -- is the earliestand most often repeated example of a drug problem before thenarcotics laws. The story exemplifies several basic themes usedin support of continued drug prohibition -- addiction is easy toacquire, hard to kick, and is a publicly noticed, i.e. asocial,problem. Soldier's Disease, though, is a myth. Not one caseof addiction was reported in medical records or the literature ofthe time; under ten references were made in the NineteenthCentury to addiction the cause of which was the Civil War; and noperjorative nickname for addicted veterans, like Soldier'sDisease, appeared in the literature until 1 9 15, and it did notbecome part of the Conventional Wisdom of drug experts untilalmost a century after Appomattox. THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVILWAR myth ... 1: a usu. traditional story of ostensiblyhistorical events that serves to unfold part of the world view ofa people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomena ... 3... b: an ill-founded belief held uncritically esp. by aninterested group. Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1973 The earliest (and often the only) example of opiate addictionas a social problem which is frequently cited by drug experts is Soldier'sDisease -- widespread addiction resulting from widespreadopiate use in the Civil War. Most writers who report Soldier'sDisease devote no more than three sentences to it. It is thebrevity, clarity, "catchiness," and conceptualimplication of "Soldier's Disease" which accounts forthe contemporary significance of such a fleeting reference.Possibly the lengthiest and most graphic description of opiateuse in the Civil War, resulting in massive addiction amongveterans, was provided by Gerald Starkey, a century after thatwar: In 1862 (sic) the Civil War broke out.... They would chargeeach other, literally pound chains down cannons and fire pointblank at the enemy and these young men were presented to theirfield surgeons with terrible shrapnel wounds ... along withterrible pain. About all the field surgeon could do was use the two newinvented tools that had been presented to him in the previousfive or six years I the hypodermic needle and syringe, along withMorphine Sulfate .... They injected the young wounded veteranswith huge amounts of Morphine daily (every four hours) to killtheir pain.... It was necessary for the surgeons to dofull-quarter amputations -- literally take the arms and legs offright at the start of the body, usually to stop infectiousgangrene. In 1865 there were an estimated 400,000 young War veteransaddicted to Morphine.... The returning veteran could be. .identified because he had a leather thong around his neck and aleather bag (with) Morphine Sulfate tablets, along with a syringeand a needle issued to the soldier on his discharge.... (T)hiswas called the "Soldier's Disease." (Starkey, 1971:482-84)1 The lesson to be learned from "Soldier's Disease"involves four linked hypotheses, phrased as fact, which form aparadigm justifying today's U.S. Drug policy. This paradigm is: Free access to opiates sooner or later breeds a massive use ofopiates. Widespread use of opiates leads to a lot of addicts. Addiction is long-term, often enough, forever. Addiction is a publicly manifest problem. In sum, free availability leads to a social problem. The historical record shows, however, that Soldier's Diseaseis a fanciful reconstruction of the past by writers I 00 years ormore after the Civil War. There was not, to my knowledge, asingle mention of Soldier's Disease, Army Disease, or any othersobriquet referring to addicted veterans, until a half -centuryafter the Civil War; not one addict was noted in any writing orstatistic compiled during or immediately after the Civil War; andreports of addicted veterans who began using during that War areonly rarely mentioned throughout the rest of the 19th Century. Soldier's Disease is a modern creation that has very little todo with the facts of 19th Century drug use. Rather, it is an ideawhich fits, which shores up, modern drug policies. It is anassertion about what opiates are supposed to do, applied to apast situation. In the next part -- Section I -- of this paper, the relevanceof Soldier's Disease to contemporary drug policy is addressed.Soldier's Disease is the only tale of a pre-Harrison Act opiateproblem which a self-respecting scholar in recent years couldpoint to as a pre-1914 social problem due to opiates. In Section2, the modern creation of Soldier's Disease, and its recentpopularity among drug experts, is shown by noting the first whomention the concept and when, a generation or two later, itbecame accepted by scholars of all persuasions. Then the focusturns to the historical evidence which would test, in order, thefour steps in the above paradigm. In Section 3 the questions are:"were opiates widely used by soldiers during the CivilWar?" and "was addiction among them widespread duringthe war?" In Section 4 the questions are: "wasthere wide-scale addiction among veterans after thewar?" and "was this a publicly manifest problem?"What follows is the evidence for answering these four questions:in order, " a tentative yes...... no," "no,"and "no." The conclusions will expand further on howthe mythic and the actual situation of Civil War opiate userelates to the current Drug policy debate. 1. The Relevance of Soldier's Disease To Contemporary U.S. Drug Policy The paradigm justifying U.S. opiate policy -- availabilityleads to use; use leads to addiction; addiction is long-term; andaddiction becomes a publicly manifest problem -- conveys the ideathat unavoidable Social consequences of free accessto opiates justify the enormous costs of contemporary U.S. drugpolicy. Of all the stories about the "bad old days"when opiates were legal, only Soldier's Disease providesconvincing I. evidence" that opiate availability led to a publiclymanifest problem, beyond merely a substantial increase in thenumbers of addicts. Thus, only the tale of Soldier's Diseasedemonstrates Step 4 of the paradigm. The very phrase"Soldier's Disease" connotes a publicly manifestproblem. Otherwise, the tales told about opiates before the lawsbanning them were either too far-fetched to be repeated in moderntimes, or reflect a social problem only if you believe theparadigm, (and often not even then). During and just before 1914,the type of stories carried by the press about opiates did notindicate a social problem which might lead to a need forprohibition, and the absence of media coverage of the HarrisonAct during the year it was passed by Congress further suggeststhe irrelevance of opiate use to a social problem. There were, in the medical as well as the mass media of thelate 19th and early 20th Centuries, occasional alarms soundedabout other publicly manifest opiate problems, but no scholar inrecent years believes that these were real or significant. (Forexample, the press periodically reported an opium problem,particularly white women smoking opium in Chinatown, with Chinesemen. A racist, not an opiate problem). Even the moralisticanti-opium writers of about a century ago, with rare and oftenunbelievable exceptions, did not point to a publicly noticedproblem.2 Today, there are imputed social problems, but not a demonstratedone, beyond Soldier's Disease. Historians David Musto andDavid Courtwright (Musto, 1972:2-4; and Courtwright, 1982:16-28)extend a tradition3 of research into the megatonnage of opiatesannually imported into the U.S. from well before the Civil Warthrough the early 20th Century. Additionally, opiates weretypically a key ingredient in patent medicines, and there was ahuge national campaign against them resulting in the Pure Foodand Drug Act. Neither the level of imports nor the widespread useof opiates in patent medicines, in the absence of belief in aparadigm such as we noted, suggest anything beyond widespreadavailability. The medical literature of the 19th Century is filled withdiscussions about opiates, many written by experts who believedits use was terrible. To them, a loss of "moral will,"perhaps best exemplified by secretiveness, including husbands andwives keeping large scale addictions hidden from their spousesfor many years,4 was a major problem. Addicts were deemed liars,which was only natural given the opprobrium attached to addictionin much of U.S. society long before there were drug laws. Themedical and pharmaceutical literature also had an on-goingcontest, essentially, to report the oldest, most long-time,addict with the largest habit. None of the above indicates thatthe behavior of 19th or early 20th Century addicts was a publiclyevident problem. In the years just before national drug prohibition, there wasbarely a sign of an opiate-caused social problem, Two newspapers,to my knowledge, were indexed for 1906-1912 -- the New York Timesand the San Francisco Call.5 In each, there were three basictypes of stories: recent state laws which were forerunnersof the Harrison Act in that they criminalized opiate use; arrests(over half being of Chinese Americans); and internationalstories. Opiates are assumed to be "evil" but the onlyallusion to a possible social consequence in any Times story isheadlined "Says Opium Aids Music Composers.-6 The onlypublic problem with opiates recounted in the Call, besides whitewomen in Chinese opiate dens7 and problems which result from thelocal laws, is lethargy among the troops at The Presidio.("It destroys the vitality of the user, and would in timemake the soldier a useless charge.") (S.F. Call, 1910b) 8 The year the nation's major opiate prohibition law was passed,the mass media, (at least the New York Times, San FranciscoChronicle, Washington Post, and the Hearst Press), gave virtuallyno coverage to Congressional discussion or passage of theHarrison Act, or when it was signed into law or took effect.(Aldrich, 1979) Fourteen months after it was signed, a medicaljournal presented the results of a one-question survey -"Inyour opinion what are the five most useful and important drugs inthe materia medica?" -- answered by teachers at leadingmedical schools. "Not only did it (opium) receive 102 votesout of 107, but in 60 instances it was named first."(Robinson, 1916) What the above suggests is not only that the rationales tojustify opiate prohibition circa 1914 could not be repeated byself-respecting scholars as rationales for continuedprohibition today, but that hardly a rationale was offered atall. The Harrison Act crept in on tip-toes, called a tax act,with no fanfare, no public interest or debate. When, a few yearslater, it became clear that this was a criminal law withconsiderable consequences, there was a brief flurry of criticismand a rationale provided for continuing opiate prohibition,namely the vileness and criminality of "junkies" andthe criminal cartels supplying them. Obviously, the consequencesof the law provided the rationale for justifying the law, butthere were not that many opiate addicts and it was not that big asocial problem for the debate to continue. "Evidence" of a social problem is needed to justifyopiate prohibition only when such prohibition is a significantsocial issue (which it was not in the years preceding theHarrison Act) and when criticism of drug laws crescendoes. Onlythen do scholars reconsider the rationales for the drug laws, andturn to the historical record for insights into contemporaryconcerns. It is only in these periods when the four parts of theparadigm, enunciated above, have to be demonstrated ifcontemporary drug policy is to be accepted. It is the final step-- the manifestation of a problem, in public -- which makes theother three socially significant. The only currently citedexample of the complete paradigm, in the absence of opiateprohibition, is Soldier's Disease ... and it's a myth. 2. Tracking The Develogment of The MM A. It's Roots The earliest portrayal of Soldier's Disease among Civil Warveterans appeared as World War I erupted over Europe (also theyear the Harrison Act, took effect). In "The Curse ofNarcotism in America -- A Reveille," Marks, a Yaleprofessor, intended to alert the U.S. to an enormous addictionproblem among Civil War veterans that would be replicated inanother war: Did you know that there is practically no old American familyof Civil War reputation which has not had its addicts?.... (I)twas the "army disease" because of its prevalence?....(W)ith the war that hangs over us, the drug evil will spread intoa giantism of even more terrible growth than the present?....(T)here are something like 4,000,000 victims of opium and cocainein this country today? (Marks, 1915:315)9 Marks feared the return of the "hydra-headeddrug-curse" of the Civil War, but others writing duringWorld War I about the consequences of combat upon drug use amongservicemen made no reference to the War Between the States.(Crothers, 1916; N.Y. Times, 1917; Stanley, 1918; and Weber,1918) In the nine years after World War I, a handful of authorsmentioned Civil War-related addiction, though none mentioned ArmyDisease or any such synonym. (Bishop, 1919 and 1920; IllinoisMedical journal, 192 1; World's Work, 1924; and Fell, 1924). "Army Disease" was next noted in The OpiumProblem. Terry and Pellens' encyclopedic work of 1928, whichbecame "regarded as the single most comprehensive work inthe field" only several decades later.10 (Ball, 1970) ForTerry and Pellens, "the Civil War gave it (chronic opiumintoxication) a considerable impetus (which) seems definitelyestablished." (Terry and Pellens, 1928: 5) Between 1928 andthe late 1950's, only a handful of scholars noted "ArmyDisease" (Terry, 193 1; Woods, 193 1: Dai, 1937: Barnes,1939; and Lindesmith, 1947), and even in the early 1960's it wasinfrequently mentioned (Isbell, 1960 and 1963; Kolb, 1960 and1962; Clausen, 196 1; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; and Sonnedecker,1963), though prior to the drug explosion of the mid- 1960'sthere were few scholars in the drug field. For the experts whothe past quarter century have claimed Soldier's Disease, if theycite any reference it is typically Terry and Pellens. B. The Contemporary Conventional Wisdom Since 1964, Soldier's Disease, in essence, was mentioned inabout 100 works by drug experts, half of these since 1973.11 Itwas also mentioned in several studies by prestigious governmentagencies and Drug and Crime Commissions.12 Among the experts aremany renowned critics of U.S. drug policies -- including EdwardBrecher, Alan Dershowitz, John Kaplan, Arnold Trebach and NormanZinberg. In the early 1970's a few writers questioned thefactuality of Soldier's (Kramer, 1971 and 1972; Swatos, 1972;Musto, 1973; and Quinones, 1975), but shortly thereafter theywere rebutted in a detailed historical analysis. (Courtwright,1978 and 1982)13 Since the mid- 1970's the mention of Soldier'sDisease has diminished, maybe because the critics had an impactor because most experts stopped probing the roots of U.S. drugpolicy after the early 1970's. Soldiers Disease is, however, still mentioned by many experts... and no one, yet, has responded to Courtwright. Though briefly stated, a consistent theme involving threecomponents is reiterated by almost all the cited drug experts,the only variation being in the synonyms used. First, morphine inparticular, and opiates in general, were administered by naivedoctors "indiscriminately" (also termed "promiscuous", "imprudent","uncontrolled", "overdosage","ignorant", etc.). Second, as a consequence of suchmedical naivete, addiction among soldiers was massive (alsotermed "prevalent", "commonplace","thousands", wholesale usage","rampant", etc.). Third, so widespread was theaddiction among soldiers and veterans that it became known asSoldier's Disease (also termed "army disease","soldier's illness", or "soldier'ssickness."),14 The only clear disagreement is the few who estimate the numberof addicted Civil War veterans. Some claim 45,000 (Ashley, 1972and 1978; Geis, 1973; Health PAC, 1970; and Kenny, 1972); others400,000. (H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Lingeman, 1969; Schwartz,1980; Starkey, 197 1; Summers et. al., 1975; and Westin andShaffer, 1972) Since no writer in either camp provides one cluefor their claim, the possibility that both estimates arose out ofthe thin air circa 1970 is not ruled out. Is today's conventional wisdom about Soldier's Disease anintellectual version of the children's game of Telephone where asimple message, after innumerable repetitions, becomes distortedand a new "catchy" message takes on a life of its own... or have recent writers captured the essence of opiateaddiction in a past era? That depends on the evidence during andjust after the Civil War. 3. Opiate Use and Addiction During The Civil War A. The Need For and Use Of Opiates During the Civil War, and at least until 1914, opiates wereconsidered the best medicine for controlling dysentery anddiarrhea and for containing the pain from war wounds. The SurgeonGeneral's history of the just ended Civil War was often lavish inits praise of opium. "Opium -- this medicine merits first place amongthese remedies. It was used almost universally in all cases ofsevere wounds, and was particularly useful in penetrating woundsof the chest, in quieting the nervous system and, indirectly inmoderating hemmorhage. (US Surgeon General, 1870 :645) But, how great was the need? How widely was it used? Given theneed, and the use, of opiates then, how many soldier addicts werethere in the Civil War? Official records from the Civil War show more incidents ofsevere illness for which opiates were the main remedy thanthere were wounds. More died from disease than were killedin battle or succumbed to wounds (For Union troops, 62%"disease," 19% "battle," and 12%"Wounds" of 360,000 deaths among Union troops).(Duncan, 1912:397) Union medical records (for medical problems,not deaths) show approximately 1,400,000 acute and 200,000chronic cases of diarrhea or dysentery, 250,000 wounds, and300,000 cases, combined, of typhoid, typhus, continued fever,venereal disease, scurvy, delerium tremens, insanity andparalysis. (Brooks, 1966:127) There were 30,000 amputationsreported performed by the Union's doctors. (US Surgeon General,1883) Among Confederate prisoners, 32% of the almost 19,000 whodied in captivity in the north succumbed to diarrhea ordysentery. (Brooks, 1966:126) In Andersonville prison fromFebruary 1864 to April 1865, of 12,541 recorded Union soldiercaptives who died, 45% did so from diarrhea or dysentery, andonly 7% from wounds, gangrene or "debility." (USSurgeon General, 1879:32) There was obviously a great needfor opiates. Civil War physicians frequently dispensed opiates. TheSecretary of War just after 1865 stated the Union Army was issued10 million opium pills, over 2,840,000 ounces of other opiatepreparations (such as laudunum or paregoric which, by weight,were well under half opium), and almost 30,000 ounces of morphinesulphate. (Courtwright, 1978:106-7 and 1982) B. Not One Report of Addiction In The Field Yet for all the quantities dispensed, there was not onereport from 1861-1865 of an addicted soldier. Could opiate addiction pass unnoticed, and have noconsequences, among troops living in raw conditions and oftenmoving from one place to another? Could so much morphine andopium preparations get used without generating a single addict? The 30,000 ounces of morphine is most easily explained.Probably, most of it was dusted or rubbed intowounds or, during anesthetization, rubbed into rawtissue. (Adams, 1952; and Brooks, 1966) In the campaign ofFredericksburg in December of 1862, "hypodermic syringeswere unknown, such drugs as morphine being doled out on the pointof a knife" by surgeons. (Duncan, 1985: 200) By the end ofthe war, the hypodermic needle was beginning to be used, inplaces -- "roughly 19 per cent of Union Army physicians werecapable of administering morphine hypodermically.... and evenfewer Confederate physicians were (so) capable."(Courtwright, 1978:105) Whether the hypodermic administration ofmorphine during the Civil War was extremely rare as some haveclaimed (US Surgeon General, 1888:547) or as others have impliedby their failure to note such use in medical histories of the war(Courtwright, 1978:104-105), or was frequent as one neurologistnoted (Courtwright, 1978:106), there is not one case mentionedwhere morphine was injected for pleasure, or to stave offwithdrawal pains. The Civil War lasted four years, with 1,500,000 three yearenlistments on the Union side. Thus, those ten million opiumpills dispensed by Union doctors average roughly two per soldierper year (assuming the pills survived combat conditions). Priorto amputations or other battlefield surgery, the patientroutinely expected and was routinely given one of these pills.Similarly, the 2,84 1,000 ounces of opiate preparations works outto about a half -ounce per Union soldier per year. Thoughphysicians argued about the benefits of opiates for the relief ofpain which accompanied "the fluxes" (diarrhea anddysentery), "the partisans of opium were very much in themajority" and used opium for dysentery and other forms offlux including "chronic fluxes." Army physicians"united opium with almost every medicine employed to checkthe progress of the disease," and despite typical failure tocure returned "almost always to opium as the drug which atleast alleviated, if it did not cure." Where the sufferingsof the patient were very great and continuous, and wheresleeplessness and restlessness had become a medical danger,opiates were highly recommended, even by the otherwise skepticalphysician. (US Surgeon General, 1879: 743-747) Again, applyingbasic arithmetic, and taking into account that there were manymore than the reported 1.6 million cases of dysentery anddiarrhea, it is easy to understand why there were periodicshortages of opiates. As with morphine, there is not a singlereport during the Civil War of a soldier rising opium forpleasure, and the single claim of opiates used to stave offwithdrawal pains (published 16 years after the War) was the"confession" of an officer charged with "desertingin the face of the enemy, and sentenced to be shot."15(Nolan, 1881) Though modern writers have accused the military doctors in theCivil War of not fully appreciating the addictive qualities ofopiates, one historian of Civil War medicine writes thatphysicians in the field did not fully appreciate the benefits ofopium. Tincture of opium and paregoric were always available, butnowhere in the records does one get the impression that they wereused routinely in the management of the fluxes. (Brooks, 1966:117) Morphine, too, may well have been underused, to judge from aleading, albeit unusual, neurologist at the time, S. WeirMitchell, who: (S)colded the medical profession for its reluctance in usingthis mighty painkiller, pointing out that some patients' agonieswere so severe the choice must lie between Morphine andamputation. (Adams, 1952:138) The naivete of military physicians regarding the negativeeffects of opiates, often noted shortly after the Civil War, hadto do basically with their misunderstanding the medical effectsof opiates, not the addictive properties of the drug.16 (USSurgeon General, 1879:735-750) There were no reports of addiction in situations which, acentury or so later, generated numerous such references. For theCivil War, one virtually never reads of a soldier sufferingwithdrawal pains, or dying of an OD; or a physician in the fieldbesieged for an opiate for feeding a habit (as distinct fromeasing pain or controlling diarrhea). In Wait Whitman'sdescription of the 80,000 to 100,000 sick and wounded he saw in600 hospital visits during three years of the Civil War, he notesthat many patients craved tobacco, sweets, or alcohol, yet henever once mentions opium. (Whitman, 1895) The sickness formsubmitted by physicians to the Surgeon General from mid- 1 862 tothe end of the war listed 152 categories of disease, including"serpent bite," "apoplexy,""insanity," "night blindness,""poisoning," "inebriation," "deliriumtremens" and "chronic alcoholism", but notaddiction or opiate deprivation. (US Surgeon General, Pt. 1, V.1). In the Surgeon General's history of the Civil War,"nostalgia ... .army itch .... poisoning .... alcoholism.... and venereal disease," but not opiate use, are singledout for special comment. Under "nostalgia" the problemof boredom is given prominence and smoking tobacco, drinkingalcohol, and gambling are singled out for their "sedativeinfluence," to "pass the dull hours" in lieu ofsatisfying the craving for excitement. (US Surgeon General, 1888:886) In sum, there is no hard evidence of addicts during theCivil War, and it is hard to believe it would have been missedhad addiction been significant. C. Not One Report of Addiction Immediately After The CivilWar If addiction among Civil War veterans was significant, itshould have been most noticed in the immediate post-War years.There were 63,000 soldiers whose chronic diarrhea carried onafter the war, (Adams, 1889) and over 20,000 survivors ofamputations reported by Union doctors. (US Surgeon General, 1883)When the Civil War ended, and veterans filled the prisons, NewYork State prison keepers at Auburn and Sing-Sing told ofcontraband smuggled into prisons, such as "whiskey,tobacco... yellow covered literature.... sugar, tea, coffee,butter, pies, cakes, liquor, looking glasses, combs, brushes,etc.", yet opiates were not mentioned. (North AmericanReview, 1867:572-74) In the Mississippi State Hospital, whoseadmission records of the mentally ill go back to 1855, the firstnarcotism case was recorded in 1884. (Jaquith, 1965) The editionof the United States Dispensatory, (the enormous physician's deskreference of the time), which appeared just after the Civil Wardevotes 27 pages to "opium" without noting the CivilWar. (Wood and Bache, 1868) Surely a significant minority ofthose 63,000 diarrhetics and 30,000 amputees were advised to takeopiates by their physicians, and willingly took what at the timewas the best relief of their problems. Yet only two references toveterans who began using opiates during the Civil War werepublished before 1880. (Day, 1868; and Oliver, 1872) (A thirdpre-1880 case-history of an addicted veteran, cited by some asdemonstrating Soldier's Disease, started using opiates after thewar). (Anon, 1876) D. The Logic For Claiming The Existence of ManyCivil War Addicts How, then, could recent experts agree on massive addictionduring the Civil War? Almost certainly it has to do with trust inthe statements of Terry and Pellens without bothering to checkthe original sources. The one exception -- the one historian whohas checked those sources and maintains the validity of addictionduring the Civil War -- is Courtwright, who believes thataddiction must exist ... even though it is not in evidence. Formorphine, Courtwright cites S. Weir Mitchell's claim that 40,000morphine injections were given at one army hospital in one year.This number is far beyond any other -- in fact, except for itthere would be no consideration of the widespread use ofmorphine other than what was rubbed and dusted into wounds.Courtwright considers the claim "puzzling, to say theleast," (and there are reasons for doubting Weir,personally),17 but he concludes if that number "is even halfcorrect, it seems impossible that a substantial portion of thepatients ... did not end the war as addicts.""Impossible" as it seems, not a single addict wasreported during the Civil War. Courtwright also notes "the frequency and casualness withwhich opiates were administered" and states that "vastquantities of opium preparations other than morphine weredispensed under circumstances (such as to those with chronicdiarrhea, dysentery or malaria) which could very easily lead toaddiction." The only trouble is "very easily" didnot occur. Disregarding the lack of documentation on a single addictduring the Civil War, Courtwright contends "that the warcontributed to the spread of addiction," and "offerthe fighting, sick and wounded veterans greatly expandedthe pool for iatrogenic addiction." (Courtwright,1982:55-56, emphasis added) Since opiates were widelyadministered in the early as well as last years of the Civil War,it is hard to imagine why addiction would only developafter the war. Nonetheless, accepting Courtwright's contentionfor the moment, the test of the validity of Soldier's Diseasethus depends on analysis of post-war addiction among veterans. 4. Reports of Addicted Veterans Through the 19thCentury Were it not for Horatio Day's The Opium Habit,published in 1868, the modern day notion of Soldier's Diseasemight never have developed. The latter of these two sentences byDay (quoted by Terry and Pellens) is, by far, the most widelycited writing on Soldier's Disease: The events of the last few years [Civil War] haveunquestionably added greatly to their [confirmed opium eaters']number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundredbattlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released fromhostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers made soby the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, have found,many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings in Opium. (Day, 1868:1) This remark, quoted by several modern writers,18 is the onlyreference to the Civil War in Day's 335 page tome. Day recountsmany types of persons who were addicts, but not one specific caseof a soldier or veteran.19 in context, Day's two-sentenceallusion to the Civil War suggests an extremely minor problemrecounted by an encyclopedic problem-seeker. A. Courtwright's Evidence Is Skimpy Courtwright recognizes that "army disease" was notan "epidemic," but still concludes: "It ispossible to document numerous references to addicted veteransboth as a class and as individuals." (Courtwright, 1978:1 11) Using the same evidence, and more, I reach oppositeconclusions. Why? In Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction In America Before 1940,Courtwright cites 1 18 books and articles published between theCivil War and the end of the century (Courtwright, 1982) yet inhis studies of Soldier's Disease he lists nine references toaddicted veterans, and only five appeared in the 19th Century2Oand were to veterans who had used opiates during the Civil War.Adding two more which I uncovered (Earle, 1880; Nolan, 188 1),and including two other brief and vague references (Crothers,1892 and 1893), this averages one reference every 4 years between18651899. The overwhelming majority of articles about opiate usewritten in the fifteen years following Appomatox, includingseveral by writers who presented lists of the types of people whowere addicts, do not single out the Civil War,21 nor can I findsuch a reference in newspapers of the time.22 None of these nine sources demonstrates that opiate addictionby Civil War veterans was of social significance. In addition tothose previously quoted (Day and Nolan, who writes of the alibiused by a deserter), there were three references by the mostprolific writers of the period, Mattison and Crothers (twice).23Mattison's sole mention appears at the end of his career, 3 yearsafter the War ended. (Mattison, 1898) Crothers wroteprolifically. If a "drug problem" could be unearthed,trust Crothers to lead the digging party.24 In the context of hisencyclopedic writings, Crothers' few mentions of the Civil Warsuggests its role in subsequent addiction was miniscule.(Crothers, 1892 and 1893) Further, when World War I broke out inEurope, Crothers urged combat physicians_to use opiatesliberally, and fears of a subsequent addiction problem weregroundless. (Crothers, 1916) Two other references are of toneaddicts, one -- of a long-time successful minister --demonstrating the difficulty of detecting addiction at the time.(Russell, 1887; and Keeley, 198 1) B. "Only Your Pharmacist Knows For Sure" The two other references suggest that for a while, in someplaces, there were some addicted veterans ... reported by thosewho would notice addicts even if the general public did notrecognize them -- i.e. the apothecaries who sold opiates. Terryand Pellens, reviewing an 1 878 study , noted that evenphysicians did not recognize the extent of addiction: Druggists were in a much better position to know the truth.... when counter sales were legal, and as a matter of commonpractice, physicians were called upon only by those opiate usersseeking (cure). (Terry and Pellens, 15) A Massachusetts study of 1871 "consulted" 20-30druggists and got mailed responses from 125 physicians. 40 ofthese physicians did not know of a single case of "opiumeating," and of 46 who commented on whether "theinjurious use of opium has increased of late years," 6 1 %answered it had not and another 13% answered it was diminishing.Only one physician, but at least two druggists, stated thatopiate use begun during the late war was an important cause foraddiction. (Oliver, 1872) Without denying the significance ofthis report, these mentions of addicted veterans had noramifications in the drug literature at the time. It was a statepublication with very limited circulation, the few summaries orreviews of the report in the medical literature at the time didnot mention the Civil War,25 and save for Terry and Pellens'lengthy excerpt from it in 1928 we might never have known thatsome pharmacists, at least, recognized that addicted veterans, asa class, were among the ranks of addicts.26 In Chicago in 1880, 50 pharmacists were surveyed about thecause of addiction of their regular opiate using customers. Themost mentioned were " rheumatism and neuralgia" (38each); "some" respondents, (but less than four),believed addiction was caused by sickness and pain and/or the"loss of property and position in society" due to therecent war. (Earle, 1880) (On another government survey, ofdoctors in Michigan in 1878, the Civil War was not mentioned).(Marshall, 1966) In toto, these surveys indicate that there was a small,temporary phenomenon of addicted veterans, which was not a socialproblem in the sense that anyone but a few pharmacists recognizedit in the quarter century after the Civil War. C. "Any" Vs. "Many" No one doubts that all the opiates used to alleviate the painfrom all the chronic diseases and continuous pain resulting fromthe Civil War resulted in some soldiers using and becomingaddicted to opiates. The issue, however, is not whether therewere any addicted veterans but if there were many.Courtwright's contention that "a substantial numberof them (veterans) eventually became addicted to opium ormorphine," and that "two events, the Civil War and thespread of hypodermic medication, triggered a massive increasein iatrogenic opium and especially morphine addiction,"(emphasis not in the original). (Courtwright, 1982) isunwarranted. In arguing that the importance of Soldier's Disease should notbe discounted, Courtwright stresses the importance on later 19thCentury addiction of the wrenching impact that War had on societyas a whole, such as the loss of loved ones, property, fortunesand social position. By such reasoning, any social event orcondition which occurs in reasonable proximity before an increasein drug use can be considered a "cause." Ergo, the ironhorse can be blamed for late 19th century addiction, or moviesand television for the increased drug problems of the last fewdecades. (In the Massachusetts study noted above, morepharmacists reported state restrictions on the use of alcohol a"cause" of recent opiate use than reported the CivilWar). However, Soldier's Disease is cited in the drug literaturethe past few decades to imply something quite specific -- namely,the presence of opiates, outside of strict and knowledgeablemedical control, ipso facto causes massive publicly notedaddiction, Nothing less. 5. Soldier's Disease and Drug Policy In sum, Soldier's Disease proves to be another myth. Inreality, the widespread use of opiates during the Civil Wargenerated so infinitesimal a problem that only two or threeapothecaries, and two or three of the most encyclopedic drugexperts, even speculated on the possibility of addicted soldiersfrom that War for almost half a century. Soldier's Disease didnot become the Conventional Wisdom until almost a century afterthat war. Implicit in the concept of Soldier's Disease are four aspectsof addiction which, together, are a paradigm used to justifycurrent opiate laws -- easy access leads to widespread use,addiction is easy to acquire, hard to kick, and its consequencesare powerful and publicly obvious. In the popular contemporaryidiom, the paradigm consists of "it's so good, don't eventry it once"; "once an addict, always an addict";and in the image of the "junkie". (Belief in thisparadigm, in the early 1970's, led many experts, and particularlycritics of U.S. military policy, to sound the tocsin about opiateuse by GIs for inevitably this would lead to a huge problem ofaddicted veterans ... which it didn't)27 Since each aspect of theparadigm is contradicted by the historical evidence, Soldier'sDisease is a mythic reconstruction of the past to make itcoincide with contemporary assumptions. How significant is the paradigm in justifying opiate laws?Each year over the past two decades the nation has spent billionsin drug law enforcement, resulting in an annual average of over ahalf million drug arrests, and has spent billions for tryingthose arrestees and incarcerating scores of thousands of them.Until the mid-1980's, when cocaine replaced opiates as the mostoften used and most frightening "hard drug," thedangers of opiate addiction formed the core of the nation'sperceived drug problem and most of the prisoners serving drugsentences had been convicted on opiate charges. Additionally,drugs are a major economic alternative for young poor people, aswell as a major source of police corruption. None of this --neither the public money, arrests, incarcerations, thecompetitive illegal economy, and police corruption -existedregarding drugs until there were prohibitory laws. How significant is Soldier's Disease for the paradigm whichshows opiate availability ipso facto causes a massive socialproblem? As noted in Section I of this paper, there is no otherpre-Harrison Act example of a currently believable socialproblem. Though an ancient and seemingly minor issue, addictionamong Civil War veterans functions as a lynchpin or cornerstone.Strip away Soldier's Disease, and the only problem suggested bythe paradigm are the medical consequences of addiction, whichoccurs in a large percentage of opiate users. The facts aboutaddiction among the Civil War's soldiers and veterans indicatesthat widespread addiction, too, is a natural result of freeaccess to drugs. The facts about Civil War drug use indicate open availabilityand no recognizable negative consequences; the facts, the pastfew generations, show extremely limited access to opiates and animmense "drug problem." It is in the illegal contextthat the modern "opiate problem" arises, rather than ina legal context such as the Civil War. The chemistry lesson ofthe Civil War is that opiates per se do not cause the problem,the context does. FOOTNOTES 1 The imagery of the "leather thong around hisneck and a leather bag" is, to my knowledge, unique toStarkey. 2 Occasionally a moralistic author of the late 19th Centurycited a social problem with opiates which no-one else evernoticed, but two problems were repeated enough to warrantcomment. T.D. Crothers in several articles claimed that morphine,in particular, led to crime. According to one scholar who studiedthe period, "No other writer ... asserts the strength andubiquity of this association .... (and) it is extremely difficultto accept the validity of his position." (Swatos, 1972),though at least one other expert claimed, as an alibi in a trialfor a property crime, (Kane, 1882b), that the cost of opiatesforced some persons with huge habits to steal. Still, before thelaws all but the extremely poor could easily afford any sizehabit. Crothers' unique assertions about opiate-caused crime cannot justify a policy which generates the extraordinarydrug-related crime of today. There were also occasional reports that addicts were lethargicand neglectful of personal hygiene and business. However, thetypes of people on 19th Century lists of addicts, were typicallyin demanding jobs. That, said the experts at the time, was whythey sought the "stimulating" effects of opiates. Themany reports of people not knowing their spouses were long termaddicts suggests that the lethargy and inattentiveness tobusiness was hardly blatant. Aside from the racist comments aboutopiate use in Chinatowns, the allegation that opiates effectedthe performance of a class of persons, such as impeding theperformance of soldiers (S.F. Call, 19 1 Ob), was rare. 3 Terry and Pellens, in their encyclopedic classic The OpiumProblem, also report import statistics, as does Kane, the authorof the longest scholarly work in the early 1880's. (Terry andPellens, 1928:50-5 1; and Kane, 1880). 4 "It has been reported that for many years husbands andwives, to say nothing of other members of a family, have lived incomplete ignorance of the existence of this condition in one orthe other." (Terry and Pellens: 2) 5 The S.F. Call index is on index cards at theUniversity of California, Berkeley library. 6 The full headline of this story is: Says Opium Aids Music Composers Jean Laporte Declares Many Owe Much of TheirFame to Smoking The Drug Colleagues Support Him Two Well Known Musicians Say a Few Pipes a Day Are No WorseThan Cigarettes - Doctors Contradict Them (N.Y. Times, 1912) 7 The obvious racism manifest in such headlines as"Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused" (S.F. Call, 1910a),becomes a "social problem" when white women areinvolved, as suggested by the following headline: 200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens Police and Detectives Sweep Chinatown, Battering In Doors ofOpium Places Two White Women Are Captured In Dragnet. (S.F. Call, 191lb) The S.F. Call on occasion linked opiate use to crime orlunacy, but each time the details indicated the problem was aresult of the law. (S.F. Call, 1910c and d, and 1911a) New YorkCity's Commissioner of Corrections said that if addicts aredeprived of opiates on arrest, "normal persons ... veryfrequently go insane." (N.Y. Times, 1914) 9 Estimates of the number of opiate addicts and "cocainefiends" circa 1915 varied enormously. Marks' estimated4,000,000; a U.S. Public Health Service expert estimated aminimum of 70,000 and, elsewhere, " I 18,000.... (and)granting (a) somewhat improbable assertion ... a maximum not morethan 187,000 users of opium," (Marks, 1915; Wilbert, 1914and 1915). 10 Had The Opium Problem gained earlier recognition asa classic, Soldier's Disease might have been the conventionalwisdom of drug experts before the late 1950's. The original 1928printing of 400 copies not sold out for decades. A 1 970 reprintsold much better. 11 Soldier's Disease citations attributable to specificauthors, starting with 1973, are: Abel, 1982; Ashley, 1978; Bean,1974; Bedworth and D'Elia, 1973; Bellis, 198 1; Blaine, Bozzettiand Ohlson, 1973; Brown, 1973; Califano, 1982; Conrad andSchneider, 1980; Coombs et. al., 1976; Courtwright, 1978 and1982; M. Cox, 1984; Cuskey, Johannes and Premkunar, 1973;Dershowitz, 1973; Ferguson, 1975; Finlator, 1973; Fuqua, 1978;Geis, 1973; Goode, 1984; Hofmann and Hofmann, 1975; Jacobs andFehr, 1987; H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Kaplan, 1983; King, 1974;Kittrie, 1974; Levine, 1973; Milby, 1981; Morrell, 1973; Muuss,1974; Pike and Goldstein, 1973; Rice, 1980; Roffman, 1973 and1976; Rublowsky, 1974; Rydell, 1980; Saper, 1974; Schwartz, 1980;Seymour and Smith, 1987; Shroeder, 1980; Smith and Seymour, 1986;Spain, 1975; Stephens and Slatin, 1974; Stimmel, 1975; Summerset. al., 1975; Trebach, 1982; Weinswig, 1973; Young et. al.,1977; and Zinberg, 1984. 12 Soldier's Disease was cited in publications by severalinfluential government agencies and prestigious commissionscreated to address the drug issue. Starting with 1973, referencesto Soldier's Disease can be found in: Los Angeles Sheriff'sDepartment, 1974; National Commission on Marihuana, 1973;Organized Crime Task Force, 1984; President's Commission onOrganized Crime, 1986; Strategy Council, 1975; U.S. AttorneyGeneral, 1984: and U.S. Department of H.E.W., 1975. 13 Despite my many criticisms, I respect Courtwright'sjudiciousness and his willingness to grapple with the issue(which no other expert who claims Soldier's Disease has done), Herecognizes and responds to contrary evidence, and criticizessimplistic recitations of Soldier's Disease. 14 Of the authors the past 30 years who reportwidespread addiction by Civil War veterans, over a third mentionSoldier's Disease, a third denote Army Disease, an occasionalauthor labels it Soldier's Illness or Soldier's Sickness, and theothers describe the phenomenon without noting a sobriquet. 15 The officer confessed at his trial that he was"suffering for want of the drug (opium) ... (and) so greatwas the craving that he temporarily deserted his post to ...obtain it, though knowing that his life would thereby beforfeited." (Nolan, 188 1). This smacks of tales from the1930's of murderers caught red-handed who, desperate to avoid theelectric chair, claimed marijuana "caused" their crime. 16 The failure to note opiate addiction as a significantproblem was not due to the absence of the concept of addictionduring and just after the Civil War, The commissioners of thePrison Association of New York in 1866 reported that men "ofa low order of morals ... (were) addicted to habits of profanityand intemperance." (North American Review, 1867:570) 17 An article on opiates by Mitchell -- on the effects ofopiates on birds -confirms him as an eccentric scientist. (BostonMSJ, 1870) Weir found that morphia did not induce steep"beyond a slight tendency to quietude, which we can never besure is not due to the habit of the wounded or sick pigeon ofseeking a remote corner and remaining at rest," but"used hypodermically in excessive amounts ... act asexcitants .... (and) in the duck they approach nearest to thetypical strychnic spasm." Weir also found "greatdifficulty with which pigeons, especially old birds, are poisonedby opiates." In All or part of Day's two sentences on the Civil War arequoted by five 20th Century writers, (Brecher et. al., 1972;Courtwright, 1978; Cuskey, Premkunar and Sigel, 1972; Quinones, 1975; and Terry andPellens, 1928), and closely paraphrased without attribution bysome others. 19 Calkins, Day's contemporary, refers to over 200 cases in Opiumand the Opium Appetite. but not one soldier who began opiateuse between 1861-65. 20 Courtwright and Terry and Pellens cite addicted Civil Warveterans who came to public attention in the 20th Century asevidence of that war's impact on subsequent addiction. Besideslending credence to the phenomenon they also demonstrate thatsuch addiction was benign and unnoticed. The octogenarians citedin 1928 by Terry and Pellens ("today in more than one oldsoldiers' home are cases of chronic opium addiction which datefrom this (Civil War) period") (Terry and Pellens, 69), orthe 82 year old Confederate veteran who "had been shot inthe head during the Civil War" and "had been addicted55 years" under medical supervision since then, (Waldorf,1973), reveal that the addiction of veterans was not a socialproblem, and not even a medical problem untilprohibition of opiates. 21 Apart from Courtwright's citations, of the 29 books orlargest articles about opiates, published between 1865-1879,which I have located, there is not an original reference tosoldiers addicted during the Civil War. (Brown, 1972: Calkins,1867 and 1871; Chaille, 1876; M.D., 1878; Frost, 1870; Gibbons,1870: Gould, 1878; Harrington, 1878; Ingals, 1877 and 1878;Layard, 1874 and 1878; Lippincott's, 1868; Ludlow, 1867;Mattison, 1876 a and b, and 1878 a and b; McFarland, 1877;National Quarterly Review, 1870; Parrish, 1869 and 1873; PopularScience, 1875; The Probe, 1869 a and b: Richet, 1878; R.S., 1869;and Warren, 1867). Several times as many articles were shorterpieces, and likewise made no mention of addiction linkedto the Civil War. 22 Four lengthy newspaper articles during the 1870's, aboutnon-Chinese opiate use, do not mention soldiers or veterans ofthe Civil War. (New York Daily Herald, 1877 and 1878; and NewYork Times, 1877 and 1878). 23 Two of the four 20th Century sources cited by Courtwrightwere also works by Crothers. (Crothers, 1900 and 1902). 24 Headings of 7 of the 18 chapters in Crothers' book Morphinismand Narcomanias From Other Drugs are "Chloralism ....Chioroformism .... Coffee Addiction .... Tea Inebriety ....Tobacco Inebriety .... Ether Inebriety .... (and) Addictions FromOther Drugs," these "others" including arsenic,ginger, cologne and lavender. (Crothers, 198 lb) 25 Three reviews of the 1872 Massachusetts study appeared inmedical journals at the time. None mentioned the Civil War (Amer.J of Medical Sciences, 1872; and Lancet, 1873), and one evenconsidered the reports of opiate habituation "exaggerated.... a piece of scandal," witness that in its subsequentannual report the Massachusetts Board of Health made "noallusion whatsoever to the subject (of opiates)" (MedicalTimes, 1873). 26 Morgan provides a lengthier excerpt of the 1872Massachusetts study than did Terry and Pellens, but omits thephysician's, and two pharmacists', comments. The single sentencerelevant to the Civil War -- "The taste for opium eatingamong soldiers retired from the army is alluded to by a few ofour correspondents" -- follows a listing of other causes ofaddiction, (injudicious prescribing, depressed nervous systems,overwork with deficient nutrition, a vicious mode of life, andintemperance). 27 In several fundamental respects, the opiate use of soldiersand veterans of the Vietnam War is not analogous to the Civil Warsituation, though the fears about what widespread opiate useamong GIs would engender once they were mustered out exactlyparallels the fears implicit in Soldier's Disease. The soldierswho used opiates in the Civil War did so to alleviate the painfrom wounds, and to help cure "the fluxes," but usingsuch drugs "to get high" or to reduce stress were theessential reasons for opiate use by Vietnam era GIs. In so far asa few veterans continued regularly using opiates in the 1970'sand 1980's, they contributed to a social problem because, in thecontext of illegality, any regular opiate use tends to be afinancial burden and criminal problem. The counterparts of theseGIs, a century earlier, went unnoticed. Further, the fact that somany GIs abandoned opiate use once out of Vietnam can be arguedas a demonstration of the effects of the U.S. approach of massivetreatment opportunities and massive enforcement. The handful ofaddicted veterans after the Civil War would suggest thatsuppression is not the root cause of why regular opiate usersquit before becoming addicted. REFERENCES Abel, Ernest 1982 Marijuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years, N.Y.,McGrawHill. (P. 189) Adams, George Worthington 1952 Doctors in Blue, N.Y., Henry Schuman. (Especially Pp.50-5 1, 116-19 and 228-29) Adams, J.F.A., 1889 "Substitutes For Opium In Chronic Diseases,"Boston Medical and Surgical Reporter, 21:351-56. Aldrich, Michael 1979 The Dope Chronicles - 1850-1950, ed. by Gary Silver withtext by Michael Aldrich, San Francisco. Harper and Row. (P, 9) American journal of the Medical Sciences 1872 "Report of the State Board of Health ofMassachusetts," 64:156-57. Anon 1876 Opium Eating, An Autobiographical Sketch By An Habituate, Philadelphia, Claxton, Remsen, and Haffelfinger. Ashley, Richard 1972 Heroin, N.Y., St. Martin's Press. (P. 5) 1978 "Opiates," in Andrew Kowl (ed.), High TimesEncyclopedia of Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Stonehill PublishingCo. (P. 224) Ball, John 1970 Foreward to the Reprint Edition of Terry and Pellens, TheOpium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, Patterson Smith. (P. v) Ball, John and Carl Chambers, eds. 1970 The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction in the UnitedStates, Springfield, Ill., Charles C. Thomas, Publisher. (Pp.41-43) Barnes, Harry Elmer 1939 Society In Transition, NY, Prentice-Hall. (P. 805) Bean, Philip 1974 The Social Control of Drugs, N.Y., John Wiley & Sons.(P. 18) Bedworth, Albert, and Joseph D'Elia 1973 Basics of Drug Education, N.Y., Baywood Publishing Co.(P. 147) Bellis, David 1981 Heroin and Politicians, Westport, Conn., Greenwood Press.(P. 5) Billings, John 1905 "Medical Reminiscences of the Civil War,"Transactions of the College of Physicians (Philadelphia),27:115-21. Bishop, Ernest S. 1919 "Legitimate Use of Narcotics In War Time,"American journal of Public Health, 9:321-29. 1920 The Narcotic Drug Problem, N.Y., Macmillan. (Pp. 24-5) Blaine, Jack, Louis Bozzetti and Kiell Ohlson 1973 "The Narcotic Analgesics: The Opiates," P. 60in Drug Use In America - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papersof the Second Report of the National Commission On Marijuana andDrug Abuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of DrugUse, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. Boston Medical and Surgical journal 1870 "Effect of Opium and Its Derivative Alkaloids,"V. n.s. 5:99-1 00. Brecher, Edward and Editors of Consumer Reports 1972 Licit and Illicit Drugs, Boston, Little Brown. (Pp. 3 andI 1) Brooks, Stewart 1966 Civil War Medicine, Springfield, Illinois, Charles C.Thomas Publisher. (Especially Pp. 65, 88, 117 and 126-27) Brown, Bertram 1973 "The Treatment and Rehabilitation of NarcoticAddicts In The United States", Pp. 127-28 in Drug Use InAmerica - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the SecondReport of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 "TheTreatment of Drug Dependence," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Off ice. Brown, H. James [1872] An Opium Cure Based Upon Science, Skill and MaturedExperi- 1972 ence, in Gerald Grob (ed.) American Perspectives of DrugAddiction, Five Studies, 1872-1912, N.Y., Arno Press. Calkins, Alonzo 1867 "Opium and Its Victims," Galaxy, 4:25-36. 1871 Opium and The Opium Appetite, Philadelphia, J.B.Lippincott. Chaille, Stanford 1876 "The Opium Habit, and 'Opium-Mania Cures'," NewOrleans Medical and Surgical journal, NS 3:767-75. Clausen, John 1961 "Drug Addiction, P. 24 in Robert Merton and R.Nisbet (eds.), Contemporary Social Problems, N.Y., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc. (Reprinted in Paul Rock (ed.), Drugs and Politics, New Brunswick, New Jersey, Transaction Books). Conrad, Peter and Joseph Schneider 1980 Deviance and Medicalization: From Badness To Sickness,St. Louis, C.V. Mosby Co. (P. II 4) Coombs, Robert, Lincoln Fry, and Patricia Lewis 1976 Socialization In Drug Abuse, Cambridge, Massachusetts,Schenckman Publishing Co. (P. 27) Courtwright, David 1978 "Opiate Addiction As A Consequence of The CivilWar," Civil War History, 24: 1 0 1 -1 1. 1982 Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction in America Before 1940,Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press. 1983 "The Hidden Epidemic: Cocaine Use In The South,1880-1920," journal of Southern History, 49:57-72. Cox, Meg 1984 "The Drug Trade: Abuse of Narcotics In U.S. Is by NoMeans A Recent Phenomenon," Wall Street Journal, December 3,1984. (P. 20) Crothers, T. D. 1892 "Some New Studies of the Opium Disease,"journal of the American Medical Association, 18:227-33, [1893] The Disease of Inebriety From Alcohol, Opium and Other 1981a Narcotic Drugs, The American Association for the Studyand Cure of Inebriety, T.C. Crothers (ed.), New York, Arno Press.(P. 323) 1899 "Criminal Morphomania," journal of the AmericanMedical Association, 33:388-91. 1900 "New Sources of Danger In The Use of Opium,"journal of the American Medical Association, 35:338-42. [1902] Morphinism and Narcomanias From Other Drugs, New York, 1981b Arno Press. 1916 "Hypnotics in the Treatment of Inebriety,"American journal of Clinical Medicine, 23:218-21. Cuskey, Walter, Johannes Ipsen and T. Premkunar 1973 "An Inquiry Into The Nature of Changes In BehaviorAmong Drug Users In Treatment," P. 199 in Drug Use InAmerica Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the SecondReport of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 "TheTreatment of Drug Dependence," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Office, D., M. 1878 The Personal Experiences of An Ex-Opium Habitue,"Medical Record, 13:399-400. Dai, Bingham [1937] Opium Addiction In Chicago, Montclair, New Jersey,Patterson 1970 Smith. (P. 35) Day, Horace 1868 The Opium Habit, With Suggestions As To The Remedy, N.Y.,Harper Brothers. Dershowitz, Alan 1973 "Constitutional Dimensions of CivilCommitment," P, 41 1 in Drug Use In America - Problem InPerspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report of theNational Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, Appendix Vol.IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 "Drug Dependence andthe Legal System," Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. Duncan, Louis C. [1912] The Medical Department of the United States Army In The 1985 Civil War, Gaithersberg, Maryland, Butternut Press. Earle, Charles Warrington 1880 "The Opium Habit" Chicago Medical Review,2:442-46. (Reprinted in H. Wayne Morgan (ed.), Yesterday'sAddicts American Society and Drug Abuse, 1865-1920, Norman,Oklahoma, 1974). Federal Bureau of Investigation 1980-87 Crime In America - Uniform Crime Reports, annual, Washington D.C., GPO. Fell, Robert 1924 "The Social Aspects of Morphine Addiction,"Institutional Quarterly, (Illinois Department of Public Welfare),15:103-08. Ferguson, Robert 1975 Drug Abuse Control, Boston, Holbrook Press. (Pp.40-1) Finlator, John 1973 The Drugged Nation - A Narc's Story, N.Y., Simon andSchuster. (P. 9) Frost, C.P. 1870 "Opium: Its Uses and Abuses," Transactions ofthe Vermont Medical Society, 1869-70, 131-47. Fuqua, Paul 1978 Drug Abuse: Investigation and Control, N.Y., GreggDivision/ McGraw-Hill. (Pp. 26-7) Geis, Gilbert 1973 Not The Law's Business? .... Homosexuality, Abortion,Prostitution, Narcotics, and Gambling, Rockville, MD, N.I.M.H.Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency. (P, 109) Gibbons, H. 1870 "Letheomania: the Result of the Hypodermic Injectionof Morphia," Pacific Medical and Surgical journal, N.S.3:481-95. Goode, Erich 1984 Drugs In American Society, 2nd Edit,, N.Y., AlfredKnopf.(P.217) Gould, S.W. 1878 "The Opium Habit," Medical and SurgicalReporter, 38:496-97. Harrington, H.L. 1878 "Hypodermic Use of Morphia," Chicago Medicaljournal and Examiner, 37:73-5. Health Policy Advisory Center 1970 "Drug Law History: Politics and Prohibition,"Health/PAC Bulletin, (No Volume No.):2-4. Hofmann, Frederick and Adele Hofmann 1975 A Handbook on Drug and Alcohol Abuse - The BiomedicalAspects, N.Y., Oxford University Press. (P. 37) Illinois Medical journal 1921 "Drug Addiction From The Lay Point of View,"Illinois Medical journal, 39:7 1. Ingals, Fletcher 1877 "Danger From Hypodermic Injections," ChicagoMedical journal and Examiner, 35:184-86. 1878 "Danger From The Hypodermic Injection ofMorphine," Chicago Medical journal and Examiner, 36:491-46. Isbell, Harris 1960 "Clinical Research On Addiction In The UnitedStates," P. II 4 in Robert Livingston (ed.), Narcotic DrugAddiction Problems, Proceedings of Symposium on the History ofNarcotic Drug Addiction, 1958, Public Health Service PublicationNo. 1050, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. 1963 "Historical Development of Attitudes Toward OpiateAddiction in The United States," Pp. 154-69 in SeymourFarber and Roger Wilson (eds.), Conflict and Creativity, (Part IIof Control of the Mind), N.Y., McGraw-Hill. Jacobs, Michael and Kevin Fehr 1987 Drugs and Drug Abuse: A Reference Text, 2nd Edition,Toronto, Addiction Research Foundation. (P. 1 1 2) (Also see lstEdition, 1983, P. 371). Jaquith, W.L. 1965 "The Treatment of Narcotism In Mississippi,"journal of the Mississippi State Medical Association, 6:15-7. Jones, Hardin and Jones, Helen 1977 Sensual Drugs - Deprivation and Rehabilitation of theMind, Cambridge and N.Y., Cambridge University Press. (P. 189) Kane, H.H. 1882a Opium-Smoking In America and China, N.Y., Putnam's Sons. 1882b "Some Medico-Legal Aspects of Morphia-Taking,"Alienist and Neurologist 3:419-433. Kaplan, John 1983 The Hardest Drug - Heroin and Public Policy, Chicago,University of Chicago Press. (P. 6 1) Keeley, Leslie 1881 The Morphine Eater: or From Bondage to Freedom, Dwight,Illinois, C. L. Palmer Co. Kenny, Maxine 1972 "Drug Law History - Politics and Prohibitions,"Pp. I I 0 - I I in Frank Browning and the Editors of Ramparts(eds.), Smack!, N.Y., Harrow Books (Harper Row). King, Rufus 1974 'The American System': Legal Sanctions to Repress DrugAbuse," P. 18 in James Inciardi and Carl Chambers (eds.)Drugs and the Criminal justice System, Beverly Hills, CA, SagePublications, Kittrie, Nicholas [19711 The Right To Be Different - Deviance and EnforcedTherapy. 1974 Penguin Books. (P. 217) Kolb, Lawrence, 1960 "Factors That Have Influenced the Management andTreatment of Drug Addicts," in Robert Livingston, (ed.),Narcotic Addiction Problems, Bethesda, MD, U.S. Department ofHealth, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service. 1962 Drug Addiction - A Medical Problem, Springfield, Ill.,Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 145) Kramer, John 1971 "Introduction to the Problem of Heroin Addiction inAmerica," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 4:15-2 1. 1972 "A Brief History of Heroin Addiction inAmerica," in David Smith and George Gay (eds.), "It'sSo Good, Don't Even Try It Once," Englewood Cliffs, NewJersey, Prentice-Haft. (P. 35) Layard, James Coulter 1874 "Morphine," Atlantic Monthly, 33:697-712. 1878 "Curing The Opium Habit - The Treatment In TheBinghampton Asylum," N.Y. Times, September 27. (Letter ToThe Editor) Levine, Samuel 1973 Narcotics and Drug Abuse, Cincinatti, W.H. Anderson Co.(P. 69) Lindesmith, Alfred 1947 Opiate Addiction, Bloomington, Indiana, Principia Press.(P. 196) (Also see 1968 revision, Addiction and Opiates, Chicago,Aldine. (P. 225) Lingeman, Richard R. 1969 Drugs From A to Z: A Dictionary, N.Y., McGraw-Hill. (P. I1) Lippincott's Magazine 1868 "Opium Eating," (unsigned), Lippincott'sMagazine, 1:404-09. Literary Digest 1919 "The Drug Disease," Literary Digest, 61:29-30. Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department 1974 Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. (Section 2, P. 12) Ludlow, Fitzhugh 1867 "What Shall They Do To be Saved?", Harpers,35:377-87. Marks, Jeannette 19 15 "The Curse of Narcotism In America - AReveille," American journal of Public Health, 5:314-22. Marshall, 0. [1878] "The Opium Habit In Michigan," in JohnO'Donnell and John Ball 1966 (eds.), Narcotic Addiction, Pp. 45-54. (Reprinted fromAnnual Michigan State Board of Health, 1878, 6:63-73). Mattison, J.B. 1876a "The Impending Danger," Medical Record, 11:69-7 1. 1876b "Opium Inebriety," Medical Record, 11:793-97. 1878a "Clinical Notes On Opium Habituation," MedicalRecord, 14:66-7. 1878b "The Responsibility of the Profession In TheProduction of Opium Inebriety," Medical and SurgicalReporter, 38:101-04. 1898 "Narcotic Inebriety In America," North AmericanReview, 166:254-55, Maurer, David and Victor Vogel [1954] Narcotics and Narcotic Addiction, Second Edition,Springfield, 1962 Illinois, Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 6) McFarland, S.F. 1877 "Opium Inebriety and the Hypodermic Syringe,"Transactions of the Medical Society of the State of New York, (NoVolume): 289-93. Medical Times 1873 "Opium-Eating In Massachusetts," editorial,(Philadelphia) Medical Times, 3:520. Milby, Jesse 1981 Addictive Behavior and Its Treatment, New York, SpringerPublishing Co. (P. 242) Morgan, H. Wayne 1974 Yesterday's Addicts - American Society and Drug Abuse,1865-1920, Norman, Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press. Morrell, Michael 1973 " Maintenance Of Opiate Dependent Persons In TheUnited States: A Legal Medical History," Drug Use In AmericaProblem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report ofthe National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, AppendixVol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 "DrugDependence and the Legal System," Washington D.C., U.S.Government Printing Office. (P. 517) Musto, David 1973 TheAmerican Disease, New Haven, Yale University Press.(Pp. 1-2, 251) Muuss, Rolf E. 1974 "Legal and Historical Aspects of Drug Abuse InHistorical Perspective," Adolescence, 9:495-507. National Commission On Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1973 Drug Use In America: Problem In Perspective, WashingtonD.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. 15) National Quarterly Review 1870 "Opium and the Opium Trade," National QuarterlyReview, 20:288-310. New York Daily Tribune 1877 "Opium and Its Consumers," July 10, 1877,(Unsigned). (P. 2) 1878 "Increase of a Dangerous Vice - The Opium HabitMorphia Syringes - Comments On Their Use By ProminentPhysicians," December 26, 1878, (Unsigned). (P. 8) New York Times 1877 "The Opium Habits Power - Its Extent In The UnitedStates," December 30, 1877, (unsigned). (P. 8) 1878 "The Opium Habits Power - Popular ErrorsCorrected," January 6, 1878, (unsigned). (P. 5) 1912 "Says Opium Aids Music Composers," January 21,1912, (unsigned). (Pt. 4, P. 12) 1914 "New Prison For Drug Users," June 30, 1914,(unsigned). (P. 7) 1917 "War Is Increasing The Drug-Consuming Habit,"April 29, 19 1 7 (unsigned). (Section 8, P. 5) Substantiallyreprinted in "The War and The Dope Habit," LiteraryDigest 54:1776-77. (June 9, 1917) Nolan, D.W. 1881 "The Opium Habit," Catholic World 33:827+. (P.83 1) North American Review 1867 "The Reformation of Prison Discipline," (NoAuthor), 105:55582. O'Donnell, John and John Ball 1966 Narcotic Addiction, N.Y., Harper & Row. (P. 1) Oliver, F.E. 1872 Massachusetts State Board of Health, Third Annual Report(For 1871), Boston, Wright and Potter, State Printers, (Pp.162-77). (Summarized in 1872, "Report of the State Board ofHealth of Massachusetts," American journal of the MedicalSciences, 64:156-57; reprinted, in part, Pp. 43-52 in H. WayneMorgan (ed.), Yesterday's Addicts; excerpted in Terry andPellens'The Opiate Problem, which is partly reprinted, Pp. 41-43in John Ball and Carl Chambers (eds.), The Epidemiology of OpiateAddiction in the United States. Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force 1984 Annual Report of the Organized Crime Drug EnforcementTask Force Program - March 1984, Washington D.C. (P. 4) Parrish, Joseph 1869 "Opium Smoking," The Probe, 1:59-6 1. 1873 "Opium Intoxication," (Reported by T.D.Crothers), Medical and Surgical Reporter, 29:361-64. Pike, Andrew and Eric Goldstein 1973 " History of Drug Use In The Military," DrugUse In America Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of theSecond Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and DrugAbuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of Drug Use, Pt. 5"Drug Use In Selected Populations," Washington, D.C.,U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. II 15) Popular Science 1875 "The Use of Narcotics," (Reprinted FromChamber's journal, England), (No Author), 7:611-17. President's Commission on Organized Crime 1986 America's Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, andOrganized Crime, Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. (Pp. 190-91) Probe 1869a "Hypodermic Use of Opium," (No Author), TheProbe, 1:7-9. 1869b "Thoughts of An Opium," (No Author), TheProbe, 1:87-90. Quinones, Mark 1975 "Drug Abuse During The Civil War,"International journal of the Addictions, 10:1007-20. Rice, Jerry 1980 "A Chronicle of Federal Drug Enforcement Law,"(accompanying photo essay), Drug Enforcement (US Drug EnforcementAdministration), December, V. 7. (P. 4) Richet, Charles 1878 "Opium and Its Antidote," Popular Science,12:555-59. Robinson, Victor 1916 "A Symposium on Drugs," Medical Review ofReviews, 22:15-26. Roffman, Roger 1973 "Heroin and Social Welfare Policy," SocialWork, 18:22-32. 1976 "Addiction Concepts and the VietnamExperience," Urban and Social Change Review, 9:16-8. Rublowsky, John 1974 The Stoned Age: A History of Drugs In America, New York,G, P. Putnam's Sons (Capricorn Books). (Pp. 129-3 1) Russell, Ira 1887 "Opium Inebriety," Medico-Legal journal,5:144-50. Rydell, Wendy 1980 Drugs, North Miami, Florida, Merit Publications. (Pp.121-22) S., R. 1869 "Thirty Grains A Day," The Probe, 1:50-3. San Francisco Call 1910a "Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused," February4, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (P. 16) 1910b "Opium Dreams Grave Menace To Local Army,"August 29, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (Pp. I + 2) 1910C "Drug Habit City's Worst Evil," (by CharlersFickert), December 15, 1910. (P. 1) 1910d "Time For A General Crusade Against The OpiumEvil," (editorial), December 16, 1910. 1911 "200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens," November 26, 1911, (unsigned). (P. 17) Saper, Anthony 1974 "The Making of Policy Through Myth, Fantasy andHistorical Accident: The Making of America's NarcoticsLaws," British journal of Addiction, 69:183-193. (P.184) Schwartz, Linda 1980 Heroin: The Strongest Thing You Can Buy Without APrescription, (Pamphlet), Phoenix, Arizona, Do It Now Foundation. Seymour, Richard and David Smith 1987 Drug Free - A Unique, Positive Approach to Staying Out ofAlcohol and Other Drugs, NY, Sarah Lazin Books, 1987. (P. 37) Shroeder, Richard 1980 The Politics of Drugs, 2nd Edition, Washington D.C.,Congressional Quarterly Inc. (Pp. 3 and 77) Smith, David and George Gay 1972 "It's So Good, Don't Even Try It Once",Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall. Smith, David and Rick Seymour 1986 "Abuse Folio -- Opiates," High Times,(reprinted from High Times, March 1984). (P. 30) Sonnedecker, Glenn 1963 "Emergence of the Concept of Opiate Addiction,"journal Mondial de Pharmacie. (Reprinted Pp. 14-22 in RobertLivingston (ed.), Narcotic Drug Addiction Problems, WashingtonD.C., U.S. Public Health Service. Spain, James 1975 "The United States, Turkey and the Poppy," MiddleEast journal, 29(3):295-307. Stanley, L.L. 1918 "Drugs and Crime," journal of Criminal Law andCriminology, 9:341. Starkey, Gerald 1971 "The Use and Abuse of Opiates andAmphetamines," Pp. 48 1 484 in Patrick Healy and James Manak(eds.), Drug Dependence and Abuse Resource Book, Chicago,National District Attorney's Association. Stephens, Richard and Gerald Slatin 1974 "The Street Addict Role: Toward The Definition of aType," Drug Forum, 3:375-89. Stimmel, Barry 1975 Heroin Dependency - Medical, Economic and Social Aspects, N.Y., Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corp. (P. 4) Strategy Council on Drug Abuse 1975 Federal Strategy For Drug Abuse-and Drug TrafficPrevention, 1975, Washington D.C., U.S. Government PrintingOffice. (P. 5) Summers, Marcia, James Trost, E. Leif Zerkin, et. al. 1975 Our Chemical Culture - Drug Use and Misuse, Madison,Wisconsin, Stash Press. Swatos, William H. Jr. 1972 "Opiate Addiction in the Late Nineteenth Century.- AStudy of the Social Problem, Using Medical journals of thePeriod," International journal of the Addictions, 7:739-53. Terry, Charles E. 1931 "Development and Causes of Opium Addiction As ASocial Problem," journal of Educational Sociology, 4:335-42. Terry, Charles E. and Mildred Pellens [ 1928] The Opium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, PattersonSmith. 1970 Trebach, Arnold 1982 The Heroin Solution, new Haven, Conn., Yale UniversityPress. (P. 38) United States Attorney General's Office 1984 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program, 1983Annual Report, Washington D.C. (P. 4) United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare,Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration 1975 Treatment of Drug Abuse: An Overview, NationalClearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, Report Series 34, No.1, DHEW Publication No. (ADM)75-197. Rockville, MD. Waldorf, Dan, Martin Orlick and Craig Reinarman 1974 Morphine Maintenance - The Shreveport Clinic 1919-1923, Washington D.C., The Drug Abuse Council. (P. 20, 30-31) Warren, Edward 1867 "A Lecture On The Sub-cutaneous Injection ofMorphia," Medical and Surgical Reporter, 16:101-4. Weber, Albert 1918 "Drugs and Crime," journal of Criminal Law andCriminology, 9:351. Weinswig, Melvin H. 1973 Use and Misuse of Drugs Subject To Abuse, N.Y., Pegasus.(P. 19) Westin, Av and Stephanie Shaffer 1972 Heroes and Heroin, N.Y., Pocket Books. (P. 8) Whitman, Wait [1895] The Wound Dresser, edited by Richard Maurice Bucke,Boston, 1975 Folcroft Library Editions. (Orig. Boston, Small, Maynard& Co.) Wilbert, Martin 1914 "Sale and Use of Cocaine and Narcotics," PublicHealth Service Reports, 29: 3180-3183 (November 27, 1914), U.S.Public Health Service. (P. 3183) 1915 "The Number and Kind of Drug Addicts," PublicHealth Service Reports, 30(2):2289-2294, U.S. Public HealthService. (Pp. 2291-92) Wood, George B. and Franklin Bache 1868 United States Dispensatory, 12th Edition, Philadelphia,Lippincott + Co. (Pp. 609-32) Woods, Arthur 1931 Dangerous Drugs, New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press.P. 12) World's Work 1924 "Drug Addiction Decreasing in the UnitedStates," World's Work, 49:17. Young, Lawrence, Linda Young, Marjorie Klein, Donald Klein,and D. Beyer 1977 Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Berkley Book. (P. 167) Zinberg, Norman 1984 Drug Set and Setting, New Haven, Conn., Yale Un. Press.(P. 26) CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-19IA086-000619-B006-102http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/prohibit.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033747 text/html 36831HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:37:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:43 GMTContent-length: 36613 Prohibition and Violence by Richard Hamm "American Prohibitionists and Violence, 1865-1920" by Richard Hamm Today I want to post part of a paper I delivered at a Meetingof the Alcohol and Temperance History Group as an AffiliatedSociety of the American Association for the History of Medicine,at its 68th Annual Meeting at Pittsburgh in May 1995. At thattime I said I wasn't planning to publish it, for various reasons,but I have been urged by people whose views I value todisseminate it, so I placed it-in pieces-on the List serve of theATHG. It brought forth a good string, so I have agreed to placethis piece (essentially the Pittsburgh paper) on the Web page ofthe ATHG. The prohibitionists were social reform agitators who sought amajor change in their society's customs. Social reformers havebeen, of course, a nearly constant presence in American societysince the early 19th century. Accounts of many social reformers'campaigns, often deal with the violence inflicted upon reformersseeking change in society and the violence engaged in by somereformers to achieve their ends. Indeed, violence, even killingand attempted killing, seems almost endemic to the history ofsocial reforms in the United States. But, with the special casesof the Women's crusades of 1873 and Carry Nation aside, the vast-and ever-growing literature on the temperance movement payslittle attention to the issue of violence.(1) This gap is aserious deficiency. There are two limits to my work. First, I am most interestedin violence in its most dramatic and drastic forms, killing orattempting to kill people. So I will be talking mostly ofkillings, attempted killings, and mobbings (because after allthey can easily lead to killings). Second, I am talking aboutviolence in respons to or as a part of agitation and not violenceattendant to law enforcement. Thus I am going to pass oversilently the many studies, popular and not, of moonshining,bootlegging, and violence.(2) Violence in resistance to law orviolence undertaken by law officers is somewhat separate fromviolence associated with a social reform movement's agitation forchange. Such violence grows out the state's presumption to have amonopoly of force and its willingness to resort to force to gainthe ends of its policy. To break the law of the state is to riskits use of violence against you, hence the likelihood that thelaw breaker will engage in violence. Law enforcement and violencego together hand and glove. But within these limits there still broad area of violence tobe explored as reform and violence also seem to go together. Wecan break down violence associated with reform into two largecategories. First, violence, used by their opponents, to stopreformers from agitating. Second, violence by reformers directedat achieving their ends-in their view, a righteous violence. Abrief look of some reforms in American history shows theexistence of these two types of violence. Violence to deter reform, for example, surfaces in studiesand memory of the civil rights movement. The literature is filledwith works that explore the violence directed against civilrights advocates in the American South in the 1950s and 1960s. Weall know of the bombing of the Birmingham churches, the mobbingof sit in protesters and freedom riders, and the killing ofGoodman, Schwerner and Chaney.(3) Similarly, contemporarycommentary on the anti-abortion movement has focused on the waveof violence against doctors and workers at women's healthcenters, most notably in the cases of Pensacola shootings and therecent the shootings in Brookline. Historians of abolitionists, perhaps the most deeply studiedof all social reform movements, have delineated both types ofviolence in that crusade. They have explored the manyanti-abolitionist mobs of the Jacksonian era, including thatwhich mobbed and killed the abolitionist editor Eliajah Lovejoyin 1837. Also, they have spent considerable effort exploring theforces and meaning of John Brown's and other abolitionists'willingness to engage in terrorism to bring about the end ofslavery.(4) But virtually no where in the vast scholarly studiesof the prohibition movement are there similar studies of theprohibitionists and violence. Its not because violence is notthere On the issue of deadly violence against agitators, the recentscholarly literature is almost silent on the subject but the drysthemselves recorded that it happened. The temperance movement atits peak, sought to encourage the faithful and to preserve therecords of its achievements and struggles by publishing, amongother things, prohibition encyclopedias. Two standard referencebooks produced by the drys, The Pocket Cyclopedia ofTemperance (1916) and Standard Encyclopedia of the AlcoholProblem (1925-1930) show that drys included information onviolence against prohibitionists. Both works contain articles onso called "Temperance Martyrs." Indeed, scatteredthrough the six volumes and 2940 page Standard Encyclopediaare many accounts of mobbings, attempted killings, and killingsof drys. Some of the stories in the Standard Encyclopediaare classics. For instance, it details in the article onPennsylvania how a county chairman of the Anti-Saloon League wasshot at in 1913, but "fortunately the bullet, intended forhis heart, was arrested by a copy of the bible which he carriedunder his arm." The article includes a picture of the pagewhere the bullet was stopped. While such miraculous tales wererare, pedestrian tales of violence were common in the temperancemovement.(5) I have combined the counts of the Standard Encyclopediaand the Pocket Encyclopedia to come up with some ball parkfigures of the violence directed against prohibitionists. Thesenumbers exclude from them prohibitionists who suffered violenceas a result of official or unofficial law enforcement or (fromthe sources available) who suffered violence in uncertaincircumstances. For example, a minister who denounced violators ofa state prohibition law and sought to bring private prosecutionsin the courts and suffered violence would be in this estimateengaging in unofficial law enforcement and is not included in thefigures of prohibitionist agitators who experienced violence.Including such persons would roughly double the number ofassaults and triple the number of the killings. Combining the twolists, I have found the names of six drys who between 1874 and1908 were killed over their advocacy of their cause. At leastanother nineteen drys were mobbed, beaten, shot at, or had theirhomes (or businesses) dynamited for their support oftemperance.(6) Without a doubt, advocating prohibition was a dangerousbusiness for some of its agitators. On the other hand, thetemperance advocates seemed not to have engaged in violenceagainst their enemies. I know of no prohibitionist who engaged inviolence to the point of killing to bring about their goal of adry nation. Some prohibitionists, Carry Nation being the mostprominent though certainly not alone, did engage in direct actionagainst liquor sellers, destroying their place of business andtheir stock through violent means. Assaults on people sometimesemerged from such attacks. But such "hatchetation"aside, the prohibitionists did not seem to engage violence thatcould lead to killing. I would like to is explain two things.First, why the violence against drys has received so littleattention. And second, explain the relative dearth of righteousviolence by drys. Why does the scholarly literature not contain muchinformation on the topic of violence against prohibitionistagitators? One explanation can be dismissed out of hand, that isthat those who the opponents perpetuated their deeds against weretoo obscure to make an impact. Among the six prohibitionistkilled, are a doctor, a judge, a minister, four editors of reformor other newspapers (including the minister), and a United StatesSenator. (The Senator is Edward Carmack of Tennessee.) If youturn toward those who suffered assaults or mobbing for agitationon the temperance question, the trend is similar with editors andministers predominating. Those attacked included figures of somerenown in temperance history; for example Albert Banks-clergyman,dry editor, and propagandist- was shot and wounded and Samuel W.("Sam") Small- journalist, dry, and evangelist-wasmobbed and beaten. The violence occurred in all areas of thenation, though the South and West seem disproportionallyrepresented, and extended from the decade after the Civil Warthrough the second decade of the 20th century. It should appearmuch more prominently in the scholarly literature. Two general causes seem to explain why the violence againstprohibitionists for their agitation has received so littleattention. First, contentions from the time of the killing orother violence that the violence had nothing to do withprohibition may have led scholars not to consider the topic.Second, and more importantly, there was little place for accountsof such violence in the evolving scholarly interpretations ofprohibition. I know of at least one example of a dry killed over hisadvocacy of prohibition where non-prohibitionists sourcesasserted that he "was not slain because of his convictionsbut" because of a "personal difficulty."(7) Ifother killings and attacks have similar conflicting accounts (andlogic would indicate that they should, as it was in the interestsof the opponents of prohibition to downplay violence againsttheir enemies) it is likely that scholars have been misdirectedaway from the topic of violence against dry agitators. But, thereis little evidence that scholars have paid any attention to thetopic at all. While scholarly interpretations of prohibition have changeddramatically over time, all of them share the trait that theyeither have little room in their frameworks for discussions ofviolence or have a tendency to turn scholars away from approachesand sources that would explore issues violence. Since World WarII, scholarly interpretations of prohibition have been marked bytwo large trends. First, there is the focus on the social statusof the members of the movement.(8) Second, there is the questionof how, if at all, prohibition related to the reform movements ofthe day: populism, progressivism, and women's rights.(9) Scholarsworking in the field have thus tended to mine the sources toanswer questions about these concerns. Thus by combing membershiprolls, church records, tax records, census data, and othersources they have told us much about the social status of theprohibitionists. Similarly in exploring the links betweenanti-monopolism, regulation, peace reform, women's suffrage,divorce reform, and anti-prostitution (just to name some)scholars have illuminated the connections of the movement toother reforms. But in doing these things they have mostlyeschewed writing narratives of movement history that would haveconfronted the sources that raise the questions of violenceagainst drys and violence by drys.(10) It is to violence by drysthat I would like to turn now. One thing is clear about violence by drys: there was no dryequivalent to John Brown, there was no dry equivalent to MichaelF. Griffin or John Salvi The closest that the prohibitionmovement ever came to such figures was Carry Nation. Nation'strashing of saloons is the stuff of American legend and folklore.Moreover it has been the subject of some scholarly work.(11) Thusa look at Nation and her movement in the context of the righteousviolence of other movements is illuminating. When we talk about figures in reform movements adoptingviolence, two things stand out. First that they believed thattheir violence is justified; violence-even killing-has become anacceptable means of bringing about the change that they want.Second, they act violently because they perceive that theirmovement is loosing ground. Hence John Brown's moral certainty ofthe evil of slavery and belief that sin could only be expatiatedby the spilling of blood convinced him that violence wasacceptable. He, in turn, convinced others to fight and kill withhim in Kansas and Virginia because, after the Compromise of 1850with its Fugitive Slave Law and the Kansas Nebraska Act repealingthe Missouri compromise, for the abolitionists crusade theirenemies seemed to have gained the upper hand.(12) Similarly, thejustifiable homicide argument used by the advocates of violencein the anti-abortion movement give them a moral base for theiractions.(13) Significantly, also, the first killing byanti-abortionists came after it became clear that the SupremeCourt was not going to overturn Roe v. Wade , the second came after a pro-abortion candidate was electedpresident. How do these two factors, developing a view that seethe violence as acceptable and acting out of fear of failure ofthe reform play out in the prohibition movement and in the careerof Carry Nation? There was a potential for developing an ideology of righteousviolence, in the prohibition movement. And evidence of it doesnot rest alone on the career of Carry Nation. Before I turn toNation and her ideas for justifying her violence, let me turn toanother source that show that drys did enunciate such ideas. The1915 novel Quarrytown, written by Douglas Dobbins andpublished by the American Issue Publishing (the press of companyof the Anti-Saloon League) shows community organized righteousviolence in a favorable light. In this fictionalized account ofthe struggle against the return of saloons to a stone quarryingtown, the drys ultimately resort to violence. At the opening the town is dry and virtually free of crime.But the dry utopia vanishes, as neither law nor community actionoffer adequate protection from the evil trade. Drys fail to blockthe issuing of a liquor license at a state liquor licensing board(dominated by politicians beholden to the organized liquorinterest), a dry organized boycott falters when its denounced bya new editor of the town's newspaper, and citizen prosecutions ofthe saloon keeper for violations of the law falter beforecorrupted juries. Thus the saloon spreads crime and disorderthroughout the community, literally turning brother againstbrother in drunken brawls. After all other means have been triedthe dry townsmen resort to violence. One night after the saloonis shut, they engage a Boston Tea Party type raid on it,destroying its fixtures and stock. When the newspaper editorcondemns the act as lawlessness he is ostracized by the town.When the saloon keeper rebuilds, the temperance men of the townblow up the establishment with three separate dynamite bombs, thefirst being set away from where the proprietor slept to allow himtime to escape. Moreover, the local minister preached a sermon inadvance of the act calling for the blowing up of "everyhell-hole in the United States tomorrow with dynamite!" Andin case the message was not clear, the dynamite works. The saloonkeeper never came back and the town was the better for it: nomurders, or assaults, no wife beatings, and no squandering offood and education money on whisky occur within its borders.(14) Without ever saying it in so many words, this publication ofthe Anti-Saloon League legitimated violence against saloons. Butit did so in a rather limited way. Violence was not the firstresort, but the last resort for the drys of Quarrytown. Its onlybecause law and boycotts have failed them, and only after liquorbegins to wreck havoc in their community do they take action. Andtheir first action, does not threaten life or limb. Even thebombing is planned to allow the saloon keeper to escape harm.Similarly, Carry Nation carried the conviction that her violencewas justified and resorted to violence only after other means hadfailed. Once you get past the myth and hype, Nation's short career asa saloon smasher is revealing of the potential of righteousviolence in the prohibition movement. Nation captured thenational imagination in 1900 when she began single-handedlydestroying dives in Kansas. Her actions were quickly overshadowedby the hucksterism to which she resorted to keep her agitationgoing: the selling of hatchets and the appearances at resortslike Coney Island. She remained a national figure until her deathin 1911. Nation was motivated, like many drys, by a personalreligious belief that liquor selling was sinful. Indeed, in herautobiography she recounting receiving visions from God showingher the evils of liquor. And she adopted violence only afterother she had tried other means.(15) In 1900 Nation lived in state that had a two decade old, andwidely violated, policy of prohibition. Moreover, it must of haveseemed to her that the temperance movement was in a rut. In hertown of Medicine Lodge, working with the WCTU she closed thetown's seven bars through the tried a true techniques of thewomen's crusade of 1873: picketing with song, prayer, and moralappeals to the sellers and purchasers. These were techniques thathad been used against legal saloons, in Kansas there were nothingbut illegal ones. Moreover, for a decade now in Kansas the policyhad been widely violated, often with the contrivances of thestate's political leaders. And at the national level thetemperance movement was stalled. Between 1889 and 1907 no stateadopted prohibition. WCTU had lost its driving force with thedeath of Frances Willard in 1898 and the Prohibition Party hadsplintered into two warring camps. The leading temperanceorganizations seemed unable to advance the cause or indeed tostop the rollback movements in various states with prohibition.Hence, with conviction, and at a time when the movement wasfaltering, Nation turned away from moral suasion and turned toviolence. As she explained, "If there's anything that's weakand worse than useless it's this moral suasion. I despise it.these hell traps of Kansas have fattened for twenty years onmoral suasion."(16) And her violence struck a chord among some temperanceadvocates. While some debated the value of violence, othersjoined Nation. She soon headed an organization of several hundredsimilarly minded saloon foes. And, in a two month period,following her lead this group, and others, engaged in vigilanteaction against saloons in Kansas's major cities, Topeka andWichita. Mobbings and riots swept the cities; people were beatenand shots were fired in anger. And among some temperance workersthe violence was welcome. One woman letter writer to a WCTU paperwrote: "What if a few people do get killed[?] . . . I'mtired of this sentimental gush about 'stopping before it comes tobloodshed. . . .' I for one, hope a thousand more of them will besmashed in Kansas before she stops." The response to Nation,shows that the potential for righteous violence existed in thetemperance crusade.(17) Which raises new questions: Why was there only one CarryNation? Part of the answer lays in the changing circumstances ofthe prohibition movement. Soon after Nation's actions in Kansas,the Anti-Saloon League emerged as the dominate organization inthe temperance movement. And the League's techniques of politicallobbying, official law enforcement, and public opinion buildingchanged the fortunes of the crusade. For example, take the topicof national legislation; the League's Washington Office, between1902 and 1919, pressured the United States Congress to enact lawsthat: prohibited the sale of liquor in federal buildings, bannedthe transport of liquor through the mails, ended liquor sales innational soldiers' homes, retained a law excluding all alcoholicbeverages from Army posts, created Oklahoma as a dry state, andlimited and then prohibited the transportation of liquor into drystates. A similar record of success can be found in theprohibitionists' campaigns in the states in the same period.(18)The very success of the drys in gaining what they wanted throughthe political process made righteous violence redundant. This pattern of potential righteous violence in theprohibition crusade and the mostly unstudied violence usedagainst drys by their opponents, suggest that we need to lookmore deeply into prohibition as a reform movement. As Robin Roomwrote over twenty years ago, "we must attempt to understandthe antiliquor movement . . . as a massive, sustained organizedeffort with a highly developed set of tactics and coherent,tangible goals." (19) Indeed, if we seek a usable past, onethat might help deal with current social reform crusades, sayagainst abortion or cigarettes, it is imperative that we look,far deeper than I have here, into tactics, strategies, andcontexts, of the temperance crusade to see how they prompted orretarded violence. Richard F. Hamm SUNY Albany hamm@csc.albany.edu Notes (1) Typical of the treatment of the topic of violence and theprohibitionists can be found in examining the three availablesurveys of the movement's history. Norman Clark, Deliver UsFrom Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition(NewYork: W. W. Norton & Co., 1976) and Paul Aaron and DavidMusto, "Temperance and Prohibition In America: A HistoricalOverview" in Mark H. Moore and Dean Gernstein, eds., Alcoholand Public Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1981), 127-181 devote nospace to the topic. Jack S. Blocker, Jr. American TemperanceMovements: Cycles of Reform(Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1989),30- 34, 59-64, 74-79 mentions violence in connection withenforcement of the Maine Law and in the direct action of thewomen's crusades of 1873 and their precursors. Moreover, MarkLender, editor, Dictionary of American Temperance Biography(Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1984) does not contain a sketch ofany prohibitionists killed, either as response to agigation orbecause law enforcement activities. Three works discuss the role of violence associated withtemperance reform. Jed Dannebaum, Drink and Disorder:Temperance Reform in Cincinnati from the Washington Revival tothe WCTU (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press,1984) and Jack S. Blocker Jr., "Give to the Winds ThyFears": The Women's Temperance Crusade, 1873-1874(Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985); Robert Bader, Prohibitionin Kansas (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986). On liquor law enforcement before national prohibition see:Stephen Cresswell, Mormons, Cowbosy, Moonshiners, andKlansmen: Federal Law Enforcment in the South and West, 1870-1893 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1991); WilliamF. Holmes, "Moonshining and Collective Violence: Georgia,1889- 1895," Journal of American History 67 (1980):589-611; William F. Holmes, "Whitecapping: Agrarian Violencein Mississippi, 1902-1906," Journal of Southern History35 (1969): 165-185; Wilbur R. Miller, Revenuers andMoonshiners: Enforcing Federal Liquor Law in the Mountain South,1865-1900 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,1991). (2) Indeed, certain killings connected to the civil rightscrusade have been used to illuminate the very nature of themovement and its opponents. See for example, Seth Cagin andPhilip Dray, We Are Not Afraid: The Story of Goodman,Schwerner and Chaney and the Civil Rights Campaign forMississippi (New York: Bantam Books, 1988) and HerbertShapiro, White Violence and Black Response From Reconstructionto Montgomery (Amherst: University of Massachsetts Press,1988). (3)On the topic of abolitionist violence and their reactionsto violence see, Jane H. Pease and William Pease,"Confrontation and Abolition in the 1850s," Journalof American History 58 (1972): 923-937; John Demos, "TheAntislavery Movement and the Problem of Violent 'Means,'" NewEngland Quarterly 37 (1964): 501-526; Lewis Perry, RadicalAbolitionism: Anarchy and the Government of God in AntislaeryThought (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1973); MichaelFellman, "Rehearsal for the Civil War: Antislavery andProslavery at the Fighting Point in Kansas, 1854-1856," inLewis Perry and Michael Fellman, Antislavery Reconsidered: NewPerspectives on the Abolitionists (Baton Rouge: LouisianaUniversity Press, 1979), 287-307; Silvan S. Tomkins, "ThePsychology of Commitment: The Constructive Role of Violence andSuffering for the Individual and for His Society, in MartinDuberman, editor, The Antislavery Vanguard: New Essays on theAbolitionists (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965),270-298. On violence directed against abolitionists see "Gentlemanof Property and Standing:" Anti-Aboliton Mobs in JacksonianAmerica (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970). Beyondspecific works that deal with violence, three surveys of theabolitionist crusade show how intergal the topics of violence areto the reform's history as they devote attention to both theviolence against and by abolitionists: Ronald G. Walters, TheAntislavery Appeal: American Abolitionism After 1830 (NewYork: Norton, 1978); Merton L. Dillon, The Abolitionists: theGrowth of a Dissenting Minority (Dekalb: Northern IllinoisUniversity Press, 1974) and James B. Stewart, Holy Warriors:The Abolitionists and American Slavery (New York: Hill andWang, 1976). (4) Clarence T. Wilson, Deets Picket, and Harry G. McCain,editors, The Pocket Cyclopedia of Temperance (Topeaka:Temperance Society of Methodist Epsicopal Church, revisededition, 1916), 155-162; Ernest Cherrington, ed., StandardEncyclopaedia of the Alcohol Problem 6 volumes (Westerville,OH: American Issue Publishing Co., 1925-1930), 2618-2620, alsofor example see 85, and 1800-1801, & 2133 (bible story); evenmidway through the crusade, drys were recording the suffering oftheir martyrs, see: Cyclopaedia of Temperance and Prohibition(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1891), 201-202. (5) The list, derrived from SEAP and Pocketincludes: Dr. J. W. Beal and Judge D. R. Cox both killed inMalden, Missouri on Februray 18 1907; Edward W. Carmack, UnitedStates Senator from Tennessee, shot November 9, 1908 inNashville; Sam D. Cox, editor and publisher of The Sentinelkilled in Minatare, Nebraska on December 20 1906: Roderick D.Gambrell, editor of The Sword and Shield killed inJackson, Mississippi on May 5, 1887; Rev. John R. Moffett, editorof Anti-Liquor shot on November 11, 1892 in DanvilleVirginia; and Joseph B. Rucker editor of the Somerset Reporterkilled in Somerset, Kentucky on September 19, 1892. Two of thesekillings have received scholarly treatment, Paul Isaac, Prohibitionand Politics: Turbulent Decades in Tennessee, 1885-1920(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1965) and Richard F.Hamm, "The Killing of John R. Moffett and the Trial of J. T.Clark: Race, Prohibition, and Politics in Danville,1887-1893," Virginia Magazine of History and Biography101 (1993): 375-404 (6) This is the case of John R. Moffett, for details see:Hamm, "Killing." The assertion that Moffett did not diefor his convictions generated a controversy between the slainman's brother and William Copeland, editor of the Danville paperat Moffett's death and later editor of the Times Dispatch.See: S. H. Thompson, The Life of John R. Moffett (Salem:McClung & White, 1895), 141-144. Richmond Times Dispatch,April 17, 1903, 4; Correspondence between W. W. Moffett &Richmond Times Dispatch Concerning Reverend John R.Moffett" bound typescript, Virginia Baptist HistoricalSociety, Botwright Library, University of Richmond, Richmond;Richmond Times Dispatch May 26, 1903, 4; Guide, WalterScott Copeland Papers #5497, E. J. Jordan, Jr., compiler, RareBooks and Manuscripts Alderman Library, University of Virginia. (7) After the pioneering work of Joseph Gusfield on thesocial status of temperance reformers, scholars rushed to testthis theory, and for nearly a generation, the study ofprohibition focused, as the title of one article put it, on"The Prohibitionists Who Were They?" Joseph R.Gusfield, Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the AmericanTemperance Movement (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,1963); Jack Blocker, Jr. "Modernity of Prohibitionists"and Charles A. Isetts, "A Social Profile of WCTU Crusade:Hillsboro, Ohio" in Jack Blocker Jr., ed., Alcohol Reformand Society: the Liquor Issue in Social Context (Westport,CN: Greenwood Press, 1979), 99-110, 149-170; Robert A. Hohner,"The Prohibitionists: Who Were They?" South AtlanticQuarterly 68 (1969): 491-505; Jack S. Blocker Jr., "Giveto the Winds Thy Fears": The Women's Temperance Crusade,1873-1874 (Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985). The salienceof relgious idenity and the prohibition issue emerged as a topicin political histories. Richard Jenson, The Winning of theMidwest, Social and Political Conflict, 1888-1896 (Chicago:University of Chicago Press, 1971); Paul Kleppner, The Crossof Culture: A Social Analysis of Midwestern Politics, 1885-1900(New York: MacMillian Free Press, 1970); Jed Dannebaum,"Immigrants and Temperance: Ethnocultural Conflict inCincinnati, 1845-1860" Ohio History 87 (Autumn 1978):125-139. (8) On the issue of whether prohibition should be considereda progressive reform, Richard Hofstader in The AmericanPolitical Tradition (New York: Vintage Books, 1954) and in Ageof Reform (New York: Vintage Books, 1955) and AndrewSinclair, Era of Excess: A Social History of the ProhibitionMovement (New York: Harper and Row, 1962) argued no. JohnBurnham in "New Perspectives on the Prohibition 'Experiment'of the 1920s" Journal of Social History 2 (1968):51-68; and James Timberlake in Prohibition and the ProgressiveMovement, 1900-1920 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,1963) challenged that view. Jack S. Blocker, Jr., Retreat fromReform: The Prohibition Movement in the United States, 1890-1913(Westport: Greenwood Press, 1976) plotted the temperancemovement's abandonment of broader social reform to concentrate onprohibition alone. Works by, Norman Clark and Austin Kerr,utilizing the organizational interpretation of Robert Wiebe,placed prohibition firmly within the panapoly of progressivereforms. See Clark, Deliver Us From Evil; K. Austin Kerr, Organizedfor Prohibition: A New History of the Anti-Saloon League (NewHaven, CN: Yale University Press, 1985). On the organizationalinterpretation see: Louis Galambos, "The EmergingOrganizational Synthesis of Modern American History," BusinessHistory Review 44 (Autumn 1980): 279-90; Samuel P. Hays, Responseto Industrialism, 1885-1914 (Chicago: University of ChicagoPress, 1957), 48- 70; Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., The VisibleHand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business(Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1977); Louis Galambos,"Technology, Political Economy, and Professionalization:Central Themes of the Organizational Synthesis," BusinessHistory Review 57 (Winter 1983): 471-93. Recently, the workon temperance reform has focused on its relationship with largerquestion of reform in the history of women. Ruth Bordin, Womanand Temperance (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981),15-33; Barbara Leslie Epstein, The Politics of Domesticity:Women, Evangelism and Temperance in Nineteenth Century America(Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University Press, 1981, 1986); RuthBordin, Francis Willard: A Biography (Chapel Hill, NC:University of North Carolina Press, 1986); Ian Tyrrell, Woman'sWorld Woman's Empire: the Woman's Christian Temperance Union inInternational Perspective, 1880-1930 (Chapel Hill, NC:University of North Carolina Press, 19. (9) I am as guilty as any other scholar in the field, seeRichard F. Hamm, Shaping the Eighteenth Amendment: TemperanceReform, Legal Culture, and the Polity, 1880-1920 (ChapelHill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995). We do not have agood modern history of the Prohibition Party, though Blocker, Retreatis a good start; similarily WCTU histories have tended to trailoff with Frances Willard's death. Where such narratives are to befound are in the local studies of an area or region. Localstudies which have looked at the mechanics of the movement likeRobert L. Hampel, Temperance and Prohibition in Massachusetts,1813- 1852 (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982); haveoften focused on areas that did not have significant outbreaks ofviolence during temperance agitation. (10) The only full length biolgraphies of Nation are old andnegative, Herbert Asbury, Carry Nation (New York: Knopf,1929) and Robert Lewis Taylor, Vessel of Wrath: The Life andTimes of Carry Nation (New York: Signet Books, 1966). Therecent work by Robert Bader is more sympathic and connects herclearly to events in Kansas. Robert S. Bader, "Mrs.Nation," Kansas History 7 (1984/5): 246-262; and Prohibition,133-155. Nation is desperately in need of a biography whichcould use the insights of women's history, gender relations, andtemperance studies to illuminate her career. The place to beginsuch a reinterpretation of Nation is her autobiography, Carry A.Nation, The Use and Need of the Life of Carry A. Nation(Topeka, KA: F. M. Stevens and Sons, 1909). (11) Stephen B. Oates, To Purge This Land with Blood: ABiography of John Brown (New York: Harpers, 1970); Dillon, Abolitionists119,-243; Stewart, Holy,147-148, 151-161, 164-177;Walters, Antislavery, 28-33. (12) Lisa Belkin, "Kill For Life," New YorkTimes Magazine October 30, 1994, 47-50, 62, 76, 80;"Rescuing a City's Reputation," Transcript "AllThings Considered" August 26, 1994, 9-16. (13) Douglas Dobbins, Quarrytown (Westerville:American Issue Publishing, 1915), 48-48, 51-67, 71-80, 100-107,155-159, 184-189, 201-207. (14) Bader, Prohibition, 134-155; Taylor, Vessel,62-94, 113-142 (15) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 140; Hamm, Shaping,123-129. (16) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 149-150. (17) Blocker, Retreat, 197-234; Hamm, Shaping,155- 255; SEAP, 177, 207, 2725. (18) Robin Room, "Governing Images and the Prevention ofAlcohol Problems," Preventative Medicine 3 (1974):11-23, 11. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-20IA086-000619-B006-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/murd3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033833 text/html 15406HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:38:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:48 GMTContent-length: 15188 Hemp Around Their Necks by Harry Anslinger Hemp Around Their Necks From The Murderers THE STORY OF THE NARCOTIC GANGS By HARRY J. ANSLINGER U. S. Commissioner of Narcotics and WILL OURSLER FARRAR, STRAUS AND CUDAHY, NEW YORK, 1961 In 1930 there was no federal law against smoking marijuana,and the average American citizen in an average community hadprobably never heard of "reefers" or "tea" orother words in the argot of marijuana users. But by the middlethirties we began to see the serious effects of marijuana on ouryouth. An alarming increase in the smoking of marijuana reefersin 1936 continued to spread at an accelerated pace in 1937.Before this, use of reefers had been relatively slight andconfined to the the Southwest, particularly along the Mexicanborder. Seizures by state officers in these two years, however, hadincreased a hundred percent and by hundreds of pounds. Reports Ireceived from thirty states showed an "invasion" bythis drug, either by cultivation or underworld importation. Marijuana was something new and adventuresome. The angle-wisemobsters were aiming their pitch straight at the mostimpressionable age group-America's fresh, post-depression crop ofteenagers. One adolescent gave a picture to an agent of a typical"smoker" in an apartment or "pad": "The room was crowded. There were fifty people but itseemed like five hundred. It was like crazy, couples lying all,over the place, a woman was screaming out in the hall, two,fellows were trying to make love to the same girl and this, girlwas screaming and crying and not making any sense. Her clotheswere mostly pulled off and she was snickering and blubbering andtrying to push these two guys away.... The place was nothing butsmoke and stink and these funny little noises I could hear butthey were way out, that far I could hardly hear them and theywere right there in the room, that laughing and crying and themusic and all that stuff. It was crazy wild. But I didn't want todo anything, I didn't want to sleep with those women or likethat. I just wanted to lie down because the room seemed big andEke a great tremendous crowd like at a ball game or something. .. ." Made from the hemp plant known as Cannabis sativa americana,marijuana is almost a twin brother to Cannabis sativa indica,otherwise called hashish. There are said to be almost threehundred names for the varieties of the hemp weed. In some partsof Asia it is called bhang; in South Africa it is called dagga.It is also challed chira and ganja. And many other names. The hemp weed grows best in warm climates but has also beenfound along roadsides north of Boston. It grows to heights offrom five and a half to fifteen or sixteen feet. Its leaves,seeds and flowers contain a substance which when chewed or smokedproduces hallucinatory effects. Elaborate technical processes have been developed for themanufacture of Cannabis cigarettes from the resin in the plants.Although pharmacists have never been able to isolate completelythe nature of the Cannabis "principal" that producesthe narcotic effect, it is known to exist in the fringes or hairson the leaves and in the flowers, and in the thick resin thatflows through the stalk and other parts of the plant. Cannabis grows wild in many parts of the world, and iscultivated in India, and illegally in certain areas of Africa,Mexico, Brazil and the United States. It also grows wild in partsof the United States, although we have been able to root the wildCannabis out of most communities. Origins of hemp weed are ancient. Rites that go backthousands of years, in temples long vanished, may wen haveevolved around the effects of some variant of the hemp weed.Worshipers of the Hindu god Siva were said to use Cannabisindica. In the eleventh century A.D., the Mohammedan sect calledthe Assassins, used hashish in so-called religious observances.They made homicide a high ritualistic art. Their name itself istoday a synonym for murder. Marijuana effects on the average user are described in abrochure we published in the Bureau for the information of laygroups. "The toxic effect produced by the active narcoticprinciple of Cannabis sativa, hemp, or marijuana," thereport states, "appear to be exclusively to the higher nervecenters. The drug produces first an exhaltation with a feeling ofwell being, a happy, jovial mood, usually; an increased feelingof physical strength and power, and a general euphoria isexperienced. Accompanying this exaltation is a stimulation of theimagination followed by a more or less delirious statecharacterized by vivid kaleidoscopic visions, sometimes of apleasing sensual kind, but occasionally of a gruesome nature.Accompanying this delirious state is a remarkable loss in spatialand time relations; persons and things in the environment looksmall; time is indeterminable; seconds seem like minutes andhours like days. "Those who are accustomed to habitual use of the drugare said eventually to develop a delirious rage after itsadministration during which they are temporarily, at least,irresponsible and prone to commit violent crimes. The prolongeduse of this narcotic is said to produce mentaldeterioration." One of the great difficulties with Cannabis is itsunpredictability. Physicians who have made hundreds of tests withCannabis report that there is no way to predict what effect ithave on the individual, both under controlled and noncontrolledconditions. One man has no reaction at all; the next may goberserk and try to stab somebody or harm himself. The medicalprofession after many such experiments was forced to drop thenarcotic as a possible analgesic because of this unpredictablequality. Much of the most irrational juvenile violence and that haswritten a new chapter of shame and tragedy is traceable directlyto this hemp intoxication. A gang of boys tear the clothes fromtwo school girls and rape the screaming girls, one boy after theother. A sixteen-year-old kills his en tire family of five inFlorida, a man in Minnesota puts a bullet through the head of astranger on the road; in Colorado husband tries to shoot hiswife, kills her grandmother instead and then kills himself. Everyone of these crimes had been proceeded (sic) by the smoking of one or more marijuana "reefers."As the marijuana situation grew worse, I knew action had to betaken to get the proper legislation passed. By 1937 under mydirection, the Bureau launched two important steps First, alegislative plan to seek from Congress a new law that would placemarijuana and its distribution directly under federal control.Second, on radio and at major forums, such that presentedannually by the New York Herald Tribune, I told the story of thisevil weed of the fields and river beds and roadsides. I wrotearticles for magazines; our agents gave hundreds of lectures toparents, educators, social and civic leaders. In networkbroadcasts I reported on the growing list of crimes, includingmurder and rape. I described the nature of marijuana and itsclose kinship to hashish. I continued to hammer at the facts. I believe we did a thorough job, for the public was alertedand the laws to protect them were passed, both nationally and atthe state level. We also brought under control the wild growingmarijuana in this country. Working with local authorities, wecleaned up hundreds of acres of marijuana we and uprooted plantssprouting along the roadsides. The 1937 law does not prohibit the sale of marijuana b puts atax of $100.00 an ounce on any sale or transfer of drug and makessuch sale or transfer illegal without proper registration andapproval from the Bureau. Possession without proper authorizationcan bring a prison term. The Marijuana Tax Act is patterned in general after theHarrison Act, but with some major technical variations,principally based on the fact that while marijuana is used inlaboratory tests it is not used for medical purposes. There were still some WPA gangs working in those days and weput them to good use. just outside the nation's capital, for somesixty miles along the Potomac River, on both banks, marijuana wasgrowing in profusion; it had been planted there originally byearly settlers who made their own hemp and cloth. The workerscleaned out tremendous river bank crops, destroying plants, seedsand roots. AR through the Midwest also, WPA workers were used forthis clean-up job. The. wild hemp was rooted out of America. During the Second World War, after Axis powers in the FarEast and Europe cut off our access to countries where hemp wasgrown for the making of cord and cloth, we developed, understrict controls, our own hemp growing program on the richfarmlands of Minnesota. Less than one thousandth of one percentwas ever diverted into illegal channels. After the war thisproduction stopped and the fields went back to ,corn and wheat.With the war's end, however, the narcotic branch of theunderworld was given a new lift by the publication of anextraordinary document which has come to be known as the LaGuardia Report. The title was a misnomer, it was actually a report of acommittee on marijuana which had been appointed by the"Little Flower" of New York to give an objectivepicture of marijuana from a scientific point of view. La Guardiawas always not only an honest official who warred against thesyndicate "tin horns," as he called them, but was alsoa good friend of Bureau of Narcotics. In Congress he foughtconsistently for increases for our Bureau to help us to achievethe power needed to do our job. The men who issued this document were men of science doctors,technicians, authorities Published as a book by the JacquesCattell Press in 1945, the report bore the tide: The MarijuanaProblem in the City of New York: Sociologic Medical,Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, by the Mayor'sCommittee on Marijuana. This report declared, in effect, that those who had beendenouncing marijuana as dangerous, including myself and expertsin the Bureau, were not only in error, but were spreadingbaseless fears about the effects of smoking Cannabis. I say thereport was a government printed invitation to youth andadults-above all to teenagers-to go ahead and smoke all thereefers they felt like. Relying solely on a series of experiments with a group of 77prisoners who volunteered to make the tests, the Mayor's expertsasserted that they found no major menace in the use of thisnarcotic, which they termed "a mild drug smoked by boredpeople for the sake of conviviality." The report further claimed that there was "noapparent" connection between "the weed" and crimesof violence, that smoking it did not produce aggressiveness orbelligerence as a rule, that it could be used for a number ofyears without causing serious mental or physical harm and thatwhile it might be habit forming it could be given up abruptlywithout causing distress; in other words, it did not produce thebodily dependence found in heroin, cocaine, morphine and otherdrugs. Finally, the report suggested that the drug is so mild thatit might well be used successfully as a substitute in the processof curing addiction to other drugs, or even in the treatment ofchronic alcoholism. Doctors and other authorities who studied the effects of thisdrug, however, tore the report apart for its inaccuracies andmisleading conclusions. The Journal of the American MedicalAssociation joined the. Bureau in condemning it as unscientific. "For many years medical scientists have consideredCannabis a dangerous drug," the Journal's editorial of April26, 1945 stated. "Nevertheless. . . . the Mayor's Committeeon Marijuana submits an analysis by seventeen doctors of tests on77 prisoners and, on this narrow and thoroughly unscientificfoundation, draws sweeping and inadequate conclusions whichminimize the harmlessness of marijuana. Already the book has doneharm. One investigator has described some tearful parents whobrought their 16-year-old boy to a physician after he had beendetected in the act of smoking marijuana. . . . The boy said hehad read an account of the La Guardia committee report and thiswas his justification for using marijuana.. A criminal lawyer for marijuana drug peddlers has alreadyused the La Guardia report as a basis to have defendants set freeby the Court. "The value of the conclusions," continued theeditorial, "is destroyed by the fact that the experimentswere conducted on 77 confined criminals. Prisoners were obligedto be content with the quantities of drug administered.Antisocial behavior could not have been noticed, as they wereprisoners. At liberty some of them would have given free rein totheir inclinations and would probably not have stopped at thedose producing 'the pleasurable principle. . . .' Publicofficials will do well to disregard this unscientific, uncriticalstudy, and continue to regard marijuana as a menace where it ispurveyed," the Journal concluded. There can be no doubt of the damage done by the report.Syndicate lawyers and spokesmen leaped upon its giddy sociologyand medical mumbo-jumbo, cited it in court cases, tried to spreadthe idea that the report had brought marijuana back into thefolds of good society with a full pardon and a slap on the backfront the medical profession. The lies continued to spread. They cropped up on paneldiscussions, in public addresses by seemingly informedindividuals. They helped once again, in a new and profitabledirection, to bewilder the public and make it unsure of its ownjudgments. This carefully nurtured public doubt was to pay offwith extra millions in the pockets of the hoods. One killer whohelped to nourish that doubt-a hoodlum called Lepke took amulti-million-dollar cut in exchange for the terror inspired bythe mere mention of his name. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-21IA086-000619-B006-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/dequinc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033914 text/html 34154HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:39:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:14 GMTContent-length: 33936 Confessions of an English Opium Eater Confessions of an English Opium Eater by Thomas de Quincey THE PLEASURES OF OPIUM It is so long since I first took opium, that if it had been atrifling incident in my life, I might have forgotten its date:but cardinal events are not to be forgotten; and fromcircumstances connected with it, I remember that it must bereferred to the autumn of 1804. During that season I was inLondon, having come thither for the first time since my entranceat college. And my introduction to opium arose in the following way. Froman early age I had been accustomed to wash my head in cold waterat least once a day: being suddenly seized with toothache, Iattributed it to some relaxation caused by an accidentalintermission of that practice; jumped out of bed; plunged my headinto a basin of cold water; and with hair thus wetted went tosleep. The next morning, as I need hardly say, I awoke withexcruciating rheumatic pains of the head and face, from which Ihad hardly any respite for about twenty days. On the twenty-firstday, I think it was, and on a Sunday, that I went out into thestreets; rather to run away, if possible, from my torments, thanwith any distinct purpose. By accident I met a collegeacquaintance who recommended opium. Opium! dread agent ofunimaginable pleasure and pain! I had heard of it as I had ofmanna or of Ambrosia, but no further: how unmeaning a sound wasit at that time! what solemn chords does it now strike upon myheart! what heart-quaking vibrations of sad and happyremembrances! Reverting for a moment to these, I feel a mysticimportance attached to the minutest circumstances connected withthe place and the time, and the man (if man he was) that firstlaid open to me the Paradise of Opium-eaters. It was a Sundayafternoon, wet and cheerless: and a duller spectacle this earthof ours has not to show than a rainy Sunday in London. My roadhomewards lay through Oxford-street; and near "the /stately/Pantheon," (as Mr. Wordsworth has obligingly called it) Isaw a druggist's shop. The druggist -- unconscious minister ofcelestial pleasures! -- as if in sympathy with the rainy Sunday,looked dull and stupid, just as any mortal druggist might beexpected to look on a Sunday; and, when I asked for the tinctureof opium, he gave it to me as any other man might do: andfurthermore, out of my shilling, returned me what seemed to bereal copper halfpence, taken out of a real wooden drawer.Nevertheless, in spite of such indications of humanity, he hasever since existed in my mind as the beatific vision of animmortal druggist, sent down to earth on a special mission tomyself. And it confirms me in this way of considering him, that,when I next came up to London, I sought him near the statelyPantheon, and found him not: and thus to me, who knew not hisname (if indeed he had one) he seemed rather to have vanishedfrom Oxford-street than to have removed in any bodily fashion.The reader may choose to think of him as, possibly, no more thana sublunary druggist: it may be so: but my faith is better: Ibelieve him to have evanesced,{1} or evaporated. So unwillinglywould I connect any mortal remembrances with that hour, andplace, and creature, that first brought me acquainted with thecelestial drug. Arrived at my lodgings, it may be supposed that I lost not amoment in taking the quantity prescribed. I was necessarilyignorant of the whole art and mystery of opium-taking: and, whatI took, I took under every disadvantage. But I took it: -- and inan hour, oh! Heavens! what a revulsion! what an upheaving, fromits lowest depths, of the inner spirit! what an apocalypse of theworld within me! That my pains had vanished, was now a trifle inmy eyes: -- this negative effect was swallowed up in theimmensity of those positive effects which had opened before me --in the abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed. Here wasa panacea - a [pharmakon nepenthez] for all human woes: here wasthe secret of happiness, about which philosophers had disputedfor so many ages, at once discovered: happiness might now bebought for a penny, and carried in the waistcoat pocket: portableecstasies might be had corked up in a pint bottle: and peace ofmind could be sent down in gallons by the mail coach. But, if Italk in this way, the reader will think I am laughing: and I canassure him, that nobody will laugh long who deals much withopium: its pleasures even are of a grave and solemn complexion;and in his happiest state, the opium-eater cannot present himselfin the character of /Il Allegro/: even then, he speaks and thinksas becomes /Il Penseroso/. Nevertheless, I have a veryreprehensible way of jesting at times in the midst of my ownmisery: and, unless when I am checked by some more powerfulfeelings, I am afraid I shall be guilty of this indecent practiceeven in these annals of suffering or enjoyment. The reader mustallow a little to my infirm nature in this respect: and with afew indulgences of that sort, I shall endeavour to be as grave,if not drowsy, as fits a theme like opium, so anti-mercurial asit really is, and so drowsy as it is falsely reputed. And, first, one word with respect to its bodily effects: forupon all that has been hitherto written on the subject of opium,whether by travelers in Turkey (who may plead their privilege oflying as an old immemorial right), or by professors of medicine,writing /ex cathedra/, -- I have but one emphatic criticism topronounce -- Lies! lies! lies! I remember once, in passing abook-stall, to have caught these words from a page of somesatiric author: -- "By this time I became convinced that theLondon newspapers spoke truth at least twice a week, viz. onTuesday and Saturday, and might safely be depended upon for --the list of bankrupts." In like manner, I do by no meansdeny that some truths have been delivered to the world in regardto opium: thus it has been repeatedly affirmed by the learned,that opium is a dusky brown in colour; and this, take notice, Igrant: secondly, that it is rather dear; which I also grant: forin my time, East-India opium has been three guineas a pound, andTurkey eight: and, thirdly, that if you eat a good deal of it,most probably you must -- do what is particularly disagreeable toany man of regular habits, viz. die.{2} These weightypropositions are, all and singular, true: I cannot gainsay them:and truth ever was, and will be, commendable. But in these threetheorems, I believe we have exhausted the stock of knowledge asyet accumulated by man on the subject of opium. And therefore,worthy doctors, as there seems to be room for furtherdiscoveries, stand aside, and allow me to come forward andlecture on this matter. First, then, it is not so much affirmed as taken for granted,by all who ever mention opium, formally or incidentally, that itdoes, or can, produce intoxication. Now reader, assure yourself,/meo periculo/, that no quantity of opium ever did, or couldintoxicate. As to the tincture of opium (commonly calledlaudanum) /that/ might certainly intoxicate if a man could bearto take enough of it; but why? because it contains so much proofspirit, and not because it contains so much opium. But crudeopium, I affirm peremptorily, is incapable of producing any stateof body at all resembling that which is produced by alcohol; andnot in /degree/ only incapable, but even in /kind/: it is not inthe quantity of its effects merely, but in the quality, that itdiffers altogether. The pleasure given by wine is alwaysmounting, and tending to a crisis, after which it declines: thatfrom opium, when once generated, is stationary for eight or tenhours: the first, to borrow a technical distinction frommedicine, is a case of acute - the second, of chronic pleasure:the one is a flame, the other a steady and equable glow. But themain distinction lies in this, that whereas wine disorders themental faculties, opium, on the contrary (if taken in a propermanner), introduces amongst them the most exquisite order,legislation, and harmony. Wine robs a man of his self possession:opium greatly invigorates it. Wine unsettles and clouds thejudgment, and gives a preternatural brightness, and a vividexaltation to the contempts and the admirations, the loves andthe hatreds, of the drinker: opium, on the contrary, communicatesserenity and equipoise to all the faculties, active or passive:and with respect to the temper and moral feelings in general, itgives simply that sort of vital warmth which is approved by thejudgment, and which would probably always accompany a bodilyconstitution of primeval or antediluvian health. Thus, forinstance, opium, like wine, gives an expansion to the heart andthe benevolent affections: but then, with this remarkabledifference, that in the sudden development of kind-heartednesswhich accompanies inebriation, there is always more or less of amaudlin character, which exposes it to the contempt of theby-stander. Men shake hands, swear eternal friendship, and shedtears -- no mortal knows why: and the sensual creature is clearlyuppermost. But the expansion of the benigner feelings, incidentto opium, is no febrile access, but a healthy restoration to thatstate which the mind would naturally recover upon the removal ofany deep- seated irritation of pain that had disturbed andquarrelled with the impulses of a heard originally just and good.True it is, that even wine, up to a certain point, and withcertain men, rather tends to exalt and to steady the intellect: Imyself, who have never been a great wine-drinker, used to findthat half a dozen glasses of wine advantageously affected thefaculties -- brightened and intensified the consciousness -- andgave to the mind a feeling of being "ponderibus libratasuis:" and certainly it is most absurdly said, in popularlanguage, of any man, that he is /disguised/ in liquor: for, onthe contrary, most men are disguised by sobriety; and it is whenthey are drinking (as some old gentleman says in Athenaeus), thatmen [eantonz emfanixondin oitinez eidin]. -- display themselvesin their true complexion of character; which surely is notdisguising themselves. But still, wine constantly leads a man tothe brink of absurdity and extravagance; and, beyond a certainpoint, it is sure to volatilize and to disperse the intellectualenergies: whereas opium always seems to compose what had beenagitated, and to concentrate what had been distracted. In short,to sum up all in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending toinebriation, is, and feels that he is, in a condition which callsup into supremacy the merely human, too often the brutal, part ofhis nature: but the opium-eater (I speak of him who is notsuffering from any disease, or other remote effects of opium)feels that the diviner part of his nature is paramount; that is,the moral affections are in a state of cloudless serenity; andover all is the great light of the majestic intellect. This is the doctrine of the true church on the subject ofopium: of which church I acknowledge myself to be the only member-- the alpha and the omega: but then it is to be recollected,that I speak from the ground of a large and profound personalexperience: whereas most of the unscientific{3} authors who haveat all treated of opium, and even of those who have writtenexpressly on the materia medica, make it evident, from the horrorthey express of it, that their experimental knowledge of itsaction is none at all. I will, however, candidly acknowledge thatI have met with one person who bore evidence to its intoxicatingpower, such as staggered my own incredulity: for he was asurgeon, and had himself taken opium largely. I happened to sayto him, that his enemies (as I had heard) charged him withtalking nonsense on politics, and that his friends apologized forhim, by suggesting that he was constantly in a state ofintoxication from opium. Now the accusation, said I, is not/prima facie/, and of necessity, an absurd one: but the defence/is/. To my surprise, however, he insisted that both his enemiesand his friends were in the right: "I will maintain,"said he, "that I /do/ talk nonsense; and secondly, I willmaintain that I do not talk nonsense upon principle, or with anyview to profit, but solely and simply, said he, solely andsimply, -- solely and simply (repeating it three times over),because I am drunk with opium; and /that/ daily." I repliedthat, as to the allegation of his enemies, as it seemed to beestablished upon such respectable testimony, seeing that thethree parties concerned all agreed in it, it did not become me toquestion it; but the defence set up I must demur to. He proceededto discuss the matter, and to lay down his reasons: but it seemedto me so impolite to pursue an argument which must have presumeda man mistaken in a point belonging to his own profession, that Idid not press him even when his course of argument seemed open toobjection: not to mention that a man who talks nonsense, eventhough "with no view to profit," is not altogether themost agreeable partner in a dispute, whether as opponent orrespondent. I confess, however, that the authority of a surgeon,and one who was reputed a good one, may seem a weighty one to myprejudice: but still I must plead my experience, which wasgreater than his greatest by 7000 drops a day; and, though it wasnot possible to suppose a medical man unacquainted with thecharacteristic symptoms of vinous intoxication, it yet struck methat he might proceed on a logical error of using the wordintoxication with too great latitude, and extending itgenerically to all modes of nervous excitement, connected withcertain diagnostics. Some people have maintained, in my hearing,that they had been drunk on green tea: and a medical student inLondon, for whose knowledge in his profession I have reason tofeel great respect, assured me, the other day, that a patient, inrecovering from an illness, had got drunk on a beef-steak. Having dwelt so much on this first and leading error, inrespect to opium, I shall notice very briefly a second and athird; which are, that the elevation of spirits produced by opiumis necessarily followed by a proportionate depression, and thatthe natural and even immediate consequence of opium is torpor andstagnation, animal and mental. The first of these errors I shallcontent myself with simply denying; assuring my reader, that forten years, during which I took opium at intervals, the daysucceeding to that on which I allowed myself this luxury wasalways a day of unusually good spirits. With respect to the torpor supposed to follow, or rather (ifwe were to credit the numerous pictures of Turkish opium-eaters)to accompany the practice of opium-eating, I deny that also.Certainly, opium is classed under the head of narcotics; and somesuch effect it may produce in the end: but the primary effects ofopium are always, and in the highest degree, to excite andstimulate the system: this first stage of its action alwayslasted with me, during my novitiate, for upwards of eight hours;so that it must be the fault of the opium-eater himself if hedoes not so time his exhibition of the dose (to speak medically)as that the whole weight of its narcotic influence may descendupon his sleep. Turkish opium-eaters, it seems, are absurd enoughto sit, like so many equestrian statues, on logs of wood asstupid as themselves. But that the reader may judge of the degreein which opium is likely to stupify the faculties of anEnglishman, I shall (by way of treating the questionillustratively, rather than argumentively) describe the way inwhich I myself often passed an opium evening in London, duringthe period between 1804-1812. It will be seen, that at leastopium did not move me to seek solitude, and much less to seekinactivity, or the torpid state of self- involution ascribed tothe Turks. I give this account at the risk of being pronounced acrazy enthusiast or visionary: but I regard /that/ little: I mustdesire my reader to bear in mind, that I was a hard student, andat severe studies for all the rest of my time: and certainly hada right occasionally to relaxations as well as the other people:these, however, I allowed myself but seldom. The late Duke of Norfolk used to say, "Next Friday, bythe blessing of Heaven, I purpose to be drunk:" and in likemanner I used to fix beforehand how often, within a given time,and when, I would commit a debauch of opium. This was seldom morethan once in three weeks: for at that time I could no haveventured to call every day (as I did afterwards) for "/aglass of laudanum negus, warm, and without sugar/." No: as Ihave said, I seldom drank laudanum, at that time, more than oncein three weeks: this was usually on a Tuesday or a Saturdaynight; my reason for which was this. In those days Grassini sangat the Opera: and her voice was delightful to me beyond all thatI had ever heard. I know not what may be the state of the Opera-house now, having never been within its walls for seven or eightyears, but at that time it was by much the most pleasant place ofpublic resort in London for passing an evening. Five shillingsadmitted one to the gallery, which was subject to far lessannoyance than the pit of the theatres: the orchestra wasdistinguished by its sweet and melodious grandeur from allEnglish orchestras, the composition of which, I confess, is notacceptable to my ear, from the predominance of the clangorousinstruments, and the absolute tyranny of the violin. The choruseswere divine to hear: and when Grassini appeared in someinterlude, as she often did, and poured forth her passionate soulas Andromache, at the tomb of Hector, &c. I question whetherany Turk, of all that ever entered the Paradise of opium-eaters,can have had half the pleasure I had. But, indeed, I honour theBarbarians too much by supposing them capable of any pleasuresapproaching to the intellectual ones of an Englishman. For musicis an intellectual or a sensual pleasure, according to thetemperament of him who hears it. And, by the bye, with theexception of the fine extravaganza on that subject in TwelfthNight, I do not recollect more than one thing said adequately onthe subject of music in all literature: it is a passage in the/Religio Medici/{4} of Sir T. Brown; and, though chieflyremarkable for its sublimity, has also a philosophic value,inasmuch as it points to the true theory of musical effects. Themistake of most people is to suppose that it is by the ear theycommunicate with music, and, therefore, that they are purelypassive to its effects. But this is not so: it is by there-action of the mind upon the notices of the ear, (the /matter/coming by the senses, the /form/ from the mind) that the pleasureis constructed: and therefore it is that people of equally goodear differ so much in this point from one another. Now opium, bygreatly increasing the activity of the mind generally, increases,of necessity, that particular mode of its activity by which weare able to construct out of the raw material of organic sound anelaborate intellectual pleasure. But, says a friend, a successionof musical sounds is to me like a collection of Arabiccharacters: I can attach no ideas to them. Ideas! my good sir? there isno occasion for them: all that class of ideas, which can beavailable in such a case, has a language of representativefeelings. But this is a subject foreign to my present purposes:it is sufficient to say, that a chorus, &c. of elaborateharmony, displayed before me, as in a piece of arras work, thewhole of my past life -- not, as if recalled by an act of memory,but as if present and incarnated in the music: no longer painfulto dwell upon: but the detail of its incidents removed, orblended in some hazy abstraction; and its passions exalted,spiritualized, and sublimed. All this was to be had for fiveshillings. And over and above the music of the stage and theorchestra, I had all around me, in the intervals of theperformance, the music of the Italian language talked by Italianwomen: for the gallery was usually crowded with Italians: and Ilistened with a pleasure such as that with which Weld thetraveller lay and listened, in Canada, to the sweet laughter ofIndian women; for the less you understand of a language, the moresensible you are to the melody or harshness of its sounds: forsuch a purpose, therefore, it was an advantage to me that I was apoor Italian scholar, reading it but little, and not speaking itat all, nor understanding a tenth part of what I heard spoken. These were my Opera pleasures: but another pleasure I hadwhich, as it could be had only on a Saturday night, occasionallystruggled with my love of the Opera; for, at that time, Tuesdayand Saturday were the regular Opera nights. On this subject I amafraid I shall be rather obscure, but, I can assure the reader,not at all more so than Marinus in his life of Proclus, or manyother biographers and auto-biographers of fair reputation. Thispleasure, I have said, was to be had only on a Saturday night.What then was Saturday night to me more than any other night? Ihad no labours that I rested from; no wages to receive: whatneeded I to care for Saturday night, more than as it was asummons to hear Grassini? True, most logical reader: what you sayis unanswerable. And yet so it was and is, that, whereasdifferent men throw their feelings into different channels, andmost are apt to show their interest in the concerns of the poor,chiefly by sympathy, expressed in some shape or other, with theirdistresses and sorrows, I, at that time, was disposed to expressmy interest by sympathising with their pleasures. The pains ofpoverty I had lately seen too much of; more than I wished toremember: but the pleasures of the poor, their consolations ofspirit, and their reposes from bodily toil, can never becomeoppressive to contemplate. Now Saturday night is the season for the chief, regular, andperiodic return of rest to the poor: in this point the mosthostile sects unite, and acknowledge a common link ofbrotherhood: almost all Christendom rests from its labours. It isa rest introductory to another rest: and divided by a whole dayand two nights from the renewal of toil. On this account I feelalways, on a Saturday night, as though I also were released fromsome yoke of labour, had some wages to receive, and some luxuryof repose to enjoy. For the sake, therefore, of witnessing, uponas large a scale as possible, a spectacle with which my sympathywas so entire, I used often, on Saturday nights, after I hadtaken opium, to wander forth, without much regarding thedirection or the distance, to all the markets, and other parts ofLondon, to which the poor resort on a Saturday night, for layingout their wages. Many a family party, consisting of a man, hiswife, and sometimes one or two of his children, have I listenedto, as they stood consulting on their ways and means, or thestrength of their exchequer, or the price of household articles.Gradually I became familiar with their wishes, theirdifficulties, and their opinions. Sometimes there might be heardmurmurs of discontent: but far oftener expressions on thecountenance, or uttered in words, of patience, hope, andtranquility. And taken generally, I must say, that, in this pointat least, the poor are far more philosophic than the rich - thatthey show a more ready and cheerful submission to what theyconsider as irremediably evils, or irreparable losses. Whenever Isaw occasion, or could do it without appearing to be intrusive, Ijoined their parties; and gave my opinion upon the matter indiscussion, which, if not always judicious, was always receivedindulgently. If wages were a little higher, or expected to be so,or the quartern loaf a little lower, or it was reported thatonions and butter were expected to fall, I was glad: yet, if thecontrary were true, I drew from opium some means of consolingmyself. For opium (like the bee, that extracts its materialsindiscriminately from roses and from the soot of chimneys) canoverrule all feelings into a compliance with the master key. Some of these rambles led me to great distances: for anopium-eater is too happy to observe the motion of time. Andsometimes in my attempts to steer homewards, upon nauticalprinciples, by fixing my eye on the pole-star, and seekingambitiously for a north-west passage, instead of circumnavigatingall the capes and head-lands I had doubled in my outward voyage,I came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys, suchenigmatical entries, and such sphynx's riddles of streets withoutthoroughfares, as must, I conceive, baffle the audacity ofporters, and confound the intellects of hackney- coachmen. Icould almost have believed, at times, that I must be the firstdiscoverer of some of these /terrae incognitae/, and doubted,whether they had yet been aid down in the modern charts ofLondon. For all this, however, I paid a heavy price in distantyears, when the human face tyrannized over my dreams, and theperplexities of my steps in London came back and haunted mysleep, with the feeling of perplexities moral or intellectual,that brought confusion to the reason, or anguish and remorse tothe conscience. Thus I have shown that opium does not, of necessity, produceinactivity or torpor; but that, on the contrary, it often led meinto markets and theatres. Yet, in candour, I will admit thatmarkets and theatres are not the appropriate haunts of theopium-eater, when in the divinest state incident to hisenjoyment. In that state, crowds become an oppression to him;music even, too sensual and gross. He naturally seeks solitudeand silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances, orprofoundest reveries, which are the crown and consummation ofwhat opium can do for human nature. I, whose disease it was tomeditate too much, and to observe too little, and who, upon myfirst entrance at college, was nearly falling into a deepmelancholy, from brooding too much on the sufferings which I hadwitnessed in London, was sufficiently aware of the tendencies ofmy own thoughts to do all I could to counteract them. -- I was,indeed, like a person who, according to the old legend, hadentered the cave of Trophonius: and the remedies I sought were toforce myself into society, and to keep my understanding incontinual activity upon matters of science. But for theseremedies, I should certainly have become hypochondriacallymelancholy. In after years, however, when my cheerfulness wasmore fully re-established, I yielded to my natural inclinationfor a solitary life. And, at that time, I often fell into thesereveries upon taking opium; and more than once it has happened tome, on a summer-night, when I have been at an open window, in aroom from which I could overlook the sea at a mile below me, andcould command a view of the great town of Liverpool, at about thesame distance, that I have sate, from sun-set to sun-rise,motionless, and without wishing to move. I shall be charged with mysticism, behmenism, quietism,&c. but /that/ shall not alarm me. Sir H. Vane, the younger,was one of our wisest men: and let my readers see if he, in hisphilosophical works, be half as unmystical as I am. -- I say,then, that it has often struck me that the scene itself wassomewhat typical of what took place in such a reverie. The townof Liverpool represented the earth, with its sorrows and itsgraves left behind, yet not out of sight, nor wholly forgotten.The ocean, in everlasting but gentle agitation, and brooded overby a dove-like calm, might not unfitly typify the mind and themood which then swayed it. For it seemed to me as if then first Istood at a distance, and aloof from the uproar of life; as if thetumult, the fever, and the strife, were suspended; a respitegranted from the secret burthens of the heart; a sabbath ofrepose; a resting from human labours. Here were the hopes whichblossom in the paths of life, reconciled with the peace which isin the grave; motions of the intellect as unwearied as theheavens, yet for all anxieties a halcyon calm: a tranquility thatseemed no product of inertia, but as if resulting from mighty andequal antagonisms; infinite activities, infinite repose. Oh! just, subtle, and mighty opium! that to the hearts ofpoor and rich alike, for the wounds that will never heal, and for"the pangs that tempt the spirit to rebel," bringestand assuaging balm; eloquent opium! that with thy potent rhetoricstealest away the purposes of wrath; and to the guilty man, forone night givest back the hopes of his youth, and hands washedpure from blood; and to the proud man, a brief oblivion forWrongs unredress'd, and insults unavenged; that summonest to thechancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suffering innocence,false witnesses; and confoundest perjury; and dost reverse thesentences of unrighteous judges: -- thou buildest upon the bosomof darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, citiesand temples, beyond the art of Phidias and Praxiteles -- beyondthe splendour of Babylon and Hekatompylos: and "from theanarchy of dreaming sleep," callest into sunny light thefaces of long-buried beauties, and the blessed householdcountenances, cleansed from the "dishonours of thegrave." Thou only givest these gifts to man; and thou hastthe keys of Paradise, oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium! ----- {1} /Evanesced:/ -- this way of going off the stage of lifeappears to have been well known in the 17th century, but at thetime to have been considered a peculiar privilege of blood-royal,and by no means to be allowed to druggists. For about the year1686, a poet of rather ominous name (and who, by the bye, didample justice to his name), viz. Mr. Flat-man, in speaking of thedeath of Charles II. expresses his surprise that any princeshould commit so absurd an act as dying; because, says he, Kings should disdain to die, and only /disappear./ They should /abscond/, that is, into the other world. {2} Of this, however, the learned appear latterly to havedoubted: for in a pirated edition of Buchan's /DomesticMedicine/, which I once saw in the hands of a farmer's wife whowas studying it for the benefit of her health, the Doctor wasmade to say -- "Be particularly careful never to take abovefive- and-twenty /ounces/ of laudanum at once;" the truereading being probably five- and-twenty /drops/, which are heldequal to about one grain of crude opium. {3} Amongst the great herd of travellers, &c. who showsufficiently by their stupidity that they never held anyintercourse with opium, I must caution my readers especiallyagainst the brilliant author of /"Anastasius."/ Thisgentleman, whose wit would lead one to presume him anopium-eater, has made it impossible to consider him in thatcharacter from the grievous misrepresenta-tion which he gives ofits effects, at pp. 215-17, of vol. I. - Upon consideration itmust appear such to the author himself: for, waiving the errors Ihave insisted on in the text, which (and others) are adopted inthe fullest manner, he will himself admit, that an old gentleman"with a snow-white beard," who eats "ample dosesof opium," and is yet able to deliver what is meant andreceived as very weighty counsel on the bad effects of thatpractice, is but an indifferent evidence that opium either killspeople prematurely, or sends them into a madhouse. But, for mypart, I see into this old gentleman and his motives: the fact is,he was enamoured of "the little golden receptacle of thepernicious drug" which Anastasius carried about him; and noway of obtaining it so safe and so feasible occurred, as that offrightening its owner out of his wits (which, by the bye, arenone of the strongest). This commentary throws a new light uponthe case, and greatly improves it as a story: for the oldgentleman's speech, considered as a lecture on pharmacy, ishighly absurd: but, considered as a hoax on Anastasius, it readsexcellently. {4} I have not the book at this moment to consult: but Ithink the passage begins -- "And even that tavern music,which makes one man merry, another mad, in me strikes a deep fitof devotion," &c. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-22IA086-000619-B006-215http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/canada1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033934 text/html 9321HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:39:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:18 GMTContent-length: 9104 The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. Panic and Indifference The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. P.J. Giffen, Shirley Endicott and Sylvia Lambert. A study in the Sociology of Law. (Highly recomended.) <Begin Quoted Text pgs 66-68> Another important claimant for credit in bringing about thelegislation was a young Conservative in Vancouver, H. H. Stevens.Stevens became a very vocal MP during the narcotics debates ofthe 1920s, and personally introduced several importantamendments. His zeal for narcotic drug prohibition was kindledduring his early investigations of the problem. According to his own account, when he learned about thegambling and opium trade being carried on in Vancouver'sChinatown, he took the following actions: I took it up with the Chief of Police, but he just brushed meoff. Then I went down into Chinatown itself, and visited thegambling joints and also saw personally the Chinese preparing rawopium for the market. When the Chief of Police refused to takeany action, I used to publish in the _Vancouver News Advertiser_exactly what I had seen the night before. This I did for severalweeks. It created quite a sensation in Vancouver, and as a resultthe civic authorities discharged the Chief and appointed Mr.Chamberlain. This man, when he became Chief of Police, did anexcellent job in clearing up Chinatown(29). He described his role in bringing about the first opium Actas follows: (In 1908) I was responsible for the matter being brought tothe attention of the then government. I remember taking some veryprominent eastern gentlemen around Pacific Coast cities andshowing them the effects and use of these drugs. They returned toOttawa and put it up to Sir Wilfred Laurier, and the result wasthe Bill that was introduced(13d,p.2899). <SNIP> The motives of H. H. Stevens and of the city councils areopen to question. They appear in this instance to have beenconcerned about moral reform and civic order but all wereassociated with anti-Chinese policies in other contexts. Stevenscame to be recognized as the "the city's leadinganti-Oriental spokesman" (30, p.91), in Parliament as atlocal rallies. Civic politicians, too, had an anti-Chineserhetoric as part of their election kit and, once elected, usuallysupported the use of municipal ordinances and licensing powersfor discriminatory purposes. <SNIP> The League's (Vancouver Anti-Opium League) representations toKing(Mackenzie) included an urgent telegram at the time when theBill was being sent to the Senate and the opium manufacturerswere lobbying for a moratorium to protect their financialinterests. INFORM GOVERNMENT NOT TO LET MANUFACTURERS DELAY LEGISTAION.CHINESE AT LARGE FAVOUR IMMEDIATE SUPPRESSION(2d). <End pgs 66-68> <Begin pg 203> THE PUBLIC Interested sections of the public became very vocal andactive during the same period in in demanding more severepenalties. The cry for heavier punishment was the result of adrug scare created almost entirely by alarmist stories in themass media. The stories, of which Emily Murphy's articles in_Maclean's_ were a prime example, reinforced pre-existinghostility to Orientals and augmented the horrifying spectre ofthe "dope fiend." The negative racial stereotypes andalarming drug mythology, spread by people who claimed to havefirst-hand knowledge, were accepted uncritically. The immediateresult of these fears and hostility was the emergence of aBritish Columbia drug lobby in 1921, with the straightforwardgoals of compulsory imprisonment and whipping for all traffickersand, where possible, deportation. Public fears about narcoticdrugs were particularly intense in British Columbia, the provincewith the largest concentration of Chinese immigrants.Accordingly, the greatest pressure on legislators for severepenalties originated in that province. Much of the demand forgreater punitiveness was linked to animus against the Chinese anda desire to get rid of them, seen most clearly in the proposalfor deportation. <End Quoted Text pg 203.> APPENDIX 2 - Persons Convicted of Offences Against the Opiumand Narcotic Drug Act by country of Birth 1922-1969(1) YEAR TOTAL Non-China(2) China % Other(3) 1922 1,858 733 1,117 60.1 1923 1,297 688 604 46.6 4 1924 997 327 633 66.5 5 1925 835 366 469 56.2 1926 743 240 495 66.5 7 1927 491 133 353 71.9 3 1928 608 187 412 67.8 7 1929 616 110 506 82.1 **** 82.1 % ***** 1930 461 164 281 60.9 1 1931 316 147 169 53.5 1932 NA 1933 230 108 122 53.0 1934 218 93 125 57.3 1935 165 101 64 38.3 1936 182 136 55 30.2 1937 220 177 35 15.9 8 1938 183 142 40 21.9 1939 226 192 24 10.6 11 1940 234 199 32 13.7 3 1941 273 241 31 11.4 1 1942 136 130 5 3.7 1 1943 136 128 8 5.9 1944 194 167 27 13.9 1945 212 199 13 6.1 1946 247 220 27 10.9 1947 341 321 16 4.7 4 1948 316 304 0 - 12 1949 353 350 2 .6 1 1950 356 346 5 1.4 5 1951 353 338 10 2.8 5 1952 367 359 5 1.4 3 1953 337 325 9 2.7 3 1954 306 291 11 3.6 4 1955 349 400 8 2.3 1 1956 382 377 0 - 5 1957 400 393 5 1.3 2 1958 488 486 1 .2 1 1959 565 560 3 .5 2 1960 467 460 3 .6 4 1961 464 459 3 .6 2 1962 334 277 1 .3 56 1963 318 309 5 1.6 4 1964 325 314 8 2.5 3 1965(4) 377 375 2 1966 428 418 10 1967 958 903 55 1968 1,372 1,326 46 1969 2,200 1,961 239 (1) From Criminal Statistics 1922 to 1969 (2) Includes Canada, the British Isles, the BritishCommonwealth, the United States and Europe. (3) Includes Asia and "not stated." (4) Chinese data no longer specified. --- APPENDIX 3 - Number of Aliens Deported from Canada havingbeen Convicted of Offences Under the Opium and Narcotic Drug Act from 1922to 1944(1) YEAR CHINESE US Citizens Others 1922 4 11 0 1923 92 29 9 1924 125 24 5 1925 88 24 7 1926 86 10 1 1927 55 13 1 1928 69 5 4 1929 59 6 4 1930 60 7 4 1931 70 1 5 1932 53 7 6 1933 81 1 5 1934 59 5 3 1935 60 6 3 1936 23 1 3 1937 16 1 1 1938 16 2 2 1939 22 3 0 1940 26 2 2 1941 14 1 1 1942 1 1943 1 1944 4 2 (1) From Annual Report, Department of Pensions and NationalHealth, 1934-5, Table 5, p. 110 and Annual Report, Department of NationalHealth and Welfare, 1944-5, Table 5, p.25. --- APPENDIX 6 - Possession Offences: Individual Drugs, 1922-1972 YEAR OPIUM MORPHINE COCAINE HEROIN MARIJUANA OTHER 1922 272 66 93 - - 665 1923 155 79 43 - - 564 1924 48 41 19 - - 276 <SNIP> 1929 56 26 10 12 - 285 (first one for heroin) <SNIP> 1937 39 23 3 64 4 18 (first year including marijuana) <SNIP> 1955 2 7 - 242 8 34 1956 - - - 29 1 322 1957 - 6 - 274 5 31 (No further opium charges after 1955) <SNIP> 1963 - 15 1 222 29 26 1964 - 13 1 227 39 18 1965 - 20 2 222 42 35 1966 - 21 1 193 112 50 1967 16 - 281 447 55 1968 - 10 1 199 817 49 1969 - 6 2 185 1,476 58 1970 201(2) 5,399 1971 1972 630 10,695(2) (1) Criminal Statistics (2) From Bureau of Dangerous Drugs, Health Protection Branch,Health and Welfare Canada 9/3/73. Source : CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-23IA031-000655-B037-133http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/saved1867.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112329 text/html 68547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:22:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:39 GMTContent-length: 68331 What Shall They Do to Be Saved - 1867 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research Harper's magazine 35, Aug. 1867, pp. 377-87 What Shall They Do to Be Saved? I have just returned from forty-eight hours'friendly and professional attendance at a bedside where I wouldfain place every young person in this country for a single hourbefore the Responsibilities of Life have become the sentinels andHabit the jailor of his Will. My patient was a gentleman of forty, who forseveral years of his youth occasionally used opium, and, for thelast eight has habitually taken it. During these eight years hehas made at least three efforts to leave it off, in each instancediminishing his dose gradually for a month before its entireabandonment, and in the most successful one holding the enemy atbay but for a single summer. In two cases he had no respite ofagony from the moment he dropped till he resumed it. In the thirdcase, a short period of comparative repose succeeded the firstfiery battle, but in the midst of felicitations on his victory hewas attacked by the most agonizing hemicranial headaches(resulting from what I now fear to have been already permanentdisorganization of the stomach), and went back to his nepenthe ina state of almost suicidal despair, only after the torture hadcontinued for weeks without a moment's mitigation. He had first learned its seductions, as happenswith the vast majority of Anglo-Saxon opium-eaters, through amedical prescription. An attack of inflamed cornea was treatedwith caustic applications, and the pian assuaged by internaldoses of M'Munn's Elixir. When my friend came out of his darkroom and bandages at the end of a month he had consumed twentyounces of this preparation, whose probable distinction from thetincture known as laudanum I point out below in the note. [FN*] ________ * Mr. Frank A. Schlitz has kindly made for me aspecial analysis of M'Munn's Elixir which seems to prove that theprocess of its preparation amounts to more than thedenarcotization of opium, which is spoken of on the wrapper ofeach vial. As nearly as can be ascertained, M'Munn's Elixir issimply an aqueous infusion of opium--procured by the ordinarymaceration--and preserved from decomposing by the subsequentaddition of a small portion of alcohol. Narcotin being absolutelyinsoluble in water is eliminated as the circular says. This facealong would not account for the difference between its action andthat of laudanum. This is explained by the fact that all theother alkaloids possess diverse rates of solubility in water, andexist in M'Munn's Elixir in very different relative proportionsfrom those which they bear to each other in the alcoholictincture called laudanum. _____ Here it may not be superfluous to say that theformer preparation has all the essential properties of thelatter, save certain of the constipatory and stupefyingtendencies which, by a private process known to the assigns ofthe inventor, have been so masked or removed that it possesses inmany cases an availableness which the practitioner can notdespise, though compelled by the secrecy of its formula to rankit among quack medicines. The amount of it which my friend hadtaken during this month's eclipse represents an ounce of dry gumopium--in rough measurement a piece as large as a French billiardball. I thus particularize because he had never previously beenaddicted to the drug; had inherited a sound constitution, anddiffered from any other fresh subject only in the intensity ofhis nervous temperament. I wish to emphasize the fact that thesystem of a mere neophyte, with nothing to neutralize the effectsof the drug save the absorbency, so to speak, of the pain fromwhich it was given, could so rapidly adapt itself to them as todemand an increase of the dose in such an alarming ratio. Thereare certain men to whom opium is as fire to tow, and my friendwas one of these. On the 1st of October he sensibly perceived thetrifling dose of fifty drops; on the first of November he wastaking, without increased sensation, an ounce vial of"M'Munn" daily. From that time--totally ignorant of theterrible trap which lay grinning under the bait he dabbledwith--he continued to take opium at short intervals for severalyears. When by the physician's orders he abandoned"M'Munn," on the subsidence of the eye-difficulty, hissymptoms were uneasy rather than distressing, and disappearedafter a few days' oppression at the pit of the stomach and a fewnights' troubled dreaming. But he had not forgotten the sweetdissolving views at midnight, the great executive achievements atnoonday, the heavenly sense of a self-reliance which dare goanywhere, say anything, attempt anything in the world. He had notforgotten the nonchalance under slight, the serenity in pain, theapathy to sorrow, which for one month set him calm as Boodh inthe temple-splendors of his darkened room. He had not forgottenthat the only perfect peace he had ever experienced was there,and he remembered that peace as something which seemed to blendall the assuaged passion and confirmed dignity of old age withthat energy of high emprise which thrills the nerves of manhood.He had tasted as many sources of earthly pleasure as any man Iever knew; but the ecstasies of form and color, wine, Eros,music, perfume, all the luxuries of surrounding which wealthcould purchase or high-breeding appreciate, were as nothing tohim in comparison with the memory of that time on which hisfamily threw away their sympathy when they called it his"month of suffering." Accordingly, without much more instinct ofconcealment than if it were an occasional tendency to some slightconvivial excess, he had resort to M'Munn, in ounce doses,whenever the world went wrong with him. If he had a headache or atoothache; if the weather depressed him; if he had a certain"stint" of work to do without the sense of native vigorto accomplish it; if he was perplexed and wished to clear hishead of passion; if anxieties kept him awake; if irregularitiesdisturbed his digestion--he had always one refuge certain. Nofateful contingency could pursue him inside M'Munn's enchantedcircle. He was a young and wealthy bachelor, living the life of arefined bon vivant; an insatiable traveler, surrounded byflatterers, and without a single friend who loved him enough towarn him of his danger excepting those who, like himself, weretoo ignorant to know it. After three years of dalliance he becamean habitual user of opium, and had been one for eight years whenI was first called to him. By the time that the daily habit fasteneditself he had learned of other opiate preparations than M'Munn's,and finding a certain insufficiency characterize that tincture ashe increased the size of the dose, had recourse to laudanum,which contains the full native vigor of the drug unmodified. Thisnauseated him. He had the same experience with gum opium, opiumpills, and opium powder; so that he was driven to that form ofexhibition which sooner or later naturally strikes almost everyopium-eater as the most portable, energetic, andinstantaneous--morphia or one of its salts. My friend usuallykept the simple alkaloid in a paper, and dissolved it as heneeded it in clear water, sometimes substituting an equivalent of"Magendie's Solution," which contains sixteen grams ofthe salt diffused through an ounce of water by the addition of afew drops of sulfuric acid. When I first saw him he had reached adaily dose of twelve grains of sulphate of morphia, and onoccasions of high excitement had increased his dose withoutexaggerating the sensible effect to nearly twenty. The twelvewhich formed his habitual per diem were divided into two equaldoses, one taken immediately after rising, the other just beforesundown. As yet he had not begun to feel the worstphysical effects which sooner or later visit the opium-eater. Hisdigestion seemed unimpaired so long as he took his morphiaregularly; he was sallow and somewhat haggard, but thus far nodistressing biliary symptoms had manifested themselves; his sleepwas always dreamy, and he woke at short intervals during thenight, but invariably slept again at once, and had so adjustedhimself to the habit as to show no signs of suffering fromwakefulness; his hand was steady; his muscular system easilyexhausted, but by no means what one would call feeble. As hehimself told me, he had come to the conclusion to emancipatehimself because opium-eating was a horrible mental bondage. Thephysical power of the drug over him he only realized whenattempting its abandonment. Its spiritual thralldom was hishourly misery. He was connected by blood and marriage withseveral of the best families in the land. Money had not beenstinted in his education, and his capabilities were as great ashis advantages. He was one of the bravest, fairest, most generousnatures I ever came in contact with; was versatile as a YankeeCrichton; had ridden his own horse in a trotting match and beatenBill Woodruff; had carried his own little 30-ton schooner fromthe Chesapeake to the Golden Gate through the Straits ofMagellan; had swum with the Navigators' Islanders, shot buffalo,hunted chamois, and lunched on mangosteens at Penang. Through allhis wanderings the loftiest sense of what was heroic in humannature and divine in its purified form, the monitions of a mosttender conscience, and the echoes of that Puritan education whichabove all other schemes of training makes human responsibilityterrible, had gone with him like his tissue. He saw the good andgreat things within reach of a fulfilled manhood, and of a suddenwaked up to feel that they could on earth never be his. He wasnaturally very truthful, and, although the invariable tendency ofopium-eating is to extirpate this quality, could not flatterhimself. Other minds around him responded to a sudden call as hisown did not. Every day the need of energy took him more bysurprise. The image-graving and project-buildingcharacteristic of opium, which comes on with a sense of genialradiation from the epigastrium about a quarter of an hour afterthe dose, had not yet so entirely disappeared from its effect onhim, as it always does at a later stage of the indulgence. Butinstead of being an instigation to the delightful reveries whichensued on his earlier doses, this peculiarity was now anexecutioner's knot in the hands of Remorse. He was daily andnightly haunted by plans and pictures whose feverish unrealbeauty he remembered having seen through a hundred times. ThoseFata Morgana plans, should he again waste on them the effort ofconstruction? The result had been a chaos of aimless, ineffectualdays. Those pictures, why were they brought again to mock him?Were they not horrible impossibilities? Were they not, throughthe paralysis of his executive faculties, mere startlinglikenesses of Disappointment? In his opium dreams he had seen hisown ships on the sea; commerce bustling in his warehouse; moneyoverflowing in this bank; babies crowing on his knee; a wifenestling at his breast; a basso voice of tremendous natural powerand depth scientifically cultivated to its utmost power ofpleasing artists or friends; a country estate on the Hudson, orat Newport, with emerald lawns sloping down to the amber river onthe leek-green sea; the political and social influence of a greatlandholder. How pleasurably he had once perceived all thesepossible joys and powers! How undeludedly he now saw theirimpossible execution! So, coming to me, he told me that his object intrying to leave off opium was to escape from these horribleghosts of a life's unfulfilled promise. Only when he tried toabandon opium did he realize the physical hold the drug had onhim. Its spiritual thralldom was his hourly misery. For three months I tried to treat him in hisown house, here in the city. A practitioner of any experienceneed not be told with what success. I could reduce him to a doseof half a grain of sulphate of morphia a day, keep him there oneweek, and making a morning call at the expiration of that timediscover that some nocturnal nervous paroxysm had necessitatedeither a return to five grains or a use of brandy (which, thoughno drinker, he tried to substitute) sufficient to demand a muchlarger dose of opium in its reaction. He had lost most of hisnear connections, and not for one hour could any hired attendanthave withstood his appeal, or that marvelous ingenuity by which,without appeal, the opium-eater obtains the drug which, to him,is like oxygen to the normal man. This ingenuity manifests itself in subterfugesof a complicated construction and artistic plausibility whichmight have puzzled Richelieu; but it is really nothing to wonderat when we recollect the law of nature by which any extremeagony, so long as it continues remediable, sharpens andconcentrates all a man's faculties upon the one single object ofprocuring the remedy. If my house is on fire, I run to thehydrant by a mere automatic operation of my nerves. If my leg iscaught in the bite of a paying-out hawser, my whole brain focusesat once on that single thought, "an axe.' If I am enduringthe agony which opium alone can cause and cure, every faculty ofmy mind is called to the aid of the tortured body which wants it.When a man has used opium for a long time the condition of hisbrain supervening on his deprivation of the drug for a period oftwenty-four hours is such as very frequently to render himsuicidal. Cottle tells us how Coleridge one day took a walk alongBristol wharves, and sent his attendant down the pier to inquirethe name of a vessel, while he slipped into a druggist's on thequay and bought a quart of laudanum; but in no fibre of hisnature could Cottle conceive the awful sense of a forcedespotizing it over his will, a degradation descending on hismanhood, which Coleridge felt as he concentrated on that onesingle cry of his animal nature and the laudanum which it spokefor, fall the faculties of construction and insight which hadcreated the "Ancient Mariner" and the "Aids toReflection." Likewise I suppose there are very few peoplewho could patiently regard the fact that one of the very purestand bravest souls I ever knew had become so demoralized by theperseverance of disease and suffering as to deal like a lawyerwith his best friends, and shuffle to the very edge of falsehood,when his nature clamored for opium. I was particular to tell himwhenever I detected any evasion (an occasion on which his shameand remorse were terrible to witness) that I, personally, hadnonetheless respect for him. I knew he was dominated, and in nosense more responsible for breaking his resolution than he wouldhave been had he vowed to hold his finger in the gas-blaze untilit burned off. In this latter case the mere translation ofchemical decomposition into pain, and round the automaticnerve-arc into involuntary motion, would have drawn his fingerout of the blaze, as it did in the cases of Mutius Sevola andCranmer, if they ever attempted the feat credited them bytradition. In his case the abandonment of opium brought on anagony which took his actions entirely out of voluntary control,eclipsing the higher ideals and heroisms of his imagination atonce, and reducing him to that automatic condition in which thenervous system issues and enforces only those edicts which arecounseled by pure animal self- preservation. Whatever may havebeen the patient's responsibility in beginning the use ofnarcotics or stimulants (and I usually find, the case ofopium-eaters, that its degree has been very small indeed,therapeutic use often fixing the habit forever before a patienthas convalesced far enough even to know what he is taking)habituation invariably tends to reduce the man to the automaticplane, in which the will returns wholly to the tutelage ofsensation and emotion, as it was in infancy; while all theIntellectual, save Memory, and the most noble and imperishableamong the Moral faculties may survive this disorganization foryears, standing erect above the remainder of a personalitydefrauded of its completion to show what a great and beautifulhouse might have been built on such strong an shapely pillars.Inebriates have been repeatedly known to risk imminent death ifthey could not reach their liquor in any other way. The graspwith which liquor holds a man when it turns on him, even after hehas abused it for a lifetime, compared with the ascendancypossessed by opium over the unfortunate habituated to it for buta single year, is as the clutch of an angry woman to the embraceof Victor Hugo's Pieuvre. A patient whom, after habitual use ofopium for ten years, I met when he had spent eight years more inreducing his daily dose to half a grain of morphia, with a viewto its eventual complete abandonment, once spoke to me in thesewords: "God seems to help a man in getting out ofevery difficulty but opium. There you have to claw your way outover red-hot coals on your hands and knees, and drag yourself bymain strength through the burning dungeon- bars." This statement does not exaggerate the feelingof many another opium- eater whom I have known. Now, such a man is a proper subject, not forreproof, but for medical treatment. The problem of his case needembarrass nobody. It is as purely physical as one of small-pox.When this truth is as widely understood among the laity as it isknown by physicians, some progress may be made in staying thefrightful ravages of opium among the present generation. Now,indeed, it is a difficult thing to prevent relatives fromexacerbating the disorder and the pain of a patient, who, fromtheir uninformed standpoint, seems as sane and responsible asthemselves, by reproaches at which they would shudder, as at anyother cruelty, could they be brought to realize that their friendis suffering under a disease of the very machinery of volition;and no more to be judge harshly for his acts than a wound forsuppurating or the bowels for continuing the peristaltic motion. Finding--as is common with all physicians Ihave found so many times before--that no control of the casecould be obtained while the patient stayed at home, and deeplyrenewing my often-experienced regret that the science andChristian charity of this country have perfected no scheme bywhich either inebriates or opium-eaters may be properly treatedin a special institution of their own, I was at lengthreluctantly compelled to send my friend to an ordinary water-cureat some distance from town. The cause of my reluctance was not the prospectof a too liberal use of water, for by arrangement with the headsof the establishment I was able to control that as I chose;moreover, an employment of the hot-bath in what would ordinarilybe excess is absolutely necessary as a sedative throughout thefirst week of the struggle. I have had several patients whomduring this period I plunged into water at 110 degrees Fahrenheitas often as fifteen times in a single day--each bath lasting aslong as the patient experienced relief. In some cases thisElysium coming after the rack has been the only period for amonth in which the sufferer had anything resembling a doze. Myreluctance arose from the necessity of sending a patient in suchan advanced state of the opium disease so far away from me that Imust rely on reports written by people without my eyes, forkeeping personally au courant with the case; that I must consultand prescribe by letter, subject to the execution of my plans bymen, who, though excellent and careful, were ignorant of mytheories of treatment, and had never made this particular diseasea specialty. I accordingly sent Mr. A. away to the water-cure,all friendless and alone to fight the final battle of his lifeagainst tougher odds than he had ever before encountered. At notime in my life have I realized with greater bitterness thehelplessness of a practitioner who has no institution of his ownto take such cases to than when I shook his poor, dry sallow handand bade him goodbye at the station. As I said in the beginning, I am just home fromseeing the result. Mr. A. has fared as special cases always dowhere there is no special provision for them. To speak plainly,he had been badly neglected; and that, undoubtedly, without theslightest intention on the part of the heads of the house to doother than their duty. Six weeks ago I heard from the firstphysician that any friend was entirely free from opium, and,though still suffering, was steadily on the mend. I had nofurther news from him till I was called to his bedside by a notewhich said he feared he was dying, penciled in a hand astremulously illegible as the confession of Guy Fawkes. I was withhim by the earliest train I could take, after arranging with aneighbor for my practice, and found him in a condition which ledhim to say, as I myself said at the commencement of this article:"Would to God that every young person could stand for asingle hour by this bedside before Life's responsibilities havebecome the sentinels and Habit the jailer of the Will!" I had not been intelligently informedrespecting the progress of his case. He had been better at notime when I was told he was so, though his freedom from opium hadbeen of even longer duration than I was advised. For ninety dayshe had been without opium in any form. The scope of sountechnical an article leaves no room to detail what had beendone for him as alleviation. His prostration had been so greatthat he could not correspond with me himself until the moment ofhis absolutely extremity; and only after repeated entreaties totelegraph to myself and his family had been refused on the groundthat his condition was not critical, he managed to get off thepoor scrawl which brought me to his side. For the ninety days he had been going withoutopium he had known nothing like proper sleep. I desire to beunderstood with mathematical literalness. There had been periodswhen he had been semi-conscious; when the outline of things inhis room grew vaguer and for five minutes he had a dull sensationof not knowing where he was. This temporary numbness was the onlystate which in all that time simulated sleep. From the hour hefirst refused his craving, and went to the battlefield of bed, hehad endured such agony as I believe no man but the opium-eaterhas ever known. I am led to believe that the records of fatallesion, mechanical childbirth, cancerous affection, the stakeitself, contains no greater torture than a confirmed opium-eaterexperiences in getting free. Popularly this suffering is supposedto be purely intellectual-- but nothing can be wider of thetruth. Its intellectual part is bad enough, but the physicalsymptoms are appalling beyond representation. The look on theface of the opium sufferer is indeed one of such keen mentalanguish that outsiders may well be excused for supposing that isall. I shall never forget till my dying day that awful Chineseface which actually made me rein my horse at the door of theopium hong where it appeared, after a night's debauch, at sixo'clock one morning when I was riding in the outskirts of aPacific city. It spoke of such a nameless horror in its owner'ssoul that I made the sign for a pipe and proposed, in"pigeon English," to furnish the necessary coin. TheChinaman sank down on the steps of the hong, like a man hearingmedicine proposed to him when he was gangrened from head to foot,and made a gesture, palms downward, toward the ground, as one whosaid, "It has done its last for me--I am paying the maturedbills of penalty." The man had exhausted all that opiumcould give him; and now, flattery past, the strong one kept hisgoods in peace. When the most powerful alleviative known tomedical science has bestowed the last Judas kiss which isnecessary to emasculate its victim, and, sure of the prey,substitutes stabbing for blandishment, what alleviative, strongerthan the strongest, shall soothe such doom? I may givechloroform. I always do in the denouement of badcases--ether--nitrous oxide. In employing the first two agents Isecure rest, but I induce death nine cases out of ten. Nothing isbetter known to medical men than the intolerance of the system tochloroform or ether after opium. Nitrous oxide I am stillexperimenting with, but its simple undiffused form is toopowerful an agent to use with a patient who for many days must behourly treated for persevering pain. So the opium-eater is leftas entirely without anesthetic as the usual practice leaves himwithout therapeutic means. Both here and abroad opium-eaters havediscovered the fact that, in an inveterate case, where opiumfails to act on the brain through the exhausted tissues of thestomach, bichloride of mercury in combination with the dosebehaves like a mordant in the presence of a dye, and, so tospeak, precipitates opium upon the calloused surfaces of themucous and nervous layers. This expedient soon exhausts itself ina death from colliquative diarrhea, produced partly by the finaldecompositions of tissue which the poisonously antisepticproperty of opium has all along improperly stored away; partly bythe definite corrosions of the new addition to the dose. But inno case is there any relief to a desperate case of opium-eatingsave death. Remembering that Chinaman's faced I can notwonder at the popular notion regarding the abandonment of opium.Men say it is a mental pain; because spiritual woe is theexpression of the sufferer's countenance. And so it is, but thiswoe is underlain by the keenest brute suffering. Let me sketchthe opium-eater's experience on the rugged road upward. Let us suppose him a resolute man, who means tobe free, and with that intent has reduced to a hundred drops thedaily dose which for several years had amounted to an ounce oflaudanum. I am not supposing an extreme case. An ounce oflaudanum is a small per diem for any man who has taken hisregular rations of the drug for a twelvemonth. In the majority ofcases I have found an old habitue's daily portion to exceedthree, or the equivalent of that dose in crude opium or morphia;making seventy-two grains of the gum or twelve of its mostessential alkaloid. In one most interesting case I found a manwho having begun on the first of January with one half a grain ofsulphate of morphia for disease, at the end of March was, to allappearance, as hopeless an opium-eater as ever lived, takingthirty-two grains of the salt per day in the form of Magendie'sSolution. This, however, was an unusual case. According to myexperience the average opium-eater reaches twelve grains ofmorphia [microfiche illegible]... and may live after that totreble the amount: the worst case I ever knew attaining a dose ofninety grains, or one and a half of the drachm vials ordinarilysold. I am happy, in passing, to add that for more than two yearsboth the extreme cases just mentioned have been entirely cured. If the opium-eater has been in the habit ofdividing his daily dose he begins to feel some uneasiness withinan hour after his first deprivation, but it amounts to nothingmore than an indefinite restlessness. In any case his firstwell-marked opium torments occur early after he has been withoutthe drug for twenty-four hours. At the expiration of that time he begins tofeel a peculiar corded and tympanic tightness about theepigastrium. A feverish condition of the brain, which sometimesamounts to absolute phantasia, now ensues, marked off intoperiods of increasing excitement by a heavy sleep, which, aftereach interval, grows fuller of tremendous dreams, and breaks upwith a more intensely irritable waking. I have held a man's handwhile he lay dreaming about the thirty-sixth hour of hisstruggle. His eyes were closed for less than a minute by thewatch, but he awoke in a horrible agony of fear from what seemedto have been a year-long siege of some colossal and demoniacVicksburg. After the opium-eater has been for forty-eighthours without his solace this heavy sleep entirely disappears.While it stays it never lasts over half an hour at a time, and isso broken by the crash of stupendous visions as not to amount toproper slumber. During its period of continuance the opium-eaterwoos its approaches with an agony which shows his instinct of thecoming weeks of sleeplessness. It never rests him in any validsense. It is a congestive decomposition rather than any normalreconstruction of the brain. He wakes out of it each time with aheart more palpitating; in a perspiration more profuse; with agreater uncertainty of sense and will; with a more confusedmemory; in an intenser agony of body and horror of hopelessness. Every nerve in the entire frame now suddenlyawakes with such a spasm of revivification that no parallel agonyto that of the opium-eater at this stage can be adduced, unlessit be that of the drowned person resuscitated by artificialmeans. Nor does this parallel fully represent the suffering, forthe man resuscitated from drowning re-oxidizes all his surpluscarbon in a few minutes of intense torture, while the anguishwhich burns away that carbon and other matter, properly effete,stored away in the tissues by opium, must last for hours, days,and weeks. Who is sufficient for this long, long pull? From the hour this pain begins to manifestitself it continues (in any average case of a year's previoushabituation to the drug) for at least a week without one second'slull or exhaustion. A man may catch himself dozing between spasmsof tic-douloureux or toothache; he never doubts whether he isawake one instant in the first week after dropping his opium. Onepatient whom I found years ago at a watercure followed thewatchman all night on crutches through his tour of inspectionaround the establishment. Other people, after walking a longtime, shift from chair to chair in their rooms, talking toanybody who may happen to be present in a low-voiced, suicidalmanner, which inexperience finds absolutely blood-freezing. Latersuch rock to and fro, moaning with agony, for hours at a time,but saying nothing. Still others go to their beds at once, andlie writhing there until the struggle is entirely decided. I havelearned that this last class is generally the most hopeful. The period during which this pain is tocontinue depends upon two elements. 1st. How long has the patient habitually takenopium? 2d. How much constitutional strength remains tothrow it off? "How much has he taken in theaggregate?" is practically not an equivalent of the firstquestion. I have found an absolutely incurable opium-eater whohad never used more than ten grains of morphia per diem; but hehad been taking it habitually for a dozen years. In another casethe patient had for six months repeated before each meal theten-grain dose which served the other all day; but he was a manwhose pluck under pain equaled a woman's, and after a fortnight'sanguish of such horror that one could scarcely witness it withoutbeing moved to tears came out into perfect freedom. The formerpatient, although he had never in any one day experienced suchpowerful effects from opium as the latter, had used the drug solong that every part of his system had reconstructed itself tomeet the abnormal conditions, and must go through a secondprocess of reconstruction, without any anodyne to mask the painresulting from its decomposition, before it could again tolerateexistence of the normal kind. If opium were not an anodyne theterrible structural changes which it works would cause nosurprise; it would be felt eating out its victim's life like somuch nitric acid. During the early part of the opium-eater'scareer these structural changes go on with a rapidity whichpartly accounts for the vast disengagements of nervous force, theexhilaration, the endurance of effort, which characterize thisstage, later to be substituted by utter nervous apathy. By thetime the substitution occurs something has taken place throughoutthe physical structure which may be rudely likened to the finalequilibrium of a neutral salt after the effervescence between anacid and an alkali. So to speak, the tissues have now combinedwith their full equivalent of all the poisonous alkaloids inopium. Further use of it produces no new disengagements ofnervous force; the victim may double, quadruple his dose, but hemight as well expect further ebullition by adding moreaqua-fortis to a satisfied nitrate as to develop with opiumexhilarating currents in a tissue whose combination with thatdrug have already reached their chemical limit. FN* _____ *FN Isay "chemical" because so much it is possible to knownexperientally; and the very interesting examination of suchhigher forces as constantly seem to intrude in any nervousdisturbance would here involve the discussion of a theoretical"vital principle"-- something apart from and betweenthe soul and physical activities--which scientific men areuniversally abandoning. ___ The opium-eater now only continues his habit topreserve the terrible static condition to which it has reducedhim, and to prevent that yet more terrible dynamic condition intowhich he comes with every disturbance of equilibrium; a conditionof energetic and agonizing dissolutions which must last untilevery fiber of wrongly changed tissue is burned up and healthilyreplaced. Though I have called the early reactions of opiumrapid, they are necessarily much less so than those produced by asimple chemical agent. No drug approaches it in the possession ofcumulative characteristics; its dependence on the time elementmust therefore be always carefully considered in treating a case.This fact leads us to understand the other element in thequestion, how long the torments of the opium-fighter mustcontinue. Having ascertained the chronology of his case, we mustsay, "Given this period of subjection, has the patientenough constitutional vigor left to endure the period ofreconstruction which must correspond to it?" ** FN -------** (FN) Not correspond day by day. At that rate a reformingopium-eater (I use the particle in the physical sense, for veryfew opium-eaters are more to blame than any other sick persons)must pay a "shent per shent" which no constitutioncould survive. The correspondence is simply proportional. ------- I am naturally sanguine, and began my study ofopium-eaters with the belief that none of them were hopeless.Experience has taught me that there is a point beyond which anyconstitution--especially one so abnormally sensitive as theopium-eater's--can not endure keen physical suffering withoutdeath from spinal exhaustion. I once heard the eminent Dr.Stevens say that he made it a rule never to attempt a surgicaloperation if it must consume more than an hour. Similarly, I havecome to the conclusion never to amputate a man from hisopium-self if the agony must last longer than three months.Uneasiness--corresponding to the irritations of dressing astump--may continue a year longer; and few victims of the habitoutlive a certain opium-prurience, which has also its analogue inthe occasional titillation of a healed wound--these arecomparatively tolerable; but, if we expect to save a patient'slife, we must not protract an agony which so absolutelyinterferes with normal sleep as that of the opium-eater's forlonger than three months in the case of any constitution I havethus far encountered. Usually as early as the third day after itsabandonment (unless the constitution has become so impaired bylong habituation that there will probably be no vital reaction)opium begins to show its dissolutions from the tissue by aprofuse and increasingly acrid bilious diarrhea, which must notbe checked if diagnosis has revealed sufficient constitutionalvigor to justify any attempt at abandonment of the drug.Hemorrhoids may result; they must be topically treated; mildastringents may be used when the tendency seems getting out ofeventual control; bland foods must be given as often as theusually fastidious appetite will tolerate them; the only tonicmust be beef-tea--diffusible stimulus invariably increasing theagony, whether in the form of ale, wine, or spirits. Short ofthreatened collapse, the bowels must not be retarded. There isnothing in the faintest degree resembling a substitute for opium,but from time to time various alleviates, which can not bediscussed in an untechnical article, may be administered withbenefit. The spontaneous termination of the diarrhea willindicate that the effete matters we must remove have been mainlyeliminated, and that we may shortly look for a marked mitigationof the pain, followed by conditions of great debility butincreasingly favorable to the process of reconstruction. Thatprocess, yet more than the alleviate, demands a book rather thanan article. I have intentionally deferred any descriptionof the agony of the opium struggle as a sensation, until Ireturned from depicting general symptoms, to relate theparticular case which is my text. The sufferings of the patient,from whom I have just returned, are so comprehensive as almost tobe exhaustively typical. When simple nervous excitement had for two daysalternated with the already mentioned intervals of deliriousslumber, a dull, aching sensation began manifesting itselfbetween his shoulders and in the region of the loins. Appetitefor food had been failing since the first denial of that foropium. The most intense gastric irritability now appeared in theform of an aggravation of the typantic tightness, corrosive acidructations, heartburn, water-brash, and a peculiar sensation, aspainful as it is indescribable, of self-consciousness in thewhole upper part of the digestive canal. The best idea of thislast symptom may be found by supposing all the nerves ofinvoluntary motion which supply that tract with vitality,suddenly to be gifted with the exquisite sensitiveness to theirown processes which is produced by its correlative object in someorgan of special sense--the whole organism assimilating itself toa retina or a finger-tip. Sleep now disappeared. This initiatedan entire month during which the patient had not one moment ofeven partial unconsciousness. In less than a week from the beginning thesymptoms indicated a most obstinate chronic gastritis. There wasa perpetual sense of corrosion at the pit of the stomach verylike that which characterizes the fatal operation of arsenic.There was less action of the liver than usually indicates asalvable case, and no irritation of the lowest intestines. Paripassu with the gastritic suffering, the neuralgic pain spreaddown the extremities from an apparent center between the kidneys,through the trunk, from another line near the left margin of theliver, and through the whole medullary substance of the brainitself. Although I was so unfortunate as not to be beside himduring this stage, I can still infallibly draw on my wholeexperience for information regarding the intensity of this pain.Tic-douloureux most nearly resembles it in character. Like thatagonizing affection, it has periods of exacerbation; unlike it,it has no intervals of continuous repose. Like tic-douloureux,its sensation is a curiously fluctuating one, as if pain had beenfluidized and poured in trickling streams through the tubules ofnerve tissue which are affected by it; but, unlike that, itaffects every tubule in the human body--not a single diseasedlocality. Charles Reade chaffs the doctors very wittily in"Hard Cash" on their penchant for the word"hyperaesthesia," but nothing else exactly defines thatexaggeration of nervous sensibility which I have invariably seenin opium-eaters. Some of them were hurt by an abrupt slighttouch, and cried out at the jar of a heavy footstep like apatient with acute rheumatism. Some developed sensitiveness withthe progress of expurgating the poison, until their very hair andnails felt sore, and the whole surface of the skin suffered fromcold air or water like the lips of a wound. After all, utterlyunable to convey an idea of the kind of suffering, I must contentmyself by repeating, of its extent, that no prolonged pain of anykind known to science can equal it. The totality of theexperience is only conceivable by adding this physical torture toa mental anguish which even the Oriental pencil of De Quincey hasbut feebly painted; an anguish which slays the will, yet leavesthe soul conscious of its murder; which utterly blots out hope,and either paralyzes the reasoning faculties which might suggestencouragements, or deadens the emotional nature to them asthoroughly as if they were not perceived; an anguish whichsometimes includes just, but always a vast amount of unjustself-reproach which brings every failure and inconsistency, everymisfortune or sin of a man's life as clearly before his face ason the day he was first mortified or degraded by it--before hisface, not in one terrible dream, which is once for all over withsunrise, but as haunting ghosts, made out by the feverish eyes ofthe soul down to the minutest detail of ghastliness, and neverleaving the side of the rack on which he lies for a moment ofdark or daylight, till sleep, at the end of a month, first dropsout of heaven on his agony. A third element in the suffering must brieflybe mentioned. It results directly from the others. It is thatexhaustion of nervous power which invariably ensues on protractedpain of mind or body. it proceeds beyond reaction to collapse ina hopeless case; it stops this side of that in a salvable one. On reaching his room I found my friendbolstered upright in bed, with a small two-legged crutch at handto prop his head on when he became weary of the perpendicularposition. This had been his attitude for fifty days. Whether fromits impeding his circulation, the distribution of his nervouscurrents, or both, the prostrate posture invariably brought oncessation of the heart and the sense of intolerable strangling.His note told me he was dying of heart disease, but, as Iexpected, I found that malady merely simulated by nervoussymptoms, and the trouble purely functional. His food wasarrowroot or sago, and beef-tea. Of the vegetable preparation hetook perhaps half a dozen tablespoonfuls a day; of the animalvariable quantities, averaging half a pint per diem. This, thoughsmall, was far from the minimum of nutriment upon which life hasbeen supported through the most critical periods. Indeed, I haveknown three patients tided over stages of disease otherwisedesperately typhoid by beef-tea baths, in which the proportion ofozmazone was just perceptible, and the sole absorbing agency wasa faint activity left in the pores of the skin. But thesepatients had suffered no absolute disorganization. Thepractitioner had to encounter a swift specific poison, not tomake over tissues abnormally misconstructed by its long insidiousaction. On examination I discovered facts which I had oftenfeared, but never before absolutely recognized, in my friend'scase. The stomach itself, in its most irreproducible tissue, hadundergone a partial but permanent disorganization. The substanceof the organ itself had been altered in a way for which scienceknows no remedy. Hereafter, then, it can only be rechanged bythat ultimate decomposition which men call death. Over theopium-eater's coffin at least, thank God! a wife and sister canstop weeping and say, "He's free." I called to my friend's bedside a consultationof three physicians and the most nearly related survivor of hisfamily. I laid the case before them; assisted them to a fullprognosis; and invited their views. I spent two nights with myfriend. I have said that during the first month of trial he hadnot a moment of even partial unconsciousness. Since that timethere had been perhaps ten occasions a day, when for a periodfrom one minute in length to five, his poor, pain-wrinkledforehead sank on his crutch, his eyes fell shut, and to outsidershe seemed asleep. But that which appeared sleep was internally tohim only one stupendous succession of horrors which confusedlysucceeded each other for apparent eternities of being, and endedwith some nameless catastrophe of woe or wickedness, in a wakingmore fearful than the stage volcanically ruptured by it. Duringthe nights I sat by him these occasional relaxations, as Ilearned, reached their maximum length, my familiar presenceacting as a sedative, but from each of them he woke bathed inperspiration from sole to crown; shivering under alternateflushes of chill and fever; mentally confused to a degree whichfor half an hour rendered every object in the room unnatural andterrible to him; with a nervous jerk, which threw him quite outof bed, although in his waking state two men were requisite tomove him; and with a cry of agony as loud as any underamputation. The result of our consultation was a unanimousagreement not to press the case further. Physicians have nobusiness to consider the speculative question, whether deathwithout opium is preferable to life with it. They are called tokeep people on the earth. We were convinced that to deprive thepatient longer of opium would be to kill him. This we had noright to do without his consent. He did not consent, and I gavehim five grains of morphia** FN ----- ** (FN) To the younger menof the profession rather than to the public generally I need hereto say that this dose is not as excessive as it would naturallyappear to be in the case of a man who had used no form of opiumfor ninety days. When you have to resume the drug go cautiously.But you will generally find the amount of it required to producethe sedative effects in any case which returns to opium, afterabandonment of a long habituation, startlingly large, and slow inits effects. ----- between 8 and 12 o'clock on the morning of theday I had to return here. He was obliged to eat a few mouthfulsof sago before the alkaloid could act upon his nervous system. Ineed only point out the significance of this indication. Theshallower lying nervous fibers of the stomach had becomedefinitely paralyzed, and such digestion as could be perfectedunder these circumstances was the only method of getting thestimulant in contact with any excitable nerve-substance. In otherwords, mere absorbent and assimilative tissue was all of himwhich for the purpose of receiving opium partially surviveddisorganization of the superficial nerves. Of that survivingtissue, one mucous patch was irredeemably gone. (This particularfact was the one which cessation from opium more distinctlyunmasked.) At noon he had become tolerably comfortable; before Ileft (7 p.m.) he had enjoyed a single half hour of something likenormal slumber. He will have to take opium all his life.Further struggle is suicide. Death will probably occur at anyrate not from an attack of what we usually consider disease, butfrom the disintegrating effects on tissue of the habit itself.So, whatever he may do, his organs march to death. He will haveto continue the habit which kills him only because abandoning itkills him sooner; for self-murder has dropped out of the purviewof the moral faculties and become a mere animal question of time.The only way left him to preserve his intellectual facultiesintact is to keep his future daily dose at the tolerable minimum.Henceforth all his dreams of entire liberty must be relegated tothe world to come. He may be valuable as a monitor, but in theexecutive uses of this mighty modern world henceforth he cannever share. Could the immortal soul find itself in a moreinextricable, a more grisly complication? In publishing his case I am not violating thatHippocratic vow which protects the relations of patient andadviser; for, as I dropped my friend's wasted hand and stepped tothe threshold, he repeated a request he had often made to me,saying: "It is almost like Dives asking for amessenger to his brethren; but tell them, tell all young men,what it is, 'that they come not into this torment.'" Already perhaps--by the mere statement of thecase--I might be considered to have fulfilled my promise. Butsince monition often consists as much in enlightenment asintimidation, let me be pardoned for briefly presenting a fewconsiderations regarding the action of opium upon the humansystem while living, and the peculiar methods by which the drugencompasses its death. What is Opium? It is the most complicated drug in thePharmacopeia. though apparently a simple gummy paste, itpossesses a constitution which analysis reveals to contain noless than 25 elements, each one of them a compound by itself, andmany of them among the most complex compounds known to modernchemistry. Let me concisely mention these by classes. First, at least three earthy salts--thesulphates of lime, alumia, and potassa. Second, two organic andone simpler acid--acetic (absolutely vinegar), meconic (one ofthe most powerful irritants which can be applied to theintestines through the bile), and sulfuric. All three existuncombined in the gum, and free to work their will on the mucoustissues. A green extractive matter, which comes in all vegetalbodies developed under sunlight, next deserves a place by itself,because it is one of the few organic bodies of which no rationalanalysis has ever been pretended. Though we cannot state theconstitution of this chlorophyll, we know that, except by turningacid in the stomach, it remains inert on the human system, as onemight imagine would happen if he swallowed a bunch of greengrass. Lignin, with which it is always associated, is mere woodyfiber, and has no direct physical action. In no instance has anystomach been found to digest it save an insect's-- somenaturalists thinking that certain beetles make their horny wing-cases of that. I believe one man did think he had discovered asolvent for it in the gastric juice of the beaver, but that viewis not widely entertained. So far as it exists in opium it canonly act as a foreign substance and a mechanical irritant to thehuman bowels. Next come two inert, indigestible, and very similargummy bodies, mucilagin and bassorin. Sugar, are powerfullyactive volatile principle, and a fixed oil (probably allied toturpentine) are the only other invariable constituents of opiumbelonging to the great organic group of the hydro- carbons. I now come to a group by far the most importantof all. Almost without exception the vegetable poisons belong towhat are called the "nitrogenous alkaloids." Strychnia,brucia, ignatia, calabarin, woovarin, atropine, digitalin, andmany others, including all whose effect is most tremendous uponthe human system, are in this group. Not without insight did theearly discoverers call nitrogen azote, "the foe tolife." It so habitually exists in the things our body findsmost deadly that the tests for it are always the first whichoccur to a chemist in the presence of any new organic poison. Thenitrogenous alkaloids owe the first part of their name to thefact of containing this element; the second part to that of theirusually making neutral salts with acids, like an alkaline base.The general reader may sometimes have asked himself why thesealkaloids are diversely written-- as, e.g., sometimes"morphia," and sometimes "morphine." Thechemists who regard them as alkalies write them in the one way,those who consider them neutrals, in the other. Of thesenitrogenous alkaloids, even the nuts of the tree, which furnishesthe most powerful, swift poison of the world, contains butthree--the above-named strychnia, brucia, and ignatia--principlesshared in common with its pathological congener, the St. Ignatiusbean. Opium may be found to contain twelve of them; but as one ofthese (cotarnine) may be a product of distillation, and the other(pseudo-morphia) seems only an occasional constituent, I treatthem as ten in number--rationally to be arranged under threeheads. First, those whose action is merely acrid--sofar as known expending themselves upon the mucous coasts.(Pseudo-morphia when it occurs belongs to these.) So doporphyroxin; narceine; probably papaverine also; while meconin,whose acrid properties in contact with animal tissue are similarto that of meconic acid, forms the last of the group. The second head comprises but a singlealkaloid, variously called paramorphia or thebaine. (It mayinterest amateur chemists to know that its difference fromstrychnia consists only in having two less equivalents ofhydrogen and six of carbon--especially when they know how closelyits physical effects follow its atomic constitution.) A dose ofone grain has produced tetanic spasms. Its chief action appearsto be upon the spinal nerves, and there is reason to suppose it apoison of the same kind as nux vomica without the concentrationof that agent. How singular it seems to find a poison of thistotally distinct class--bad enough to set up the reputation ofany one drug by itself--in company with the remaining principleswhose effect we usually associate with opium and see clearest inthe ruin of its victim! The remainder, five in number, are the opiumalkaloids, which act generally upon the whole system, butparticularly, in their immediate phenomena, upon the brain. Imention them in the ascending order of their nervine power:narcotine; codeine; opianin; metamorphia, and morphia. The first of these the poppy shares in commonwith many other narcotic plants--tobacco the most conspicuousamong the number. In its anti- periodic effects on the humansystem it has been found similar to quinia, and it is anundoubted narcotic poison acting on the nerves of organic life,though, compared with its associates in the drug, comparativelyinnocent. The remaining four act very much like morphia,differing only in the size of the dose in which they proveefficient. Most perfectly fresh constitutions feel a grain ofmorphia powerfully; metamorphia is soporific in half-gain doses(American Journal of Pharmacy, September, 1861); opianin in itsphysical effects closely approximates morphia; codeia is aboutone-fifth as powerful; a new subject may not get sleep short ofsix grains; its main action is expended on the sympatheticsystem. It does not seem to congest the brain as morphia does;but its action on the biliary system is probably little lessdeadly than that of the more powerful narcotic. Looking at the marvelous complexity of opium wemight be led to the a priori supposition that its versatility ofaction on the human system must be equally marvelous. Miserably for the opium-eater, fortunately forthe young person who may be dissuaded from following in hisfootsteps, we are left in no doubt of this matter by theconclusions of experience. In practical action opium affects aslarge an area of nervous surface, attacks it with as muchintensity, and changes it in as many ways as its complexity wouldlead us to expect. I have pointed out the existence in opium of aconvulsive poison congeneric with brucia. The other chief activealkaloids, five in number, are those which specially possess thecumulative property. Poisons of the strychnia and hydro-cyanicacid classes (including this just mentioned opium alkaloid,thebaine), are swifter agents; but this perilous opium quintettesigns to every sense a lulling song from which it may not awakefor years, but wakes a slave. Every day that a man uses opiumthese cumulative alkaloids get a subtler hold on him. Even aphysician addicted to the practice has no conception how theirinfluence piles up. At length some terrible dawn rouses him out ofa bad sleep into a worse consciousness. Though the mostuntechnical man, he must already know the disorder which hastaken place in his moral nature and his will. For a knowledge ofhis physical condition he must resort to his medical man, andwhat, when the case is ten years old, must a practitioner tellthe patient in any average case? "Sir, the chances are entirely againstyou, and the possession of a powerfully enduring constitution, ifyou have it, forms a decided offset in your favor." He then makes a thorough examination of him byear, touch, conversation. If enough constitution responds to thecall, he advises an immediate entrance upon the hard road ofabnegation. If the practitioner finds the case hopeless hemust tell the patient so, in something like these words: "You have either suffered adisorganization of irreproducible membranes, or you havedeposited so much improper material in your tissue that your lifeis not consistent with the protracted pain of removing it. "One by one you have paralyzed all theexcretory functions of the body. Opium, aiming at all thosefunctions for their death, first attacked the kidneys, and withyour experimental doses you experienced a slight access ofdysuria. As you went on, the same action, progressively paralyticto organic life, involved the liver. Flatulence, distress at theepigastrium, irregularity of bowels, indicated a spasmodicperformance of the liver's work, which showed it to be under highnervous excitement. your mouth became dry through a cessation ofthe salivary discharge. Your lachrymal duct was parched, and youreye grew to have an arid look in addition to the dullnessproduced by opiate contraction of the pupil. All this time you continued to absorb an agentwhich directly acts for what by a paradox may be called fatalconservation of the tissues. Whether through its complexitycombined nitrogen, carbon, or both, the drug has interposeditself between your very personal substance and those oxidationsby which alone its life can be maintained. It has slowed thefires of your whole system. It has not only interposed but inpart it has substituted itself; so that along with much effetematter of the body stored away there always exists a certainundecomposed quantity of the agent which sustains this morbidconservation. **FN ----- ** (FN): I frequently use whathydropaths call "a pack" to relieve opium distress, andwith great benefit. After an hour and a half of perspiration, thepatient being taken out of his swaddlings, I have found in thewater which was used to wash out his sheet enough opium to haveintoxicated a fresh subject. This patient had not used opium fora fortnight. ----- "When this combination became established,you began losing your appetite because no substitution of freshmatter was required by your body for tissue wrongly conserved.The progressive derangement of your liver manifested itself inincreased sallowness of face and cornea; the organ was working onan inadequate vital supply because the organic nervous system wasbecoming paralyzed; the veins were not strained of that which isthe bowels' proper purgative and the blood's dire poison. You hadsealed up all but a single excretory passage--the pores of theskin. Perhaps when you had opium first given you you were toldthat its intent was the promotion of perspiration but did notknow the rationale. The only way in which opium promotesperspiration is by shutting up all the other excretory processesof the body, and throwing the entire labor of that function uponthe pores. (When the skin gives out the opium- eater is shut uplike an entirely choked chimney, and often dies in delirium ofblood-poisoning.) "For a while--the first six years,perhaps--your skin sustained the work which should have beenshared by the other organs--not in natural sweat, but violentperspiration, which showed the excess of its action. Then yourpalms became gradually hornier--your whole body yellower--at thesame time that your muscular system grew tremulous throughprogressively failing nervous supply. "About this time you may have had sometemporary gastric disturbance, accompanied with indescribabledistress, loathing at food, and nausea. This indicated that themucous lining of the stomach had been partially removed by thecorrosions of the drug, or that nervous power had suddenly cometo a standstill, which demanded an increase of stimulation. "Since that time you have been taking yourdaily dose only to preserve the status in quo. The condition bothof your nervous system and your stomach indicate that you mustalways take some anodyne to avoid torture, and your only anodyneis opium. "The rest of your life must be spent inkeeping comfortable, not in being happy.: Opium-eaters enjoy a strange immunity fromother disease. They are not liable to be attacked by miasma inmalarious countries; epidemics or contagions where they exist.They almost always survive to die of their opium itself. And anopium death is usually in one of these two manners: The opium-eater either dies in collapse throughnervous exhaustion (with the blood poisoning and deliriumabove-mentioned), sometimes after an overdose, but oftenerseeming to occur spontaneously; or in the midst of physical ormental agony, as great and irrelievable, as men suffer in hopefulabandonment of the drug, and with a colliquative diarrhea, bywhich--in a continual, fiery, acrid discharge--the systemrelieves itself during a final fortnight of the effete matterswhich have been accumulating for years. Either of these ends is terrible enough; let usdraw a curtain over their details. Opium is a corrosion and paralysis of all thenoblest forms of life. The man who voluntarily addicts himself toit would commit in cutting his throat a suicide only swifter andless ignoble. The habit is gaining fearful ground among ourprofessional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary sewingwomen, our fagged clerks, our disappointed wives, our formerliquor-drunkards, our very day-laborers, who a generation agotook gin; all our classes, from the highest to the lowest, areyearly increasing their consumption of the drug. The terribledemands, especially in this country, made on modern brains by ourfeverish competitive life, constitute hourly temptations to someform of the sweet, deadly sedative. Many a professional man of myacquaintance, who twenty years ago was content with histri-diurnal "whiskey," ten years ago, drop by drop,began taking stronger "laudanum cocktails," until hebecame what he is now--an habitual opium-eater. I have tried toshow what he will be. If this article shall deter any from animitation of his example, or excite an interest in thequestion--"What he shall do to be saved?"--I amcontent. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-24IA086-000619-B006-240http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/szasz1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034002 text/html 7317HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:39:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:33 GMTContent-length: 7100 Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? A Historical Perspective From _Our Right To Drugs_ by Thomas Szasz, PraegerPublishers, NY (1992): *The Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906* Before 1907, all drugs could be sold and bought like anyother consumer good. The manufacturer did not even have todisclose the contents of his concoction. Hence the name patentmedicine, the adjective alluding to the fact that the compositionwas a trade secret, protected by a patented name. Although there is no evidence that the American consumer evercomplained about the free market in drugs, there is plenty ofevidence that his self appointed protectors complained bitterlyand loudly. The first landmark event in the federal regulation ofdrugs (and foods) was the Food and Drugs Act of 1906. What didCongress intend to achieve with this seemingly laudablelegislation? To protect people from the sale of"adulterated" or "misbranded" foods or drugs,that is, "assur[ing] the customer of the identity of thearticle purchased, not of its usefulness." I say Congress's aim in enacting this legislation wasseemingly laudable because, while it is desirable that peopleknow what drugs they buy, forcing manufacturers by law to listthe ingredients of their products is an unnecessary infringementon the free market -- the foot in the door ofpaternalistic-statist protectionism. If Great American Drugs,Inc., wants to market a mystery product, there is no reason whythe government should prevent it from doing so. And if I want tobuy such a pig in a poke, why should the government prevent mefrom making that choice? People who want to be informed about thedrugs they buy and use would abstain from purchasing mysteryproducts, and market forces would then create a supply oftruthfully labeled drugs. In short, there would be no need toprohibit the non-disclosure of the contents of medicinal (orother) products. It is enough to prohibit false disclosure and topunish it, as fraud, by both criminal and civil penalities. Asfor nondisclosure, it would be "punished" by theinvisible hand of the market. The truth is that behind Congress'sostensible aim of combating drug misbranding lay its growingantagonism to the habit of pharmacological self-pleasuring,manifested by the act's specifically mandating the listing on thelabel of what were then the main ingredients of Americans'favorite nostrums: alcohol, hypnotics, and sedatives. Therelevant lines of the Food and Drugs Act read as follows: That for purposes of this Act an article shall also be deemedmisbranded: ... if the package fails to bear a statement on thelabel of the quantity or proportion of any alcohol, morphine,opium, cocaine, heroin, alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform,cannabis, chloral hydrate, or acetanilide. It is implicit in this sentence that, back then, Congresstook for granted the legality of a free market in drugs,including cannabis, cocaine, heroin, and morphine. [...] *The Harrison Act (1914) and It's Aftermath* In 1914, Congress enacted another landmark piece of anti-druglegislation: the Harrison Narcotic Act. Originally passed as arecord-keeping law, it quickly became a prohibition statute. Inthe course of the next seven years, by a curious coincidence ofhistory -- if, indeed, it is a coincidence -- in Russia theSoviet Union replaced the czarist empire, while in the UnitedStates the free market in drugs was replaced by federal drugprohibition possessing unchallengeable authority. Excerpts fromtwo key Supreme Court decisions quickly tell the story. In 1915, in a test of the Harrision Act, the Court upheld itbut expressed doubts about its constitutionality: "While theOpium Registration Act of December 17, 1914, may have a moralend, as well as revenue, in view, this court, in view of thegrave doubt as to its constitutionality except as a revenuemeasure, construes it as such." Yet, only six years later the Court considered objection tofederal drug prohibition a taboo. In Whipple v. Martinson thejustices declared, "There can be no question of the authority of the Statein the exercise of its police power to regulate theadministration, sale, prescription, and use of dangerous andhabit-forming drugs.... The right to exercise this power is so manifest in theinterest of public health and welfare, that it is unnecessary toenter upon a discussion of it beyond saying that it is too firmlyestablished to be successfully called in question. In 1914, trading in and using drugs was a right. In 1915,limited federal drug controls were a constitutionallyquestionable tax revenue measure. By 1921, the federal governmenthad gained not only complete control over so-called dangerousdrugs, but also a quasi-papal immunity to legal challenge of itsauthority. Thus has the rejection of one of our most basicconstitutional rights become transformed into reverence for oneof our most baneful therapeutic-religious dogmas. Once ignited,the fire of "progressive" drug protectionism spread andsoon enveloped the whole contry, transforming the Harrison Actinto the legislative embodiment of the "moral principle thattaking narcotics for other than medicinal purposes was harmfuland should be prevented." That threw the monkey wrenchmedicinal purpose into the machinery of the trade in drugs; thisundefined and undefinable concept has haunted us ever since. In1920, drug prohibitionists won another major victory: Americawas, at last, alcohol-free -- if not de facto, then at least dejure. Since 1924, when Congress made it illegal to manufacture,possess, or sell heroin, America has been free from heroin aswell -- if not in practice, then at least in theory. [...] In retelling this tale, it is impossible to overemphasizethat, although initially the drug laws were intended to protectpeople from being "abused" by drugs others wanted tosell them, this aim was soon replaced by that of protecting themfrom "abusing" drugs they wanted to buy. The governmentthus succeeded in depriving us not only of our basic right toingest whatever we choose, but also of our right to grow,manufacture, sell, and buy agricultural products used by mansince antiquity. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-25IA031-000655-B037-153http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/1600BC.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112339 text/html 3184HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:23:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:12 GMTContent-length: 2967 Evidence Found of Ancient Marijuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research EVIDENCE FOUND OF ANCIENT MARIJUANA USE Albany (NY) Times Union, 20 May 1993 (attributed to Newsday) The first physical evidence that marijuana was used as amedicine in the ancient Mideast was reported Wednesday by Israeliscientists who found residue of the drug with the skeleton of agirl who apparently died in childbirth 1,600 years ago. The researchers said the marijuana probably was used by amid-wife trying to speed the birth, as well as ease the pain.Until now, the researchers wrote in a letter to the journalNature, "physical evidence of cannabis (marijuana) use inthe ancient Middle East has not yet been obtained." The seven researchers -- from Hebrew University, the IsraelAntiquities Authority and the National Police Headquartersforensic division -- said references to marijuana as a medicineare seen as far back as 1,600 B.C. in Egyptian, Assyrian, Greekand Roman writings. But physical evidence that the hemp weed,cannabis sativa, was used for that purpose has been missing. The researchers' examination of an undisturbed family tombnear Jerusalem dating to the fourth century AD indicated thegirl, about 14, died because her pelvis was too small to permitnormal birth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-26IA086-000619-B006-289http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/mrsin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034030 text/html 10634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:40:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:53 GMTContent-length: 10416 From Mr Sin to Mr Big From Mr Sin to Mr Big Auth: Desmond Manderson Published: 1993 Publisher: Oxford University Press Australia ISBN: 0 19 553531 6 Background to the Book. (From back cover) From Mr Sin to Mr Big is a compelling legal and socialhistory of the origins and development of drug laws in Australia.It argues that the selective enactment of 'drug' laws has beendriven by fear, racism, powerful international pressures, and thevested interests of the medical profession, bureaucrats andpoliticians, rather than by genuine concerns about the welfare ofusers. Behind the emotion and contoversy that surround the use ofillegal drugs lie previously unexamined assumptions about how andwhy certain substances - such as opium, herion and cannabis -have been prohibited, while others - such as alcolhol and tobacco- have not. This book challenges these assumptions, while alsoexamining the power and efficacy of law as a means of achievingsocial change. Desmond Manderson traces the legislative developments, fromthe anti-opium laws directed against the Chinese in thenineteenth century, to the complex web of our present drug laws,and illustrates the gradual politicisation of the drugs debate.From Mr Sin to Mr Big argues that Australia's current drug lawsare a product of the past, and it is only by understanding thispast that we can begin a rational debate about reform in thefuture. [note] Desmond Manderson is a lawyer and historian who has writtenextensively on drug history and policy. After studying andteaching at the Australian National University in Canberra forseveral years, he is currently engaged in research at the Centrefor Medicine, Ethics, and Law at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. [accurate at 1993 : PH] [summary of the research programs] As part of his Honours thesis in History, Mandersonresearched for a small publication funded by the Research intoDrug Abuse Program (RIDAP) of the National Campaign Against DrugAbuse (NCADA). Following his Honours thesis, it was suggested that he workon a larger project into the history of drug laws in Australia,again supported by RIDAP, under the Commonwealth (Federal, forour world audience) Department of Community Services and Health. Interesting quotes from the book. (page 7) In nineteenth-century Australia, opium was the preserve ofneither the creative few nor the urban poor. It was freelyavailable and freely used. Furthermore, perhaps partly as aconsequence of the weakness of the medical profession, the linewhich is now seen to divide medical 'use' form non-medical'abuse' was not yet apparent. Many people who consumed opiumundoubtedly did so out of habit. Indeed, temperance activists whowould rather forfiet their lives than drink a nip of whiskey, butwho were addicted to opium, were the butt of many jokes. 'Ibelieve the teetotalers have too little pleasure in this world,whatever they may hope for in the next,' said Godfrey Carter, amember of the Victorian Legislative Assembly well known for hisopposition to the temperance movement, in 1898, "and when Ithink what little joy they have here at present is derived, to agreat extent, from the use of morphine, chlorodyne, painkiller,and a variety of other preparations of opium, why should weprevent them from going to their chemists and getting thesethings?" (page 19) As the "Bulletin", whose masthead proudlyproclaimed 'Australia for the White Man', stated in 1889: "The badness of the Chinaman, socially and morally, isthe outcome of his low wages ... If Chinamen will tomorrow refuseto work for less wages, man for man, than Britons, and willrefuse to work longer hours, the head and front of the objectionsto their presence will disappear." For the "Bulletin", the Chinese were'jaundice-coloured apostles of unlimited competition'. The proponents of a 'White Australia', however, slid withease from arguments of economic protectionism to visceral racism.The Chinese were painted as living squalidly and in filth, theirhabits depraved and their lives degraded. The absence of Chinesewomen was seen as a threat to the honor and chastity of innocentEuropean women and girls (and prostitution certainly flourishedin the Chinatowns of large communities). That the Chinese menworked on Sundays was portrayed as an indication of theinfiltration of paganism and devil-worshipping into god-fearingAustralian society. In the slandering of the Chinese, almostanything went, as this extract from a tract written by someonewho went by the ironic pseudonym 'Humanity' shows: "The Chinese amidst their evil surroundings, and theirfilthy and sinful abodes of sin and swinish devilry [will be]entered into by the servants of the Most High God! May thewayside scattering of the seed of holiness and truth take root inthe hotbed of all unholy and unclean vices! ... It would never bebelieved that our Saxon and Norman girls could have sunk so lowin crime as to consort with such a herd of GorillaDevils..." (page 23-24) Opium was seen as a pollutant, moral as well as physical; itwas tainted by the environment of its consumption and by itsconnections with the Chinese themselves. The potency of theseseparate aesthetic revulsions-against dirtiness, the Chinese, andthe smell of opium-was compounded by their mutual association, ascan be seen from the description of an opium den contained in the'Bulletin's" 1886 feature on 'The Chinese in Australia': "Down from the fan-tan den are stairs leading to lowerand dirtier abodes: rooms darker than and more greasy thananything on the ground floor: rooms where the legions ofaggressive stinks peculiar to Chinamen seems to linger ... Yetthe rooms are not naturally repulsive, nor would they be so whenoccupied by other tenants; but the Chinaman has defiled theirwalls with his filthy touch; he has vitiated what was once areasonably pure atmosphere with his presence, and he has pollutedthe premises with his disgusting habits; and so it is that noughtsave suggestions of evil, incentives of disgust and associationsof vice, now seems to move in the fetid atmosphere ... The veryair of the alley is impregnated with the heavy odour of thedrug." From being seen as a dirty habit in dirty people, opiumsmoking came to be seen as an immoral habit in hated people. Itwas a small step readily taken: from a symbol of depravity, opiumbecame a cause of it; from a sign of evil, it became an activeagent of it. (page 32) Sub-title: 'They all go to the Chinaman': Aboriginal OpiumLaws and the Chinese In fact, the first laws specifically toprohibit opium did not seem to deal with the Chinese use of it atall. The Queensland "Sale and Use of Poison Act 1891"penalised "any person who supplies, or permits to besupplied, any opium to any aboriginal native of Australia orhalf-caste of that race ... except for medicinal purposes..." (page 36) A man named Corbett, 'speaking for all other farmers',complained that 'they could not get the blacks to work when theywanted them, while the Chinese', who farmed half of thesurrounding land, could always get them, a fact which heaccounted for by saying that the Celestial paid their Aboriginalemployees in opium'. The solution seemed simple. As the localcarpenter argued, 'the blacks should be taken from the Chineseand compelled to work for any European who might require theirservices'. Opium was, as ever, a scapegoat. The local Whitefarmers, wanting cheap Black labour, could not understand whythey would rather work for the Chinese. The use of opium wasfastened upon as the only possible explanation for such aperverse choice. The more likely truth was that the Chinese treated theAboriginal with a modicum of respect. Roth reported the localpolice as saying that is the White population ceased starving andmistreating its Black employees, it could get as many workers asit wanted. But even the crudest kind of decency appears to havebeen beyond some of the locals. A man named Putt expressed hisgrievance with incredulity: "I have shot thirteen or fourteen niggers in thisDistrict and this is all the Government has done for me:-I can'tget a _____ nigger when I want one. They all go to theChinaman." (page 204-205) Senator Peter Baume, amongst others, has spoken with more andmore conviction as the years have passed. In one of his lastparliamentary speeches on the subject, before retiring to take upan appointment as Professor of Community Medicine at theUniversity of New South Wales, he said: "Our strategies seekto prevent the production of certain designated illegalsubstances, and fail to do so; they seek to prevent theimportation of substances, and fail to do so; they seek toprevent the distribution of substances, and fail to do so; theyseek to prevent the sale and use of substances, and fail to doso." (page 207) One thing is apparent. 'Drugs' is a subject which peopleapproach with many erroneous preconceptions, and a littleknowledge can change people's opinions profoundly. Both PeterBaume and Peter Cleeland, chairmen of influential parliamentarycommittees on the subject, have stressed to me how much theirthinking began to change when they first started to read and tolisten. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-27IA086-000619-B006-311http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/ommenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034058 text/html 3264HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:40:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:33 GMTContent-length: 3047 The Opium Monopoly - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE AUTHOR OF " BACKWASH OF WAR...... PEKING DUST,CIVILIZATION," ETC. THE MACMILLAN COMPANY - 1920 " If this was our battle, if these were our ends, Which were our enemies, which were our friends?" Witter Bynner, in The Nation. CONTENTS INTRODUCTION I. GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY II. THE INDIAN OPIUM MONOPOLY III. JAPAN AS AN Opium DISTRIBUTOR IV. SINGAPORE V. THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS OPIUM COMMISSION VI. OPIUM IN SIAM VII. HONG KONG VIII. SARAWAK IX. SHANGHAI X. INDIA XI. TURKEY AND PERSIA XII MAURETIUS XIII. BRITISH NORTH BORNEO XIV. BRITISH GUIANA XV. HISTORY OF THE Opium TRADE IN CHINA.. XVI --CONCLUSION Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-28IA030-000641-B028-324http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nylawyer/iif1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141826 text/html 17403HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:18:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:44:29 GMTContent-length: 17185 Costs of Prohibition - Threatens Public Health Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | AWiser Course, Ending Drug Prohibition Part II Continued The Costs of Prohibition Prohibition Threatens Public Health Spread of Disease Sharing Needles Because the possession of hypodermic needles isgenerally illegal, users of injectable drugs routinely shareneedles and syringes with one another, often in "shootinggalleries" where dozens of addicts may line up to use asingle needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilizedbetween uses. This sharing of needles has become a major source of transmission ofblood-borne diseases such as acquired immune deficiency syndrome("AIDS") and hepatitis. According to a recent nationalreview, "more than 33% of newAIDS cases occur among injecting drug users or people havingsexual contact with them." In New York State, the majorityof new AIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users ofinjectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers forDisease Control and the New York State Department of Health haveestimated that more than 75% ofpediatric AIDS cases are children whose mothers eitherinjected drugs or were the sexual partners of persons whoinjected drugs. The data suggest, at the very least, that sterilehypodermic needles should be readily and freely available to drugusers. So long as drug use remains unlawful, however, free needle distribution is notlikely to attract a substantial portion of the user population.In response, some courts havecircumscribed laws dealing with the unlawful possession ofhypodermic needles by applying defenses of medical necessity. Trading Sex for Drugs Because illicit drugs are expensive, manyaddicts turn to prostitutionto make money to support their habits, or exchange sexualservices directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts often do notprotect themselves from contracting sexuallytransmitted diseases carried by their customers, and theypass such diseases on to other customers, their lovers, and theirchildren. The crack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed forthe recently noted resurgence of syphilis and other sexuallytransmitted diseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for DiseaseControl placed the blame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: People---especially women---have high-risk sex and practice prostitution to support their habits. And it is occurring in a relatively poor population where people have a lot of things that prevent their access to treatment. Therefore, they stay infected longer and are more likely to pass their infections on to others. [133]. Fewer addicts would be forced to resort to prostitution if thecurrent prohibitions against drugs were lifted. Neglect of Health Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtainingand using drugs, and the debilitating effects of some of thedrugs themselves, many addicts are in very poor health. Malnutrition is a frequent problemand, in turn, contributes to many others. Addicts' poor healthmakes them especially susceptible to diseases ranging from scurvyand shingles to tuberculosis and the flu. Addicts are also morelikely to contract communicable diseases and therefore morelikely to spread them. The interrelated urban problems ofhomelessness and illegal drug abuse have contributed to thedevelopment of multi-drug-resistantstrains of diseases such as tuberculosis, which was oncethought to be on the verge of eradication. These more virulentdiseases know few geographical limitations and pose risks to thegeneral population. Avoidance of the Health-Care System Individuals who use illegal drugs often put offaddressing their health problems for fear of prosecution or otheradverse consequences (e.g.,rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). This reluctance to seek medicalcare is compounded by the fact that many drug addicts have noprivate physicians and rely instead on public hospitals orclinics for any care they might get. Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drugabusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and whentheir need for care is acute, which is also when care is mostcostly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natalcare, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight andother medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seekingtreatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in theemergency room and the intensivecare ward. Mothers and pregnant women face the additional and justifiablefear that any detectable drug use may be reported as a possibleindication of child abuse or neglect. In many large cityhospitals, the urine of newborn babies is tested for prohibiteddrugs, and mothers whose babies test positive for pre-natalexposure are reported to the child abuse authorities. Untilrecently, in New York City, such babies were routinely kept fromtheir mothers pending investigations that often lasted manymonths, interfering with normal bonding and necessarily adverselyaffecting the infant's development and relationship with theparent. Moreover, these women have, in some jurisdictions, been prosecuted for pre-partum distributionof prohibited drugs. In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who becomeinfected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughoutsociety, particularly to the sexual partners and children ofinfected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are morelikely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglecttheir children after they are born, or to have their children placed in foster care. Lack of Information and Quality Control Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, andDrugs of Unknown Potency Because drugs are manufactured anddistributed in secret, it is impossible for users to guardagainst adulteration or to determine the purity and potency ofthe drugs they use. The problem is compounded by drug growers,manufacturers, and distributors who, to minimize the risks ofapprehension, develop and purvey the drug varieties that pack themost intoxicating effect into the smallest package. According toan experienced New York City researcher, The fact that cocaine, heroin and related drugs are illegal encourages the use of injection. Severe statutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of illicit substances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a way to economize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are much more concentrated than traditional forms, such as opium or coca tea. Injection provides an intense and economical effect by maximizing the amount of drug that reaches the brain. People who sniff or smoke drugs say that if they inject they need only one third of the amount of the drug to maintain a habit. Because the injection forms of illicit drugs are concentrated, they are [also] relatively easier to ship. [140]. It has been demonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminalpenalties intensify, dealers also find other ways to economize byinventing new drugs---so-called "designer drugs"---thatare not yet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers ofsuch drugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction ofdangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have beenused with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due tovariations in potency, and (3) the development of "designerdrugs" intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicantswith new chemical compositions that put them beyond the reach of current laws.Just as the prohibition against alcohol led to sales of poisonouswood alcohol and the prohibition against abortion led tocoat-hanger abortions, the prohibition against drug manufacture,sale, and possession results in unnecessarydeaths due to adulteration, variable purity, and"designer drugs." This contrasts sharply with thegovernment's current regulation of alcoholic beverages, whichensures that the beverages are pure and that buyers know howstrong they are and what some of their health effects may be.Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce drug lawsand amend them to encompass new formulations or ban precursorsubstances may only push dealers totake greater risks, selling ever more potentially dangeroussubstances. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Because many drugs are outlawed, individualsconsidering drug use rarely have access to accurate informationabout the effects of drugs. While a cautious user may err on theside of avoiding certain activities while under the use of drugs,he or she may have no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, thepossible adverse health consequences of certain combinations ofdrugs and his or her individual tolerance for particularsubstances. Because of its penchant for exaggeration andcartoonish treatment of the issues, most current education aboutdrugs is not taken seriously by young people. As a result, it isfar less effective than other health education (e.g., aboutnutrition, fitness, and smoking cigarettes). Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of"Soft Drugs" Alcohol and tobacco arecompletely legal yet do much more harm, statistically speaking,than illegal drug use. It is also generally recognized thatalcohol, at least when used to excess, can cause aggressive, anti-social behavior.The current prohibitionist laws against marijuana, generallyconsidered an "a-motivational" drug, and otherso-called "soft drugs" have the effect of influencingsome people to choose alcohol over these "soft drugs."Peter Reuter, an economist at the Rand Corporation, concludesthat "If marijuana is a substitute for alcohol..., alcoholis, by definition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough marijuana enforcement must increasedrinking." Similarly, Frank Chaloupka, an economist atthe University of Illinois, found through statistical analysis"that states without criminal sanctions against marijuanapossession suffered fewer autofatalities." Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate atHarvard, found that "states decriminalizing marijuanareported lower overall rates ofdrug- and alcohol-related emergencies." To the extentthat users are choosing alcohol rather than marijuana or other"soft drugs," the overall public health effects areprobably worse than they would be otherwise. Injuries Due to Violence The high prices commanded by prohibited drugscreate competition among groups and individuals willing to breakthe law to supply drugs to consumers. Their competition oftenbecomes violent and has contributed to the build-up of arms andthe pervasiveness of violencein many areas. Gunshot wounds and other traumas due to theillegal drug business have become commonplace in big-cityhospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, but also lawenforcement officers and innocent bystanders are often the victims. Mayor Rudolph Giulianirecently noted: The victims of the [ ] gun battles [of street-level drug dealers] are innocent bystanders---and often young children. Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot; of these, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. [151]. The cost of prohibiting drugs must be measured in terms oflost lives and expensive medical care and include the hiddencosts of lost productivity and the psychological damage toindividuals and entire communities living in fear, helpless andhopeless. With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, drugs themselves do not generally causeviolent behavior. It is, instead, turf wars for the controlof black markets and the drug users' need for money to purchasesuch substances that leads to violence. Indeed, marijuana andheroin have been shown to render their users disinclined toviolence or incapable of violence while under the influence.These substances are much lessdangerous in this regard than alcohol. Diversion of Resources from Treatment andPrevention Prohibition diverts moneythat could otherwise be used for preventing and treating drugabuse. Federal anti-drug legislation provides a single budget for"supply reduction" and "demand reduction"efforts. Law enforcement agencies have always received much morethan prevention, treatment, and research programs combined. TheABA recently reported that "[s]ince the early 1980s,treatment has been a declining priority. In 1991, treatmentreceived 14% of the $10.5 billion federal drug budget compared to25% ten years earlier." During the same period,"federal spending on lawenforcement increased 737%, with interdiction efforts leadingthe increase." Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for druginterdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of lawenforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and qualityof life issues. Forward A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Report of The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June 14, 1994 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | AWiser Course, Ending Drug ProhibitionWT01-B33-29IA088-000636-B010-31http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/opinion.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100502 text/html 8082HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:04:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:21 GMTContent-length: 7865 Drug Legalization? Decriminalization? Prohibition? TheOpinion Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate The Drug Policy Debate Legalization? Decriminalization? Prohibition? The Opinion Page Conservatives onProhibition -- For all those who thought that drug policyreform was a liberal cause - here are numerous statements fromleading conservatives. This section is maintained by JimRosenfield. Recent Comments on the War onDrugs - 25 pages of extracts from current books on varioustopics related to the War on Drugs. Letter from Dear Abby Dear Abbysays she supports the Hoover Resolution. Letter from Bob Dole saying hedoes not oppose an objective study of our drug laws. The Drug Legalization Debate: What'sthe Real Issue? By Clifford A. Schaffer Dispatch from the DrugWar by Peter H. King Why we should legalize drugs byBenson B. Roe, MD, Professor Emeritus and former Chair ofCardiothoracic Surgery at the University of California at SanFrancisco. The Effects of Legalization From"Ain't Nobody's Business If You Do", by PeterMcWilliams. It is a discussion between William F. Buckley, Jr.and Professor Gazzaniga (the Andrew W. Thompson Jr. Professor ofPsychiatry [Neuroscience] at Dartmouth Medical School) which wasoriginally published in the February 5, 1990, issue of theNational Review. Perspectives On Drugs - HowLegalization Would Cut Crime The no-win 'drug war' keeps drivingup the price. Users commit crimes to cover the cost. The publicis the loser. By Steven B. Duke. Dethrone the Drug Czar byWhitman Knapp, Federal Judge. Testimony of NY StateCorrections Commissioner Thomas A. Coughlin This is the testimony of the New York State Commissioner ofCorrections before the New York State Legislature regarding theRockefeller Drug Laws. Simply put, he thinks the current drugpolicy is a dumb idea. Should We Re-Legalize Drugs? Astatement by the Libertarian Party of America Why Do We Make Major Problemsout of Minor Drugs of Abuse?, by Frederick H. Meyers, M.D.,Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, SanFrancisco, CA Drug wars: Menace to Americaby Tod Mikuriya, M.D. Medicalization of Drug AbuseControl: Pharmacy Based Voluntary Drug Users Co-operatives AProposal by Tod H. Mikuriya. M.D. Why is There a 'War on Drugs? byDave Haans The Wrong Message OfLegalizing Illicit Drugs This is a pamphlet put out by the Partnership for a Drug-FreeAmerica which basically states that it is wrong to talk aboutdrug policy reform because even talking about it encourages druguse. Now even ordinary discussion has become dangerous. Interview with Milton Friedmanon Drug Prohibition The Drug War and the Constitution,by Paul Hager Crime and the Drug War, by KirbyCundiff, Ph.D. Opinion Pieces by Judge James P.Gray It's Time for a NewBattle Plan in the Losing War on Drugs, by Judge James P.Gray An Open Letter to the DrugCzar by Judge James P. Gray A View from the FrontLines of the Drug War by Judge Volney Brown -- A response toJudge Gray's Open Letter to the Drug Czar, by one of the topleaders of the fight against drugs from the Nixon Administration.Quite an interesting response. Darkening Shades of the Drug War:Brown Vs. Gray - Address of The Honorable James P. Gray ,Orange County Superior Court Judge, State of California, at theCrime, Drugs, Health & Prohibition II Conference, Harvard LawSchool, May 21, 1994 Keep Doin' What We're Doin'? No,We Must Reassess Our Drug Policy By Judge James P. Gray Drugs and the Law by James P.Gray, Orange County Superior Court, California Courts Commentary Opinion Pieces by Thomas L. Wayburn,Ph.D. The Case for Drug Legalization andDecontrol in the United States by Thomas L. Wayburn, Ph.D. Fallacies and Unstated Assumptions inPrevention and Treatment by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD A Review of the 1990 Drug PolicyFoundation Conference by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD A Seven-point Post-Prohibition Policyby Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD Can the State Teach that Drugs are Wrongand Harmful? by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD Despite Recent Flurry of Anti-DrugPropaganda, Drug Prohibition is Indefensible by Thomas L.Wayburn, PhD Two Crucial Issues in the Argument forDrug Legalization by Dr. Thomas L Wayburn, ExecutiveDirector, American Policy Institute, Inc. The Trouble with Surveys by ThomasL. Wayburn, PhD Junior Goes to School by Thomas L.Wayburn, PhD A Review of Drug Legalization,For and Against Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-30IA088-000636-B010-64http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/chicken.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100515 text/html 19786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:05:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:50 GMTContent-length: 19568 The Chicken Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate The Chicken Page What this page is all about Debate? What debate? In the last year or so, the people andorganizations who support the War on Some Drugs have realizedthat they simply cannot win an open and honest debate on drugpolicy. As a rational matter, there is no rational defense forour current policy. As a result, they have gone into ahunkered-down mode where they are refusing to engage in anydialogue at all on drug policy - because they realize they willlose badly. We think it is important to point out and name all the peopleand organizations who want to try to tell the world what we oughtto be doing about drugs, but then refuse to engage inconstructive debate or dialogue with anyone who might propose anymodification to the current system. In short, they have pushedthemselves into an extremist corner, and we think it ought to bepublicly known. Therefore, we are listing below the people and organizationswho have been invited for a polite, open, and honest publicdebate on drug policy but have so far refused. We think they arechicken - afraid to debate because they know they will be soundlybeaten. We feel that the media and everyone else who reads thispage should call it to their attention that their refusal todiscuss drug policy is unreasonable and counter-productive. Ifthey are really interested in finding a drug policy which works,then we ought to be talking together, not hiding as these peopleare doing. PLEASE NOTE: We wholeheartedly invite any of the people or organizationslisted below to respond and participate in this debate by postingtheir responses, arguments, or whatever. We have alreadyestablished links to their web pages so readers may compare therespective arguments, and understand why these people don't wantto debate. We will post whatever responses they want to make. The Chickens The Drug Enforcement Administration The DEA refuses to discuss drug policy in any environmentwhere they might be subjected to either honest debate or direct,probing questions about our drug policies. This is despite thefact that they held a major conference in August, 1994, to try toteach their people how to survive in a drug policy debate andeven wrote a book called "How to Hold Your Own in a DrugLegalization Debate". Why do they refuse to debate? Verysimple - they know from past history that they will get theirbutts kicked without any question. Prove it to yourself. Call your local DEA office andtell them you are setting up a public forum and would like themto come to speak to whatever community group. They will gladlyvolunteer - because they have public relations officers with thatspecific task - until they hear the rest. Then tell them thatthere will be people from the drug policy reform movement there,and you would like to set up an open and honestdiscussion/debate. Their answer will be short and simple:"We don't debate." If you ask them why, they will tellyou it is because it would lend credibility to the other side. Ofcourse, they will still refuse even if you have recognizedmedical authorities, Nobel prize winners, or anyone else whoalready has credibility. The real reason is: They are chicken! Thomas Constantine Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration After putting his pretty face on the book he masterminded -"How to Hold Your Own in a Drug Legalization Debate" -Mr. Constantine has apparently wisely decided not to try ithimself. We have posted his book, along with our reply which,among other things, found that they had cited books which didn'teven exist. That's no way to win a debate! In recent months hehas openly admitted that the drug war of the 1980s has hadlittle, if any, effect on the flow of drugs despite all thebillions spent. Mr. Constantine may now be frightened to come outand debate this policy on any rational basis, or he may just begetting his resume ready because he realizes that, sooner orlater, the jig is up. Robert Bonner Former Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration Mr. Bonner relies on the same standard old arguments insupporting the drug war but, curiously, doesn't want to puthimself in a position where anyone can question him about what hesays. He has been given numerous opportunities to debate credibleproponents of drug policy reform but rarely accepts anyinvitation where he has any opposition at all. We believe it isbecause he realizes he really can't "hold his own" inthe drug policy debate. Senator Joseph Biden of the US Senate "What we do not need is a debate that treats our nation's serious drug problem as a political football; what we do not need are more charges of who should do more and who hasn't done enough." -Sen Joseph Biden April 28, 1996 Wilmington News Journal page A8 Joe, you really don't get the point, do you? The point, Joe,is your fundamental ignorance of many facets of the issues. Thepurpose of a debate is to educate people like you. Open andhonest discussion of the issues has always been a fundamentalpart of the American political process - clear back to the dayswhen George Washington and Thomas Jefferson were still growinghemp. The following are some of his quotes, or close to them: (Mostof this section is supplied by Scott Ehlers.) "General McCaffrey, you should take this administration by the ears...If they don't give you real power, then you should quit"; (That ought to be a short job.) "this war must be fought on the streets of every community"; (That's OUR community you are talking about fighting a war in, Joe.) "hard-core addicts must face swift and tough punishment even if they are first-time or nonviolent offenders"; (OK, there are about 2.7 million of them and not a single available jail cell. Tell me how that works out, Joe.) "gratuituous violence is due to cocaine users...you can bet they're on cocaine" (Joe, you just proved you haven't read the Federal Government's own reports on this issue. Start with Psychoactive Substances and Violence by the Department of Justice, -- click on the title there and you can read the whole thing.) "Bill Bennett was the best drug czar because he hollered, and I hope you'll holler as well Gen. McCaffrey" (Personally, I want more out of Government officials than the ability to holler - especially when what he is hollering doesn't make any sense anyway.) "Just act, we don't need any more studies...we've done plenty of studies...don't listen to the people." (Would you care to share with us any of those studies that you have read? I have a number of them on these web pages and not one of them agrees with this drug policy. See the list - Major Studies of Drug Policy) Biden also added some interesting new "facts" to therecord that I was not aware of, namely: the Harrison Act waspassed in 1917; there was more drug education in 1923 than thereis today; and 10 to 20 times more drugs were confiscated underMcCaffrey than under his predecessors. (Yes, this is a U.S.Senator and according to him, he's been studying the drug problemfor 20 years!) Joe Biden has been a major supporter of the War on Some Drugsfor many years. His obvious ignorance of the basic facts aboutthe issue is all the more shocking, considering he is one of themajor congressional leaders and has been ranting about this foryears. He has admitted on several occasions that our drug policyclearly leaves something to be desired but, for Joe at least, anhonest discussion of the issues - and how to make our policybetter - is out of the question. Unless you already agree withhis preconceived notions, don't bother to call. Joe Biden is up for re-election again in 1996, so the obviousquestions come up: Will Joe Biden ever have the courage to face someone from the"legalization" camp in an open and honest debate? Iseriously doubt it. An open and honest debate would mean thatthose long, rambling, say-nothing statements he makes would besubject to some real examination. My personal opinion is that hewould look like a major fool in short order against any of thetop advocates for reform. Who should you vote for if you live in Delaware? Clearly,anybody more honest and forthright on the issue than Joe Biden -such as any candidate who is willing to discuss his ideas in anopen forum and put them to an honest test. I have included links to a page on Joe Biden, and another pageby one of his opponents so you can judge for yourself. JoeBiden's Vote Smart Page Mark Jones for Senate Send Joe Biden somee-mail - Tell him he is listed here, and Cliff Schaffer iscalling him out for a debate. The only thing you will get inresponse is a massive clucking sound. Dr. Eric Voth Dr. Voth's List of Research - whereinhe finds support for his position. The list is most curiousbecause much of the information listed plainly does not supporthis point of view. Dr. Voth is one of the Grand Poobahs of Drug WatchInternational and a few other pro-prison organizations and iswell-known for histrionic appearances before congressionalcommittees where, to hear him tell it, the entire future ofcivilization rests on the grand plan to incarcerate every potsmoker. (Dr. Voth, when you read this, please remember that Iwill be glad to post any statements you want to make about theissue, including a rebuttal of everything I say here - but lookout, because that will probably start the debate you are tryingso hard to avoid.) I have had several private e-mail conversations with him andit is quite clear that Dr. Voth would be no match for me oranyone I have trained and would quickly look quite foolish infront of all but the most extreme audiences. Dr. Voth's initial tactic, like those of the Drug WatchInternational folks in general, is to try to turn the wholedebate into a series of personal attacks. I had extremedifficulty in getting him to address any substantive issue aboutdrugs because he kept making accusations against everyone in thedrug-policy reform movement. For example: He said that the drug policy reform movement was composed of a bunch of drug addicts. I pointed out to him that simple logic should tell him this was wrong. Why would anyone want to try to organize a bunch of drug addicts? The reasons they would not be good activists seem pretty obvious to me. He said that the real force behind the movement was a bunch of people like Dick Cowan (formerly head of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws) who wanted the laws changed just so they could get stoned and so they could get rich selling pot after the laws were changed. I can't tell you all of Dick Cowan's reasoning for wanting the laws changed but it is my clear impression that neither one of these two reasons are high up on the list. As for making money from pot after it is legal, I don't think Dick Cowan is stupid enough to believe that he could. (Dick can correct me, if I am wrong.) If anyone wanted to make money from pot, the best time to do it would be under the current policy. But, the bottom line is that Dick Cowan's motives (or any other individual's motives) don't really have much to do with the issue of whether it makes sense to incarcerate millions of people for drug offenses. As I pointed out to Dr. Voth, Dick Cowan may not know any more about this issue than Dr. Voth does. Dr. Voth persisted in this kind of routine for quite sometime, until I finally hit him with a long list of corruption anddishonesty on the other side, starting with the lies told byHarry Anslinger starting in 1937. People who live in glass housesshouldn't throw stones. Once I hit him back, he stopped that routine (a little) and wewent on to some *real* issues, but the conversation was marked byhis inability to answer almost any question I asked him. Forexample: He claims he is a "world-renowned expert" on marijuana, and especially marijuana addiction. Yet, it is obvious to me that he has never read many of the basic research texts that I have posted on this web page and is woefully ignorant of many other facets of the subject. As one small example, he is not familiar with the various ways in which cannabis can be consumed medically. I pointed him to the web pages, especially the work of Dr. Tod Mikuriya, but it is doubtful if he will ever bother to read it. I asked him to provide me with his credentials and the full text of any research he has done on the issue, or that he thinks is important to understanding the issue. I assured him that I would post anything he sends me unaltered. So far he hasn't come forth with a single page of anything but his personal opinions. On the other hand, I have received reams of information from many other "experts" on the issue, including people with better medical credentials than Dr. Voth. He says that he supports the use of cannabinoids as medicine but wants people to use "medicines", not "potions." It occurred to me that, since the active ingredient in Marinol, an FDA-approved prescription drug, comes directly from the marijuana plant, that the difference between a "medicine" and a "potion", was very much the same as the difference between a Vitamin C tablet and an orange. Some patients, it would seem, would naturally prefer the "medicine" (the tablet), while others would prefer the "potion" (the orange). I asked him to explain what I had missed, but he had no response. Most interesting is Dr. Voth's response to my request for adebate. He said the conditions would have to be right. I told himthat my conditions were pretty simple: Any time, any place, anyaudience, any rules - just show up. Dr. Voth's terms for a debate were quite a bit different. Theyare: The forum needs to be high visibility such as a major media event like national talk show, news show, etc. I suggested any number of possible forums, including online, taped radio or TV appearances, etc. He said all of them could be edited to make him look foolish. (No editing required for that.) I even suggested that we do it online and then post matching transcripts on our respective web pages with links to each other - just so we could make sure that neither one of us had done any editing. No dice. No pro-legalization forum. Either a totally neutral audience or something on his turf. (One should note that a totally neutral audience would be almost impossible to find. I don't really see what the audience has to do with it anyway - they just watch, they don't participate.) He wants all his costs covered. (That shouldn't be a problem, I know lots of people who would buy tickets just to watch him fall). In short, Dr. Voth just isn't very eager for a public debatewith any knowledgeable opponent. He seems to have a lot to saywhen nobody has the microphone but him, but he quickly craps outwhen faced with any significant opposition. If you happen to read about Dr. Voth in the newspaper, or seehim on the media, make it a point to write to the media sourceand include a copy of this segment of the Chicken Page. Dr. Kim Edward Light Dr. Light has a relatively small (by comparison to any ofours) web site devoted to a few articles making poorly documentedand plainly illogical arguments against "legalization."His web page invites responses and even purports to maintain acommentary area where people can comment, but he has neverresponded to any invitation to debate, or even any comments onhis web page that anyone can determine. We invite Dr. Light tojoin us in debate. We don't expect that he will do so any timesoon. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-31IA088-000636-B010-97http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/myths/myths1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100525 text/html 7637HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:05:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:58 GMTContent-length: 7420 Drug Legalization: Myths and Misconceptions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Drug Legalization: Myths and Misconceptions by The US Dept. of Justice Table of Contents Introduction 1 Introductory Pointers 2 Chapter 1: Addiction Rates 3 Summary Sheet 8 Chapter 2: Crime and DrugLegalization 11 Summary Sheet 16 Chapter 3: Experience of ForeignCountries 19 Great Britain 19 Netherlands 21 Switzerland 22 Spain 23 China 23 Japan 23 Other Countries 23 Summary Sheet 25 Chapter 4: Economics of DrugLegalization 29 Summary Sheet 32 Chapter 5: Lessons ofProhibition and Drug Legalization 35 Summary Sheet 38 Chapter 6: Role of Alcohol and Tobaccoin the Drug Legalization Debate 41 Summary Sheet 43 Chapter 7: Medical Uses of PresentlyIllegal Drugs 45 Summary Sheet 51 Chapter 8: Individual Right and theLegalization of Drugs 55 Summary Sheet 57 Chapter 9: Legal Issues Surrounding theLegalization of Drugs 59 Summary Sheet 61 Chapter 10: Environmental Issues 63 Summary Sheet 64 Chapter 11: "Anything is Betterthan What We Are Doing Now", Hopelessness, Drug Control, andPotential Solutions 65 Summary Sheet 68 Appendix 1: How to Debate the Issue 71 Bibliography 73 Drug Legalization: Myths and Misconceptions U.S. Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration 220 W. Mercer Street, Suite 104 Seattle, Washington 98119 May 12, 1994 Dear Friends, Law enforcement has a responsibility to be involved in theprevention of all illegal or harmful activities. At this time inour nation's history, there is no crime problem of graverconsequence than the drug problem. While law enforcement acts asa deterrent to drug abuse and drug trafficking, we know that thelong-term answer to the drug problem goes beyond traditional lawenforcement actions. In 1987, the Drug Enforcement Administration initiated a drugprevention and education program when Special Agents wereassigned as Demand Reduction Coordinators in each of the agency's19 field divisions. With limited resources they have providedsupport, assistance and training to grassroots organizations.Many requests are for information on the issue of druglegalization. Lee P. Brown, the Director of the Office of National DrugControl Policy stated in the 1993 Interim National Drug ControlStrategy, "Drug use among our nation's youth has droppedsince its peak in 1985 and 1986, prompting some to conclude thatthe drug problem, if not over, is no longer a crisis. Thisconclusion is as dangerous as it is wrong. The loss of publicfocus has also allowed the voices of those who would promotelegalization to ring more loudly and be heard more clearly. Thedeclines thus far in the use of drugs are in part because theyare illegal. Legalization is a formula for self-destruction. The[Clinton] Administration is unequivocally opposed to any 'reform'that is certain to increase drug use." S/A Tom Pool has compiled and edited a list of the most commonarguments used by proponents of drug legalization. Thesearguments fall into eleven general areas, hence the elevenchapters in the attached manual. These arguments are analyzed andinformation is provided to defeat these arguments. This manual will be revised and expanded. I solicit thereaders to assist us by submitting comments, position papers,research, and documented sources of information to: S/A Tom Pool - Demand Reduction Coordinator Drug Enforcement Administration 220 West Mercer Street, Suite 104 Seattle, WA 98119 Tel: (206) 553-5443 I hope that this "debate manual" will proveuseful to the police officers, parents, teachers, and othersfaced with the myths and misconceptions of drug legalization. Raymond J. McKinnon Special Agent in Charge Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-32IA086-000619-B009-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/wrong1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035034 text/html 5570HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:50:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:40 GMTContent-length: 5353 The Wrong Message Of Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy The Wrong Message Of Legalizing Illicit Drugs By the Partnership for a Drug-Free America 18-Aug-94 A new publication that discusses that any policy discussionthat includes consideration of legalizing illicit drugs reflectseither a complete misunderstanding or ignorance of the keyfactors that affect trial and use of these substances.Legalization sends the societal message of public approval,eroding the anti-drug attitudes of our youth and encouraging themto try and use illegal drugs. What we need is the reverse --establishing the unequivocal message that our public behaviorstandard and social norm is 'no-use," continuouslyreinforced through the attitudes of harm/risk and social disapproval thatare prevent inhibitors to our youth trying and using thesesubstances. First, it is critical to recognize that drug abuse is, at itscore, the result of the demand we as individuals and societycreate for these drugs. Prior to drug use becoming the disease ofaddiction, all drug trial and use is the result ofdecisions/choices we make to use or not use. The primarydeterminant in these decisions are the attitudes of 1) perceived harm/risk and 2) social disapproval.This is true across ethnicity, demography and geography. Allprogress in reducing drug use and, ultimately, addiction, is theresult of increasing anti- drug attitudes in order to change thebehavior. The message of legalization is precisely antithetical toeverything we've learned about preventing the demand for illegaldrugs. The epidemic of illegal drug use over the past threedecades was the result of these substances, their use, and theirusers becoming "normalized" -perceived as benign and anaccepted part of normal social behavior. Normalization has led tonearly 80 million Americans having tried illegal drugs. Becausewe did not understand the impairment and harm that results fromusing illegal drugs, we passively and actively moved away fromthe behavior standard and social norm of no-use. The reverse process of "denormalization" that beganwith the death of Len Bias in 1986 has resulted in a decline ofmore than 50% in the number of Americans using illicit drugs.This fact is not well known, and probably is responsible for muchof the sense of hopelessness and helplessness that oftensurrounds the issue of drug abuse. As a nation, we began torecognize the harmfulness of drug use, and we began tore-establish the social norm of no- use. All the declines intrial and non-addicted use of illicit drugs are directlycorrelated with the increase in the attitudes of perceived harm/risk andsocial disapproval. Importantly, however, most recent trends among young teensindicate an erosion in their key anti-drug attitudes of risk anddisapproval, resulting in higher usage rates of marijuana, LSD,cocaine and inhalants. Further confusion in the behavior standardand social norm of no-use, especially consideration of legalizing(read 'normalizing") illicit drugs, will surely acceleratethis disturbing trend and put us back into the drug epidemic ofthe 1970's and early 1980's. Courtesy: Partnership for a Drug-Free America Distributed by: | JOIN TOGETHER: A National Resource for | Tel. 617/437-1500 | Communities Fighting Substance Abuse | Fax. 617/437-9394 441 Stuart Street, Sixth Floor |info@jointogether.org | Boston, MA 02116 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B33-33IA088-000636-B010-118http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/introhv.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100532 text/html 6110HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:05:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:54 GMTContent-length: 5893 Introduction to the Hoover Resolution Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Introduction to the Hoover Resolution by Clifford A. Schaffer July 15, 1993 On December 28, 1992 I wrote to Judge James P. Gray of OrangeCounty, California to ask him to help me draft a letter whichprominent people could sign, and ask others to sign, to show thatthey were united in demanding major reform of our national drugpolicy. Judge Gray, Dr. Clarke Smith, and I, wrote the bulk ofthe wording of what was to become known as the Hoover Resolution.By happy coincidence, Kathy Smith, the wife of Dr. Clarke Smith,arranged a meeting with Dr. Milton Friedman and Joseph McNamarato discuss the resolution. News of the meeting spread farther andmore quickly than even we had intended and, before we knew it, wehad a list of attendees for the meeting which included some ofthe world's most prominent citizens and internationallyrecognized experts on drug abuse, some of whom have been in thefield for more than fifty years. On February 26, 1992 we met at the Hoover Institution atStanford University, finalized the wording, and signed theresolution which calls for an objective Federal Commission toreview the evidence on drug policy and to form a new drug policywhich does not do so much harm. A list of these signers isenclosed. The purpose of the resolution is to 1) draft a statement whichall fair-minded people would agree with, and thus build aconsensus for reform and 2) call for concrete action for reform. Reaction to the resolution has been beyond our wildest dreams.The mayors and chiefs of police of San Francisco, Oakland, andSan Jose held an unprecedented joint press conference to publiclysign the resolution. Major medical organizations, religiousorganizations, and literally dozens of judges, law enforcementofficials, and others have publicly announced their support ofthe Hoover Resolution and the call for a Federal Commission toreview and rewrite drug policy. We are also beginning to receivemajor support for the resolution from around the world. Therewill be more news about this later. The resolution has received major news coverage across thenation, including an excellent article by Federal Judge Jack B.Weinstein in the NY Times, July 8, 1993, and a call for theFederal Commission by three Federal judges on Nightline on (orabout) July 10, 1993. It has also received a combined total ofseveral complete pages of coverage in the LA Times, the SanFrancisco Examiner, and the SF Chronicle, the Oakland Tribune,the San Jose News-Mercury, the Baltimore Sun, Newsweek (June 14,1993), and many, many others. It has received more favorable newscoverage for drug policy reform than any other single event ofthe last twenty-five years. Some of the original signers of the resolution support"legalization" or "decriminalization".However, we do not ask anyone to support or endorse anyparticular approach to the drug problem. We simply ask everyoneto admit that the current drug policy has not worked and that itis time to review the evidence in an open and honest commissionand to form a new drug policy which does not do so much harm --whatever that policy may be. Let's lay the facts on the table,and let the chips fall where they may. I have enclosed a copy of the resolution, along with a list ofsigners, and some of the more important facts relative to drugpolicy. We (the signers of the Hoover Resolution), ask that you signthe Resolution and send a copy to President Bill Clinton, TheWhite House, Washington, DC. We also ask that you ask others tosign the resolution and send it in to Bill Clinton. If theResolution is signed or endorsed by any groups or organizationswe ask that you send those endorsements to: C. A. Schaffer, P.O.Box 1430, Canyon Country, CA 91386-1430. Please remember that we are not asking you to endorselegalization, or decriminalization, or any other approach todrugs. We are simply asking you to admit that the time has cometo re-examine the facts and fairly investigate other possibleapproaches. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-34IA088-000636-B010-150http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/hoover.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100542 text/html 1098HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:05:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:18:45 GMTContent-length: 882 The Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy The Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy Introduction to the Hoover Resolution Hoover Resolution and the Short Listof Signers Long List of Signers of the HooverResolution CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-35IA088-000636-B010-183http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/shortlst.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100555 text/html 15847HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:05:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:17 GMTContent-length: 15629 Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy RESOLUTION Whereas, the overall situation regarding the use ofdrugs in our society and the crime and misery that accompanies ithas continued to deteriorate for several decades; and Whereas, our society has continued to attempt, atenormous financial cost, and loss of civil liberties, to resolvedrug abuse problems through the criminal justice system, with theaccompanying increases of prisons and numbers of inmates; and Whereas, the huge untaxed revenues generated by theillicit drug trade are undermining legitimate governmentsworld-wide; and Whereas, the present system has spawned a cycle ofhostility by the incarceration of disproportionate numbers ofAfrican-Americans, Hispanics, and other minority groups; and Whereas, the number of people who have contracted AIDS,hepatitis, and other diseases from contaminated hypodermicneedles is epidemic under our present system; and Whereas, in our society's zeal to pursue our criminalapproach, legitimate medical uses for the relief of pain andsuffering of patients have been suppressed. Therefore be it resolved that our society mustrecognize drug use and abuse as the medical and social problemsthat they are and that they must be treated with medical andsocial solutions; and Further be it resolved that an objective commission beimmediately empowered by the President and by Congress torecommend revision of the drug laws of these United States inorder to reduce the harm our current policies are causing. Name: __________________________________________ Title: ____________________________________________ Organization: _______________________________________ Address: _________________________________________ City: ______________________ State: ____ Zip: ___________ Please send to: C. A. Schaffer, P.O. Box 1430, Canyon Country,CA 91386 and send to: President Bill Clinton, White House, Washington,DC Make copies and encourage your friends to do the same. Partial List of Signers Dr. Milton Friedman            Nobel laureate; Professor Emeritus of                                           Economics, University of Chicago; Senior                                        Research Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford,                                  CA                                               Dr. Joseph D. McNamara         Former Police Chief of San Jose; Fellow, Hoover                                 Institution, Stanford, CA                        Herbert Berger, M.D.           F.A.C.P.;  F.C.C.P.; Internationally recognized                                 authority on drug treatment, Staten Island, NY   Judge James P. Gray            Orange County Superior Court, Santa Ana, CA      Katherine H. Smith             Founder, Group Resolving Anti-Social Problems                                   (GRASP), Anaheim, CA                             S. Clarke Smith, M.D.          F.A.A.F.P.; Board of Directors, California                                      Academy of Family Physicians, Anaheim, CA        Clifford A. Schaffer           Author; Computer Consultant, Canyon Country, CA  Frederick H. Meyers, M.D.      Professor of Pharmacology, University of                                        California at San Francisco; Chairman of the                                    California Research Advisory Panel on Drugs      Harvey L. Rose, M.D.           Author of California's "Intractable Pain                                        Treatment Act"; Family Practice, Carmichael, CA  John J. McCarthy, M.D.,        Psychiatrist, Executive Director, Bi-Valley      A.B.P.N.                       Medical Clinic, Sacramento, CA                   Gary Davis, M.D.               Diplomate in Psychiatry, A.B.P.N., American                                     Board of Psychiatry & Neurology, Citrus                                         Heights, CA                                      Benson B. Roe, M.D.            Professor and Chief Emeritus of Cardiothoracic                                  Surgery, University of California at San                                        Francisco, CA                                    Stephen A. Fisher, M.D.,       Diplomate in Psychiatry, A.B.P.N., American                                     Board of Psychiatry & Neurology, Berkeley, CA    Reverend Leonard B. Jackson    First A.M.E. Church of Los Angeles, CA           Reverend J. D. Moore           First A.M.E. Church of Los Angeles, CA           Donald McNamara                Investment Consultant, New York, NY              Richard Arthur                 Educator; Former Principal of Castlemont High                                   School, Oakland, CA;  Author of Gangs and        Schools, Richmond, CA                            Richard "Gibb" Martin          Owner, Marbros Construction Co., Garden Grove,                                  CA                                               Howard Lavine                  Office of the Mayor, Baltimore, MD               *Kurt L . Schmoke              Mayor, City of Baltimore, Maryland               *George Shultz                 Former Secretary of State; Fellow, Hoover                                       Institution, Stanford, CA                        Frank Jordan                   Mayor, City of San Francisco, CA                 Susan Hammer                   Mayor, City of San Jose, CA                      Elihu Harris                   Mayor, City of Oakland, CA                       Robert R. Nolan                Mayor, City of Upland, CA                        Assemblyman John Vasconcellos  Chairman, Committee on Ways and Means,                                          California State Assembly                        Senator Rebecca Q. Morgan      California State Senate                          Representative Greg R.         M.P.H., Hawaii House of Representatives          Buckwalter                                                                      Senator Joseph Galiber         New York State Senate                            Marc Martin                    Fire Chief, Fullerton Fire Department,                                          Fullerton, CA                                    Arlo Smith Esq.                District Attorney, San Francisco, CA             Harriett M. Wieder             County Supervisor, County of Orange, CA          Emma Bonino                    Deputy Speaker, Italian Chamber of Deputies;                                    Secretary, Radical Trans-National Party, Rome,                                  Italy                                            Alan H. Dodds                  Foreign Service Officer (Retired), U.S.                                         Department of State                              James J. Gormley               Foreign Service Officer (Retired), U.S.                                         Department of State                              Jim Toledano                   Former Regent, University of California          J. Tilman Williams             Councilman (Retired), Garden Grove, CA           Daniel H. Ninburg, M.D.        Commissioner, Orange County Human Relations                                     Commission, Orange County, CA                    Mike A. Nisperos, Jr., Esq.    Director, Mayor's Office of Drugs and Crime,                                    Oakland, CA                                      Ellen Lorman                   Deputy City Attorney, Children and Family                                       Services, San Francisco, CA                      Senator Marian Bergeson        California State Senate                          Thomas F. Riley                Orange County Board of Supervisors, Orange                                      County, CA                                       Senator Robert Presley         California State Senate                          Anne Rudin                     Former Mayor, 1981-1993, Sacramento, CA          Donald M. Fraser               Mayor, Minneapolis, MN                           Illa Collin                    Sacramento County Supervisor, Sacramento, CA     William Von Raab*              Former Commissioner of Customs under Presidents                                 Reagan and Bush, Orange, VA                      Anthony Ribera                 Chief of Police, San Francisco, CA               Lou Cobarruviaz                Chief of Police, San Jose, CA                    Bob Nichelini                  Acting Chief of Police, Oakland, CA              Michael Hennessey              Sheriff, City and County of San Francisco, CA    Nicolas Pastore                Chief of Police, New Haven, CT                   Alfred Blumstein, Ph.D.        Carnegie-Mellon Foundation; Pres. Amer                                          Association of Criminologists                    Robert G. Le Conte             President, National Association of Veteran                                      Police Officers, Austin, TX                      **Central Conference of        Contact: Rabbi Joseph B. Glaser, New York, NY    American Rabbis                                                                 California Democratic Council  Rita Hodgkins, President, Sacramento, CA         The Libertarian Party of       Washington, DC                                   America                                                                         San Francisco Drug Advisory Board, San Francisco, CA                            Berkeley City Council          Berkeley, CA                                     Board of Directors, California Academy of Family Physicians                     The California Society of Addiction Medicine                                    The Cbief of Police and the entire staff of the District Attorney's Office in   Rotterdam, the Netherlands                                                      The entire stafff of the San Bernardino County Probation Department             Twenty-three chaplains from Rikers Island Prison in New York                    Michael L. Sorg                Former Police Chief, San Clemente, CA            R. H. Hessing                  Chief of Police, Rotterdam, Holland              T. Reitsma                     Police Chief, Rotterdam, Ruenmond, Holland       Nancy Foutts                   (Former) Supervisory Patrol Officer, US Customs                                 Service, Orange County Grand Jury, Garden                                       Grove, CA                                        Gregory L. Morgon              Lieutenant, Los Angeles County Sheriff's                                        Department, Los Angeles, CA                      Sidney Mills                   Captain (Retired) Los Angeles County Police                                     Department, Los Angeles, CA                      Joel Fort, M.D.                Former Director, National Instiute on Mental                                    Health                                           Mario Lap                      Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs       Nia Van Oosten                 Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs       Frans Jansen                   Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs       Melvyn L. Sterling, M.D.       President, Orange County Medical Association,                                   Orange, CA                                       Frank Amato, M.D.              Past President, Orange County Medical                                           Association, Orange, CA                          Jonathan Weisbuch, M.D., MPH   Medical Director, Department of Health                                          Services, County of Los Angeles; Delegate of                                    the American Medical Association, Los Angeles,                                  CA                                               Reverend Bruce Larson          Co-Pastor of the Crystal Cathedral, Garden                                      Grove, CA                                        Father Joseph Ganssle          OFM, President, Religious Coalition for a Moral                                 Drug Policy, Denver, CO                          Pastor Andrew L. Gunn          President, Clergy for an Enlightened Drug                                       Policy, St. Luke's United Methodist Church,                                     Washington, DC                                   Marjorie H. Cherry             District Chief, Jail Mental Health Services,                                    Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health   Russel C. Ewing, M.D.          Former President, Orange County Medical                                         Association, Santa Ana, CA                       Harold Amer, M.D.              Director, Pediatric Critical Care, Cedars-Sinai                                 Medical Center, Beverly Hills, CA                Joseph R. Rowan                President and CEO, Criminal and Juvenile                                        Justice International, Roseville, MN             Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-36IA088-000636-B010-224http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/longlist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100638 text/html 129018HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:06:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:18:43 GMTContent-length: 128799 Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy National Coalition for Drug Policy Change Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy Long List of Signers February 13, 1995 Table of Contents Resolution 1 Introduction 2 Public Officials 3 Organizations 7 Medical Profession 9 Law Enforcement and Social Services 17 Media and Entertainment 23 Members of the Clergy 24 Legal Profession 27 Educators 31 Business 38 Note: The list of concerned citizens / taxpayers who havesigned the Resolution is not included in this list. The list ofconcerned citizens / taxpayers numbers in the thousands. Resolution Whereas, the overall situation regarding the use of drugs inour society and the crime and misery that accompanies it hascontinued to deteriorate for several decades; and Whereas, our society has continued to attempt, at enormousfinancial cost, and loss of civil liberties, to resolve drugabuse problems through the criminal justice system, with theaccompanying increases of prisons and numbers of inmates; and Whereas, the huge untaxed revenues generated by the illicitdrug trade are undermining legitimate governments world-wide; and Whereas, the present system has spawned a cycle of hostilityby the incarceration of disproportionate numbers ofAfrican-Americans, Hispanics, and other minority groups; and Whereas, the number of people who have contracted AIDS,hepatitis, and other diseases from contaminated hypodermicneedles is epidemic under our present system; and Whereas, in our society's zeal to pursue our criminalapproach, legitimate medical uses for the relief of pain andsuffering of patients have been suppressed. Therefore be it resolved that our society must recognize druguse and abuse as the medical and social problems that they areand that they must be treated with medical and social solutions;and Further be it resolved that an objective commission beimmediately empowered by the President and by Congress torecommend revision of the drug laws of these United States inorder to reduce the harm our current policies are causing. Introduction On February 26, 1993 a group of concerned citizens met at theHoover Institution on the campus of Stanford University andunanimously passed a resolution which recommends that our countryinvestigate the possibility of change in the way we handle ourdrug problem. The Resolution, which recommends that these medicaland social problems be treated with medical and social solutions,is attached hereto. It further recommends that one final blueribbon commission be immediately empowered by the President torecommend revisions of the drug laws of these United States toreduce the harm caused by this drug problem. The original signersof the Resolution, who are known as the National Coalition forDrug Policy Change, are as follows: Dr. Milton Friedman Nobel laureate; Professor Emeritus ofEconomics, University of Chicago; Senior Research Fellow, HooverInstitution, Stanford, CA Dr. Joseph D. McNamara Former Police Chief of San Jose;Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA Herbert Berger, M.D. F.A.C.P.; F.C.C.P.; Internationallyrecognized authority on drug treatment, Staten Island, NY Judge James P. Gray Orange County Superior Court, Santa Ana,CA Katherine H. Smith Founder, Group Resolving Anti-SocialProblems (GRASP), Anaheim, CA S. Clarke Smith, M.D. F.A.A.F.P.; Board of Directors,California Academy of Family Physicians, Anaheim, CA Clifford A. Schaffer Author; Computer Consultant, CanyonCountry, CA Frederick H. Meyers, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology,University of California at San Francisco; Chairman of theCalifornia Research Advisory Panel on Drugs Harvey L. Rose, M.D. Author of California's "IntractablePain Treatment Act"; Family Practice, Carmichael, CA John J. McCarthy, M.D., A.B.P.N. Psychiatrist, ExecutiveDirector, Bi-Valley Medical Clinic, Sacramento, CA Gary Davis, M.D. Diplomate in Psychiatry, A.B.P.N., AmericanBoard of Psychiatry & Neurology, Citrus Heights, CA Benson B. Roe, M.D. Professor and Chief Emeritus ofCardiothoracic Surgery, University of California at SanFrancisco, CA Stephen A. Fisher, M.D., Diplomate in Psychiatry, A.B.P.N.,American Board of Psychiatry & Neurology, Berkeley, CA Reverend Leonard B. Jackson First A.M.E. Church of LosAngeles, CA Reverend J. D. Moore First A.M.E. Church of Los Angeles, CA Donald McNamara Investment Consultant, New York, NY Richard Arthur Educator; Former Principal of Castlemont HighSchool, Oakland, CA; Author of Gangs and Schools, Richmond, CA Richard Gibb Martin Owner, Marbros Construction Co., GardenGrove, CA Howard Lavine Office of the Mayor, Baltimore, MD *Kurt L . Schmoke Mayor, City of Baltimore, Maryland *George Shultz Former Secretary of State; Fellow, HooverInstitution, Stanford, CA *Unable to attend due to prior commitments Since that February 26 meeting the Resolution has been signedby large numbers of people around the country. A list of thosepeople who signed the Resolution before August 4, 1993 was handdelivered in Washington, DC, to Dr. Lee P. Brown, who isPresident Clinton's Drug Policy Director ("Drug Czar"),on August 4, 1993., and a list of these signers was handdelivered in Washington, DC to Ms. Kristine Gebbie, RN, who isPresident Clinton's AIDS Policy Director ("AIDS Czar")on November 19, 1993. The list of signers is as follows: Public Officials Frank Jordan Mayor, City of San Francisco, CA Susan Hammer Mayor, City of San Jose, CA Elihu Harris Mayor, City of Oakland, CA Donald M. Fraser Mayor, Minneapolis, MN Robert R. Nolan Mayor, City of Upland, CA Ann-Marie Burger Mayor, City of Saratoga, CA Anne Rudin Former Mayor, 1981-1993, Sacramento, CA Karen Tucker Former Mayor, Saratoga, CA Charles Wolfarth Former Mayor, La Habra Heights, CA Maryann Mahaffey President, Detroit City Council, Detroit, MI William Von Raab* Former Commissioner of Customs underPresidents Reagan and Bush, Orange, VA Arlo Smith Esq. District Attorney, San Francisco, CA Senator Enrique Gomez Colombian Senate, Bogota, Colombia Emma Bonino Deputy Speaker, Italian Chamber of Deputies;Secretary, Radical Trans-National Party, Rome, Italy Jan F. Glastra van Loon Chairman, Dutch Humanist Association,Member, Netherlands Senate, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Michael Moore Member of Parliament, Australian CapitalTerritory Legislative Assembly, Canberra, Australia Assemblyman John Vasconcellos Chairman, Committee on Ways andMeans, California State Assembly Senator Rebecca Q. Morgan California State Senate Senator Marian Bergeson California State Senate Senator Robert Presley California State Senate Senator Joseph Galiber New York State Senate Representative Greg R. Buckwalter M.P.H., Hawaii House ofRepresentatives Harriett M. Wieder County Supervisor, County of Orange, CA Eleanor R. Montano Commissioner, County of Los AngelesCommission on Human Relations, CA Illa Collin Sacramento County Supervisor, Sacramento, CA Gordon K. Blunt City Commissioner, Claremont, CA Thomas F. Riley Orange County Board of Supervisors, OrangeCounty, CA Miriam Kaywood Member, Anaheim City Council (Retired)Anaheim, CA J. Tilman Williams Councilman (Retired), Garden Grove, CA Daniel H. Ninburg, M.D. Commissioner, Orange County HumanRelations Commission, Orange County, CA Darrell Steinberg Council Member, District 6, Sacramento CityCouncil Michael H. Gentry Lake Los Angeles Councilman, Palmdale, CA Robert Stevenson Councilman, Rochester, NY Merrill A. Smith Chief, Federal Probation System (Retired)Administrative Office of the Courts, Washington, DC Marc Martin Fire Chief, Fullerton Fire Department, Fullerton,CA Robert Van Der Hoeven Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands M. Witteveen, Ph.D. Bureau of Public Prosecution, Rotterdam,The Netherlands E. A. Laneijer Bureau of Public Prosecution, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands Edward Koning Bureau of Public Prosecution, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands J. Wittop Koning District Attorney, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands Rick Smid Oberstaatsamwalt, Dept. of Justice, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands L.Yonge Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, The Netherlands A. J. P. Van Essen Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands H. J. Mosaal District Attorney, Rotterdam, The Netherlands M. C. Kaptein Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, The Netherlands L. A. M. Steiyt Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Elizabeth C. Koekman Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands Mrs. S. A. J. van Hiel Public Prosecutor, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands Judge Whitman Knapp Senior U.S. District Judge, SouthernDistrict of New York Judge James C. Paine U.S. District Court, Southern Districtof Florida Justice Charles W. Froehlich, Jr. California Court of Appeal,Fourth Appellate District Justice William A. Newsom California Court of Appeal, FirstAppellate District Justice Bea Ann Smith Texas Court of Appeals, Third District,Austin, Texas Justice Mack Kidd Texas Court of Appeals, Third District,Austin, Texas Judge Vaughn R. Walker U.S. District Court, Northern Districtof California Judge Robert W. Sweet U.S. District Court, Southern Districtof New York Judge James L. Smith Orange County Superior Court, Santa Ana,CA Magistrate Judge Ronald R. Rose U.S. District Court, CentralDistrict of California Judge Lawrence Storch Superior Court, County of Ventura, CA Judge Leighton Hatch (Retired) Municipal Court, County ofSacramento, CA Judge Bert L. Swift Municipal Court, County of SanBernardino, CA Judge Reid M. Spencer General District Court, Norfolk, VA Judge Russel A. Bostrom (Retired) Municipal Court, County ofOrange County, CA Judge Robert P. McDonald Municipal Court, San Diego MunicipalCourt, San Diego, CA Judge Richard W. Van Dusen Rio Hondo Municipal Court, ElMonte, CA Judge Henry K. Nelson Mt. Sanhedrin Municipal Court, Ukiah,CA Judge Donald W. Ryan North San Diego Municipal Court, Vista,CA Judge William F. Levins (Retired) Municipal Court,Oakland-Piedmont-Emeryville Judicial District, Oakland, CA Judge William B. Burleigh Monterey Municipal Court, Salinas,CA Judge James R. Ross Superior Court, Orange County, CA Judge Phillip R. McGraw (Retired) No. Orange County MunicipalCourt, Newport Beach, CA Judge Dallas Edgar (Retired) Hayward-San Leandro MunicipalCourt, Hayward, CA Judge William R. Phelps (Retired) Shasta County SuperiorCourt, Redding, CA Judge Gilbert C. Alston (Retired) Los Angeles Superior Court,Los Angeles, CA Referee Agatha Hoff San Francisco Municipal Court, SanFrancisco, CA Judge Martin Hildreth Municipal Court, Rancho Cucamonga, CA Judge Francisco Firmat Orange County Superior Court, SantaAna, CA Commissioner Bobby Vincent San Bernardino Superior Court, SanBernardino, CA Judge Ward O. Mathews (Retired) Municipal Court, Rialto, CA Judge H. Walter Steiner (Retired) Orange County SuperiorCourt, Santa Ana, CA Judge Eleanor Provost (Retired) Tuolomne County JusticeCourt, Sonora, CA Judge Sheila F. Pokras Superior Court, Long Beach, CA Judge Sara Kleban Radin (Retired) Superior Court, LosAngeles, CA Judge Robert J. Soares (Retired) Ventura County SuperiorCourt, Ojai, CA Judge Gerald E. Ragan (Retired) San Francisco Superior Court,San Francisco, CA Judge Howard R. Broadman Superior Court, Visalia, CA Judge Charles Egan Goff (Retired) San Francisco MunicipalCourt, San Francisco, CA Judge Abby Soven Los Angeles Superior Court, Los Angeles, CA Judge Alan Goldhammer California State Bar Court, SanFrancisco, CA Judge John "Nip" Gallagher Municipal Court, Fresno,CA Judge Robert K. Barber (Retired) Superior Court, Berkeley, CA Judge Steve Fleck (Retired) Director, Kiwanis Club ofCapistrano Valley, CA Judge Steven Van Dissel Rechtbank, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Judge A. G. Van de Grampen District Court, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands Judge M. K. Asscheman Versluis District Court, Rotterdam,Holland Judge Michael E. Ballachey Judge, Alameda County SuperiorCourt, Oakland, CA K. Nishimoto Administrative Law Judge, CaliforniaUnemployment Insurance Appeals Board, Inglewood, CA Jeanne S. Berger Administrative Law Judge, CaliforniaUnemployment Insurance Appeals Board, Inglewood, CA Sura L. Weiss Administrative Law Judge, CaliforniaUnemployment Insurance Appeals Board, Inglewood, CA Ted Wolfe Administrative Law Judge, California UnemploymentInsurance Appeals Board, Los Angeles, CA Jack Klanis Administrative Law Judge, California UnemploymentInsurance Appeals Board, Inglewood, CA Mitchell M. Brockman Administrative Law Judge, CaliforniaUnemployment Insurance Appeals Board, Inglewood, CA Denise Meyer Administrative Law Judge, CaliforniaUnemployment Insurance Appeals Board, Inglewood, CA Carol Agate Administrative Law Judge, Los Angeles, CA Andrew H. Lund, Esq. Deputy City Prosecutor, Long Beach, CA David Gordon, Esq. Deputy City Prosecutor, Long Beach, CA Alan H. Dodds Foreign Service Officer (Retired), U.S.Department of State James J. Gormley Foreign Service Officer (Retired), U.S.Department of State Jim Toledano Former Regent, University of California Mike A. Nisperos, Jr., Esq. Director, Mayor's Office of Drugsand Crime, Oakland, CA Ellen Lorman Deputy City Attorney, Children and FamilyServices, San Francisco, CA Dr. Cynthia P. Coad Trustee, North Orange County CommunityCollege District, Orange County, CA Harriet S. Walther Vice-President, Saddleback CommunityCollege District, Mission Viejo, CA William R. Kincaid Chairman, Fullerton Library Board ofTrustees Roger H. Rathburn Asst. Chief, Piffard, NY Fire Department Edward J. Stovosik Postmaster, US Postal Service, Piffard, NY Col. W. H. Longenecker, Jr. USAF Retired, Indio, CA Marshall Phillips Foreign Service Officer (Retired) LongBeach, CA Anne Beytin Torkington Administrative Judge, EEOC, Glendale,CA Susan Agrillo Town Magistrate, Oro Valley, AZ John G. Powers, Esq. Member, La Habra Heights City Council,CA Ernest Walker City Councilman, Sparks, NV William P. Elzey, Jr. Major, USMC, Retired, Santa Ana, CA William G. Sproull Colonel, USAF Retired, Escondido, CA Helen D. Walker Administrative Analyst, Harbor MunicipalCourt, Newport Beach, CA Paul B. Henley Colonel USMC Retired, San Clemente, CA * signed with edits Organizations Berkeley City Council Berkeley, CA Mendocino County Board of Supervisors Mendocino County, CA **Central Conference of American Rabbis Contact: Rabbi JosephB. Glaser, New York, NY California Democratic Council Rita Hodgkins, President,Sacramento, CA The Libertarian Party of America Washington, DC San Francisco Drug Advisory Board, San Francisco, CA Wendy Goldberg, President Marylouise Adlo-Robinson, Vice-President Eric Brizee, Executive Officer Michelle Aldrich John James Entwistle, Jr. Iris Garcia Stefano Hillman California Society of Addiction Medicine Max Schneider, M.D.CAS, Orange, CA Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, DC David C. Condliffe,Executive DirectorArnold Trebach, J.D., Ph.D., President; KevinZeese, Esq., Vice-President Criminal Justice Policy Foundation, Washington, DC EricSterling, President Religious Coalition for a Moral Drug Policy Father JosephGanssle, President People for a National Health Program, Leisure World, CATheodore Rosenbaum, President Democratic Club of West Orange County, CA Elmer Phibbs,President Orange County Hemp Council, Orange, CA Kenneth R. Tigner,Council Member American Civil Liberties Union, Los Angeles Chapter RamonaRipston, Director Advocates for Self-Government, Atlanta, GA Carol Ann Rand,President, Atlanta, GA New Mexico Libertarian Party, Alamogordo, NM Kay Stone,Chairman Family Council on Drug Awareness, Los Angeles, CA ChrisConrad, President, Center for Independent Thought, New York, NY Andrea Rich,President Harold Washington New Generation Democratic Club SabrinaSaunders, Co-Chair, San Francisco, CA Illinois Marijuana Initiative, Chicago, IL Mike Rosiny,Coordinating Director Save Our Liberties, San Rafael, CA Eric Harlow, President California Drug Policy Reform Coalition, San Francisco, CAJoey Tranchina, Dale Gieringer, Co-Directors ACAJAHMEM Indigenous People of Orange County, CA Don JuanPablo Serrano-Nieblas, Shaman Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp (BACH), Los Angeles,CA Robert Deitch, Director Families Against Mandatory Minimums Brenda Grantland, Chair Medical Marijuana Initiative, El Monte, CA Brian J. Cosner,Natalie Michelle Cosner, Representatives Arizona Libertarian Party, Phoenix, AZ Richard Tompkins,Chairman Libertarian Party of Orange County, CA Geoffrey Braun,Secretary National Organization for the Reform of the Marijuana Laws(NORML), Washington, DC Richard Cowan, President Shared Living Resource Center Berkeley, CA Mainliners, London, England John Mordaunt, Director New South Wales Drug Users and AIDS Association, New SouthWales, Australia Dave Burrows, Co-Coordinator American Civil Liberties Union, New York, NY Ira Glasser,Executive Director American Civil Liberties Union, Pittsburgh Chapter Witold J.Walczak, Esq., Executive Director Cannabis Action Network Etienne Fonton, Coordinator,Berkeley, CA The Alliance of Humanist, Atheist, and Ethical CultureOrganizations of Los Angeles County Reuben Heller, Los Angeles,CA Association of Legal Aid Attorneys Michael Letwin, Esq.,President, New York, NY Genesee Valley Chapter, New York Civil Liberties Union JudithR. Knight, Executive Director, Rochester, NY ** signed Resolution without the phrase "and loss ofcivil liberties" Medical Profession Board of Directors, California Academy of Family Physicians Barbara Kostick, M.D. M.F. Harris, Jr., M.D. Robert C. M. Bourne, M.D. Renee Armstrong, Medical Student Mary E. Frank, M.D. Norman J. Rosen, M.D. Ingeborg B. Shaffer, M.D. Paulette J. Adams, M.D. Jean L. Ray, M.D. Warren F. Brandle, M.D. John P. Crivaro, M.D. Richard E. Katz, M.D. Alexandra Korin, M.D. Robert A. Pedrin, M.D. Merritt S. Matthews, M.D. Kenneth B. Reed, M.D. Joel Fort, M.D. Former Director, National Institute on MentalHealth Jonathan Mann, M.D. Harvard Medical School, HarvardUniversity Lester Grinspoon, M.D. Harvard Medical School, Wellesley, MA Ernest Drucker, M.D. Department of Epidemiology & SocialMedicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY Lawrence C. Kolb, M.D. Professor Emeritus, ColumbiaUniversity, New York, NY Melvyn L. Sterling, M.D. President, Orange County MedicalAssociation, Orange, CA Frank Amato, M.D. Past President, Orange County MedicalAssociation, Orange, CA Jonathan Weisbuch, M.D., MPH Medical Director, Department ofHealth Services, County of Los Angeles; Delegate of the AmericanMedical Association, Los Angeles, CA Max Schneider, M.D., CAS Ceritifed Addictionist, ClinicalAssociate Professor, University of California at Irvine Charles S. Grob, M.D. Director, Psychiatric ResidencyProgram, Director, Child Adolescent Psychiatry Unit, Universityof California at Irvine Jeffrey Kaufman, M.D. President, Orange County UrologicalSociety, CA John O. Strong, M.D. Past President, California Society ofPlastic Surgeons, Corona Del Mar, CA Neal Kaufman, M.D. Director, Primary Care Pediatrics,Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Beverly Hills, CA Harold Amer, M.D. Director, Pediatric Critical Care,Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Beverly Hills, CA Henry N. Blansfield, M.D. Member, Alcohol/Drug EducationCommittee; Member, Committee on Physician Health; Member,American Society of Addiction Medicine, Member, Danbury AIDS TaskForce; Member, Section on Chemical Dependency; Danbury CT Olina Harwer, M.D. Medical Director, Orange County Academy ofFamily Physicians, Orange, CA Russel C. Ewing, M.D. Former President, Orange County MedicalAssociation, Santa Ana, CA Ricardo Mendoza, M.D. Director, Outpatien Psychiatric Clinic,Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA Gregory A. Dunford, M.D. Past President, California Academyof Family Physicians, San Francisco, CA Ralph J. Argen, M.D. President, Arthritis Center, Tonawanda,NY Mark A. Ritchie, M.D. Medical Director, Psychiatric EmergencyService, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Department of Psychiatry,Torrance, CA Michelle Sager, M.D. Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Departmentof Psychiatry, Torrance, CA Martin E. Mueller, M.D. Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance,CA Madeline Andrew, M.D. Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Departmentof Psychiatry, Torrance, CA William K. Summers, M.D. Alzheimers Rightrs Assoc.Albuquerque, NM Arnold P. Nerenberg, Ph.D. Director, Mental Health Services,Whittier, CA Steven L. Batki, M.D. Professor of Psychiatry, University ofCalifornia at San Francisco Eugene Tinelli, M.D. Addiction Psychiatrist, VAMC, Syracuse,NY Daniel Liebowitz, M.D. Director of Medical Education, SequoiaHospital, Redwood City, CA Bart Majoor Clinical Psychologist, Head of Department ofTraining and Development, Institute on Alcohol and Drugs,Utrecht, The Netherlands. Mario Lap Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs Nia Van Oosten Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs Frans Jansen Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs Anna Halverstadt Freud, M.D. Psychiatrist, Amsterdam, TheNetherlands Freek Polak, M.D. Psychiatrist, Amsterdam, The Netherlands Erik Fromberg, Ph.D. Neurophysiologist, Dutch Institute forAlcohol and Drugs, Eutrecht, The Netherlands Phillip L. Gausewitz, M.D. Chairman and CEO, PathologyMedical Laboratories, San Diego, CA Marilynn J. Pratt, M.D. Founder/Director Women's Instituteand Health Center, Los Angeles, CA Gary A. Chase, M.D. Parole Outpatient Clinic, CaliforniaDepartment of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA K. Stojanovich, M.D. California Department of Corrections,Los Angeles, CA Pamela R. Jackson, M.D. Parole Outpatient Clinic, CaliforniaDepartment of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA Fred Afrasiabi, M.D. Staff Psychiatrist, Parole OutpatientClinic, California Department of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA Jeane Haining, Ph.D. Staff Psychologist, Parole OutpatientClinic, California Department of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA Kenneth Baum, M.D. Parole Outpatient Clinic, CaliforniaDepartment of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA Leisha W. Howell, Ph.D. Clinical Psychologist, ParoleOutpatient Clinic, California Department of Corrections, LosAngeles, CA Roger Walsh, M.D., Ph.D. College of Medicine, University ofCalifornia at Irvine, CA Elizabeth Kantor, M.D. Correctional Health ServicesSpecialist, San Francisco, CA Jean F. Segall, M.D. Staff Psychiatrist, Parole OutpatientClinic, California Department of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA Bernadette S. Corpuz Senior Medical Transcriber, ParoleOutpatient Clinic, California Department of Corrections, LosAngeles, CA Robert D. Gruener, M.D. Parole Outpatient Clinic, CamarilloState Hospital, California Department of Corrections, Camarillo,CA Ira M. Frank, M.D. Parole Outpatient Clinic, CaliforniaDepartment of Corrections, Los Angeles, CA Christopher Lyon, M.D., Ph.D. Lyon Eye Institute, NewportBeach, CA James K. Lightfoot, M.D. California Department of HealthServices, San Francisco, CA John Magrann, M.D. Member, Board of Directors, PeerAssistance League, La Palma, CA Ralph J. Turner, M.D. California Department of HealthServices, Los Angeles, CA William Schwied, M.D. Orange County Health Care Agency,Orange County, CA Brian Fitch, M.D. University of California at Irvine MedicalCenter Thomas Coad, D.D.S. Member, Republican Central Committee,Garden Grove, CA Alex Go, M.D. President, Garden Park Medical Clinic, Anaheim,CA Carl K. Pearlman, M.D. Orange County Public Health andClinical Professor Emeritus, University of California at IrvineMedical School Edward S. Friedrichs, M.D. Addictionologist, Milwaukee CountyMental Health Complex, Milwaukee, WI Pravin Kansagram, M.D. Orange County Mental Health, OrangeCounty, CA William Grant Loomis, M.D. Community Mental Health, OrangeCounty, CA Gary L. Hardegen, M.D. President, Anaheim Skin MedicalCenter, Anaheim, CA Jon Woods, M.D., Ph.D. Research Associate, WashingtonUniversity School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO Eugene Carpenter, M.D. Senior Forensic Pathologist, LosAngeles County Department of the Coroner, Los Angeles, CA James R. Sauer, M.D. Wayne County Jail Phsyician, Wooster, OH John M. Zasadny, D.P.M. Podiatrist, Torrance, CA John H. O'Neal, M.D. Gold River, CA Gasto De Carlo, M.D. Colonel, USAF (Retired), Wadsworth, OH Theodore C. Smith, M.D. Claremont, CA J. S. Cummings, M.D. Ophthalmologist, Anaheim, CA Thomas F. Ednie, M.D. Sandpoint, ID Lon Engelberg, M.D. Inglewood, CA Lawrence A. Plumlee, M.D. Bethesda, MD F. A. Webster, M.D. Huntington Beach, CA David Priver, M.D. San Diego, CA Charles D. Ruis, M.D. Cordele, GA Thomas Badin, M.D. Anaheim, CA Ward Dean, M.D. Pensacola, FL Jeri Rose, DC Doctor of Chiropractic, Altadena, CA Ronald Hutchings, DC Doctor of Chiropractic, Altadena, CA Robert M. Solow, DDS Woodland Hills, CA Michael Robertson, DDS, DMD Woodland Hills, CA James D. Tovey, M.D. Benicia, CA A. Bergsma, M.D. Anaheim, CA Jose Alvarez, M.D. San Juan, Puerto Rico LeClair Bissell, M.D. Sanibel, FL Robert S. Mumford, M.D. New York, NY Lillian Sproul, M.D. Escondido, CA Margit Zoller Ballun, M.D. Escondido, CA Jonathan D. Weinberg, M.D. Boston, MA Douglas L. Smith, DDS Santa Paula, CA Kenneth L. Pratt, M.D. Sebastian, FL Dan E. Crutchfield, DDS Santa Paula, CA Gerald T. Dolejs, R.P. Registered Pharmacist, Omaha, NE James T. Barter, M.D. Sacramento, CA Winthrop C. Hopgood, M.D. Newport Beach, CA D. V. Hubble, M.D. Downey, CA Matthew R. Zeturner, M.D. Anaheim, CA John Isherwood, M.D. Napa, CA Jose A. Nunez-Lopez, M.D., F.A.P.A. Caguas, PR Arnold Knefer, M.D. Kentfield, CA Betty Werksman, M.D. Irvine, CA Charles Hemmenway, M.D. Fairfield, CT John McAnulty, M.D. Portland, OR Reda Sobky. M.D. Berkeley, CA Julia Weightman, R.N. Angels Camp, CA Jan Comstock, R.N. Sacramento, CA Henry L. Foucher, M.D. Anaheim, CA Andrea Morrison, M.D. Tarzana, CA Jack Connole, O.D. Newport-Balboa Rotary Club, Newport Beach,CA J. Hermes, M.D. General and Child Psychiatrist, Orange, CA Derek H. Spark, M.D. Psychiatrist, San Gabriel, CA Fred Raleigh, Pharm.D. Atascadero, CA George K. Fuller, M.D. Oakland, CA Herman Siegel, M.D. Los Angeles, CA Steven J. Marcus, M.D. Beverly Hills, CA Gerald B. Whitman, M.D. Beverly Hills, CA Gordon Labedz, M.D. Los Angeles, CA H. Fong Pharmacist, Altadena, CA Arthur A. Walton, D.P.M. Newport Beach, CA Bob Cuyler, D.D.S. Corona Del Mar, CA Gary Alford, M.D. West Hills, CA David M. Davis, M.D. Santa Ana, CA D. F. Rendinell, M.D. Marina Del Rey, CA E.T. Moran, M.D. Newport Beach, CA Brian Robertson, M.D. Arroyo Grande, CA Clifford B. Widmark, M.D. Orange, CA Dennis L. Randall, M.D. Orange County, CA Robert N. Akeley, M.D. Oakland, CA Paul F. Reardon, M.D. University of California at Irvine Howard Dolinsky, M.D. Los Angeles, CA Michael W. Kistler, M.D. Palm Springs, CA Irwin D. Zim, M.D. Hillsborough, CA Steven Auer, M.D. Malibu, CA Thomas A. Sazani, M.D. Member, American College ofPhysicians, Las Vegas, NV Edward Dutton, M.D. Anaheim, CA Phil White, D.P.M. Garden Grove, CA James T. Hamilton, M.D. Newport Beach, CA Richard C. Smith, M.D. San Pedro, CA William L. Schwartz, M.D. Hillsborough, CA Clifford J. Straehley, III, M.D. Fair Oaks, CA Dr. Shawn I. Harrington Lake Oswego, OR Dr. Ghazarian Palm Desert, CA Dr. Meddick Sarty Los Angeles, CA Dr. J.B. Kiehlbauch Riverdale, GA Dr. Albert Rothman Livermore, CA Ward Dean, M.D. Center for Bio-Gerontology, Pensacola, FL David F. Duncan, Ph.D. Research Fellow, Brown UniversitySchool of Medicine Dr. Allan Olson Staff Physician, Marquette-Alger CommunityMental Health, Marquette, MI Daniel Weiss, M.D. Beachwood, OH Mona K. Stern, M.D. Gary, IN Jerome Schachter, M.D. Isle Palms, SC Jose A. Mijares, M.D., F.A.C.S. Tampa, Florida Barry Solomon Pharmaceutical Consultant, CaliforniaDepartment of Health Services Sonia Santiago AGPA, California Department of Health Services Qunitina Carreon OA II, California Department of HealthServices Emily Horn OSSI, California Department of Health Services Bobbie Johnson Registered Nurse, California Department ofHealth Services Maureen Womack Nurse Evaluator II, California Department ofHealth Services Lolita N. Yabut Registered Nurse, California Department ofHealth Services Fritzi Werner Registered Nurse, Program Supervisor in DrugAbuse, Siskiyou General Hospital, Yreka, CA Lenora M. Lawrence Pharmacist, Siskiyou General Hospital,Yreka, CA Linda M. Koopman Pharmacy Clerk, Siskiyou General Hospital,Yreka, CA Andrea Rubin Medical Assistant, Siskiyou General Hospital,Yreka, CA Susan Walpert Medical Assistant, Siskiyou General Hospital,Yreka, CA June Rene Fox Registered Nurse, Siskiyou General Hospital,Yreka, CA Corinne Armer Registered Nurse, San Francisco, CA Ruth McBride Registered Nurse William Nadell Registered Nurse, Elk Grove, CA Alice Murphy Registered Nurse, Long Island, New York Joanne Morris Registered Nurse, Fresno, CA Robert Fromer Director, Fromer Psychological Center, Upland,CA Patricia B. Fromer Business Administrator, FromerPsychological Center, Upland, CA Brenda J. Hopley M.F.C. Intern, Fromer Psychological Center,Upland, CA Maureen Kappler Registered Nurse, Tucson, AZ Susan M. Judy Registered Nurse, Huntington Beach, CA Athena Miller Registered Nurse, University of California atIrvine Harry B. Dickinson Laboratory Consultant, CaliforniaDepartment of Health Services - Audits and Investigations Charlene A. Richards Registered Nurse, Appointee - CaliforniaDemocratic Party - 36th Congressional District Andrew Rose Tri-City Health Center, Fremont, CA Micky Daxbury Tri-City Health Center, Fremont, CA Jan Falk Executive Director, Center for Human Development,Pleasant Hill, CA David Franks Tri-City Health Center, Fremont, CA David M. Duffy, M.D. Torrance, CA Stephen Mutchsenbacher, M.D. Studio City, CA Dr. McDonald Robinson Goleta, CA Khai Quach, Psychiatric Technician Cypress College, SantaAna, CA Mardi Wally Administrative Assistant, Health Care,Sacramento, CA Tina Acciltola Health Care Professional, Sacramento, CA Sally A. Wright Health Care Professional, Folsom, CA Louise Maestretti Health Care Professional, Sacramento, CA L. W. Epsen, M.D. Redwood City, CA Margaret Shannon, M.D. Costa Mesa, CA F. Jack Warner, M.D., FAAP Fullerton, CA Richard Raczka, M.D. Anaheim, CA Paula M. Jones Senior Staff Nurse, LA County Sheriff'sDepartment, Los Angeles, CA Marjorie H. Cherry District Chief, Jail Mental HealthServices, Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health Dale W. O'Neal, Ph.D. Psychologist, Laguna Beach, CA Georgia L. Nelson, CAS Certified Addiction Specialist,American Academy of Health Care Providers in the AddictiveDisorders, San Clemente, CA James D. Boyce, M.D. Garden Grove, CA Manuel Q. Arjona, M.D. California Rehabilitation Center,Department of Corrections, Norco, CA Randall C. Stenson, M.D. Bi-Valley Medical Clinic,Sacramento, CA Nicholas G. Cornes, M.D. Davis, CA C. E. Drake, M.D. Sacramento, CA Neal S. Edwards, M.D. Davis, CA Arthur Root, M.D. Fair Oaks, CA Steven Schwartz, M.D. Chico, CA Archie Estampa, M.D. Fair Oaks, CA Robert Reinke, M.D. Chief, MRI, St. Mary's Medical Center,Long Beach, CA Edward S. Friedrichs, M.D. Wisconsin Department ofCorrections, Brown Deer, WI Barry Slaterman, M.D. San Jose, CA George H. Fish, M.D. San Jose, CA Francis J. Durgin, M.D. Fayetteville, NY Richard Fisher, M.D. Sun City, AZ Kim Marie Thorburn, M.D. Professor of Medicine, University ofHawaiiHealth Care Division Administrator, Hawaii Dept. of PublicSafety, Honolulu, HI Terrence B. Allen, M.D. Physician/Forensic Pathologist,Honolulu, HI Ralph B Allison, M.D. Forensic and Correctional Psychiatrist,Los Osos, CA J. Walter Kane, M.D. Saddle River, NJ Arthur F. Greenwald, M.D. Palm Springs, CA Lawrence Novis, M.D. El Cerrito, CA Richard W. Murray, M.D. Magalia, CA William A. Viele, M.D. San Clemente, CA Theodore Goodman, M.D. Medical Director, Sutter Center forPsychiatry, Sacramento, CA Simone L. Kuo, M.D. Rosemead, CA Irena S. Westmoreland, M.D. Pyschiatrist, Gateways Hospital,Los Angeles, CA E. James Stanley, M.D. Psychiatrist, Newport Beach, CA Richard P. Berkson, M.D. Visalia, CA Gaye Wilson, R.N.,MSN, PHN Supervising Public Health Nurse,Placerville, CA David Wernst Addiction Counselor, Oakland, CA Nadi Lars Addiction Counselor, Oakland, CA Nancy E. Greene, Ph.D. Clinical Psychologist, San Diego, CA Faye J. Gersh, Ed.D. Psychologist, Past President, San DiegoPsycho-Law Society, San Diego, CA Clifford J. Straehlen, III, M.D. Fair Oaks, CA Jerri Accettola Health Care Professional, Sacramento, CA Neil Flynn, M.D. University of California at Davis MedicalCenter, Davis, CA Tim Crump, F.N.P. Multnoma County Health Department,Portland, OR Karen Kern Dietician, Multnomah County Health Department,Portland, OR Robert S. Erickson Director, Department of Health Services,County of Lake, CA Alex Vilomsons, Ph.D. Psychotherapist, Sherman Oaks, CA Patricia Barrett Community Health Nurse, Multnomah CountyHealth Department, Portland, OR Toby Hyman Clinical Dietitian, Tucson Medical Center, Tucson,AZ Barbara A. Rosen Clinical Psychologist, Tustin, CA Richard M. Bentley Chief Sanitarian (Retired) Los AngelesCounty Health Dept., Los Angeles, CA Marit Braemer, R.N.C. Inside Edge, Costa Mesa, CA Leslie Jo Gault, R.N. Manhattan Beach, CA Rita L. Wright Los Angeles County Mental Health Department,Los Angeles, CA Kelsea K. Baggett, R.N. Registered Nurse (Retired) LosAngeles County Sheriff's Department Medical Service, Los Angeles,CA Pamela Marie Walters, R.N. Roche Professional Services, SanDiego, CA Suzanne Sollman, R.N. Roche Professional Services, San Diego,CA Edward Rudin, M.D. Sacramento, CA Joey Upland, R.N. Registered Nurse, Santa Clara ValleyMedical Center Main Jail, Burlingame, CA Lorraine L. Blansfield, R.N. Registered Nurse, Danbury, CT Rodney Jones, R.N. Registered Nurse, San Francisco, CA June Cecil, M.A. Rehabilitation Counselor/HIV Specialist, SanFrancisco, CA Jayne Brannon, R.N. Registered Nurse, Elmwood Men'sCorrection Facility, Los Gatos, CA Linda Lee Wilson, R.N. Registered Nurse, AmericanCorrectional Health Services Association, San Rafael, CA Rachel L. Anderson Research Associate, UCD Medical Center,Sacramento, CA Dennis R. Ding. R.N. Registered Nurse, Citrus Heights, CA Robert Chisholm Medical Tehnician Assistant, CaliforniaDepartment of Corrections, San Bernardino, CA Christina Chisholm LVN Licensed Vocational Nurse, SanBernardino, CA Pamela G. Heredia Assoc. Exec. Director, Orange CountyFoundation for Medical Care, Santa Ana, CA Luis Sandoval Psychiatric Technician, University ofCalifornia at Irvine Medical Center, Irvine, CA Lisa S. Menen, R.N. Registered Nurse, Orange, CA Mary Alice Sanchez Steinman, R.N. Certified Registered Nurse,Family Nurse Practitioner, Certified Physicians Assistant,Anaheim, CA Robert W. Eckert Medical Student, Davis, CA Robin Eckert Medical Student, Davis, CA Evan B. Rees EMT - Mobile Intensive Care Specialist, SantaFe, NM Michael D. Brown, M.D. Lafayette Hill, PA Lawrence T. Charbonneau, R.N. Metropolitan State Hospital, LaHabra, CA Valerie Dzuber, R.N. Clinic Director, Sacramento, CA Rachel L. Anderson Research Associate, University ofCalifornia at Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA Mary Alice Pratt, R.N. Lexington, KY John F. Farney, R.N. Tucson, AZ Matthew Belmonte Neurosciences, University of California atSan Diego Jeannine Michaud, R.N. Health Services Coordinator, Speechand Language Development Center, Long Beach, CA Jan Golden, R.N. Tustin, CA Dr. Mary M. Griffin-Jones Tiburon, CA Rosemary E. Hubble Downey, CA Jeff Majcen Respiratory Therapist, Glendale, OR J. M. Kelly, LVN, LPN Retired, Vancouver, WA Dr. Jerrold E. Brown Lansing, KS Dr. Jean-Paul Bierny Tucson, AZ Robert B. Stone, M.D. Yountville, CA Elaine Hutsinpiller, DC Berkeley, CA Douglas A. Blose, M.D. Downey, CA James M. Larson, M.D. San Diego, CA Eugene Tinelli, M.D. Addiction Psychiatrist, Member, City ofSyracuse Drug and Alcohol Abuse Commission, Syracuse, NY Law Enforcement and Social Services Anthony Ribera Chief of Police, San Francisco, CA Lou Cobarruviaz Chief of Police, San Jose, CA Bob Nichelini Acting Chief of Police, Oakland, CA Michael Hennessey Sheriff, City and County of San Francisco,CA Nicolas Pastore Chief of Police, New Haven, CT Michael L. Sorg Former Police Chief, San Clemente, CA R. H. Hessing Chief of Police, Rotterdam, Holland T. Reitsma Police Chief, Rotterdam, Ruenmond, Holland David C. Benson Chief of Police, Castleton Police Department,Vermont, retired Major with Honolulu Police Dept., Hawaii Alfred Blumstein, Ph.D. Carnegie-Mellon Foundation; Pres.Amer Association of Criminologists Robert G. Le Conte President, National Association of VeteranPolice Officers, Austin, TX ** Richard Chrystie, Esq. Deputy District Attorney, LosAngeles, CA William B. Rumford, Ph.D. Chief of Security, Golden GateBridge, San Francisco, CA Alissa Riker Program Director, San Francisco, CA Michael S. Hebel Captain, San Francisco Police Department,San Francisco, CA Vincent Schiraldi Executive Director, Center on Juvenile& Criminal Justice, San Francisco, CA Jodi Schwartz Administrative Director, Center on Juvenile& Criminal Justice, San Francisco, CA Marsha Rosenbaum, Ph.D. Sociologist, Institute for ScientificAnalysis Linda C. Padgett, Ph.D. Biomedical Scientist, US Agency forInternational Development, Vienna, VA Karen E. Moore, Ph.D. Program Manager, International DrugAbuse Prevention, US Agency for International Development,Washington, DC Patricia Jones Director, Child Abuse Prevention Program,Family Services Agency, San Francisco, CA Kathleen Baxter Director, San Francisco Child Abuse Council,San Francisco, CA Lynn Friar Educational Coordinator, San Francisco Child AbuseCouncil, San Francisco, CA Lori Dix Family Support Services, San Francisco, CA Daniel K. Blue Alternative Family Services, San Francisco, CA Mai-Win Ho Executive Director, Asian Prenatal Advocates, SanFrancisco, CA James N. Speros Sergeant, San Francisco Police Department,San Francisco, CA Kathleen Connolly Program Case Worker, San Francisco, CA Kenneth L. Christie San Jose Police Department, San Jose, CA Martha Rodetts Training Coordinator, Child Welfare Project,San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA J. Mark Robinson, Ph.D. Clinical Psychologist, Orange CountyHealth Care Agency, Orange County, CA Shirley Collins Program Director, Women's Alcoholic Unit, SanFrancisco, CA Gary L. Frucan Senior Social Services Supervisor, Departmentof Social Services, San Francisco, CA Lynda M. Frattiani Maternal and Child Health, San FranciscoGeneral Hospital, San Francisco, CA Pamela C. Brett Licensed Clinical Social Worker, SanFrancisco Department of Public Health, San Francisco, CA Robert L. Slaughter, Esq. Captain (Retired), San Diego PoliceDepartment, San Diego, CA Clark W. Baker Police Officer, Los Angeles Police Department,Los Angeles, CA Barbara J. Frank Chief Probation Officer, San BernardinoCounty, CA Claude M. Potts Deputy Chief Probation Officer, SanBernardino County, CA Sandra Klapp Group Counselor, San Bernardino County ProbationDepartment, San Bernardino, CA Darrel Day Supervising Group Counselor, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, San Bernardino, CA Alan Hutton Supervising Probation Officer, San BernardinoCounty Probation Department, San Bernardino, CA"When you'vespent 24+ years arresting & jailing druggies, it's difficultto adopt a new position. But I've been involved in this activityin lean times & times with lots of money & programs &our system just doesn't work." Cathy Ortiz, N.S.I. San Bernardino County ProbationDepartment, San Bernardino, CA Fred Esber Group Counselor, San Bernardino County ProbationDepartment, San Bernardino, CA Byron Saldana Group Counselor, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, San Bernardino, CA Fred R. Speidel Probation Director II, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, San Bernardino, CA C.W. (Bill) Simington Probation Officer, San BernardinoCounty Probation Department, San Bernardino, CA Frank E. Schlesinger, M.F.C.C. San Bernardino, CA Laura L. Hoffman Probation Officer II, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, San Bernardino, CA David M. Lawrence Deputy Probation Officer, Riverside County,CA Marilyn Medler Deputy Probation Officer II, Orange CountyProbation Dept., Orange, CA Jack N. Carl Supervising Probation Officer, Orange CountyProbation Dept., Orange, CA Ann DeMarco Deputy Probation Officer, Orange County, CA Walter L. Glaser Night Supervisor I, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, San Bernardino, CA Gary V. West Supervising Probation Officer, San Mateo, CA Jasmin S.K. Jackson Deputy Probation Officer, Upland, CA Marcia Gradin Deputy Probation Officer, San Diego, CA R. Scott DeuPree Supervising Probation Officer, Santa Maria,CA Adrienne Moore Supervising Clerk I, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, San Bernardino, CA Richard Eaton, ADPO II Parole Officer, San Diego CountyProbation Department, San Diego, CA Rex G. Dillon Senior Probation Officer, San Mateo CountyProbation Department, San Mateo, CA Betty Busch Supervising Nurse, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department Juvenile Hall, CA Earl R. McClure Sergeant (Retired) San Jose PoliceDepartment; Instructor in Narcotics, De Anza College, Daniel B. Jeffs Chief Investigator, County Public Defender,San Bernardino, CA Karl B. Hutchinson Law Enforcement Coordinator, SacramentoPublic Safety Center, Sacramento, CA Mary Kay Rudolph Corrections Coordinator, Sacramento PublicSafety Center, Sacramento, CA Tiffany Johnston Group Counselor, Probation Officer, OrangeCounty, CA Paul D. Muntz Probation Director, Los Angeles CountyProbation Department, Los Angeles, CA Doris Waterman Volunteer Probation Officer, Orange CountyProbation Department, Orange County, CA Kenneth Kingsbury MS, MFCC, Fullerton, CA Shirley Melnicoe Executive Director, Northern CaliforniaService League, San Francisco, CA John J. "Jack" Gutowski Program Director, Boys andGirls Clubs of San Gabriel Valley, CA Billy J. Parrott Former Director, Community ConnectionResource Center, San Diego, CA Abn Qadir Al-Amin Director, SLP, San Francisco, CA Keith Harris Clinical Psychologist, San Bernardino CountyDepartment of Mental Health, San Bernardino, CA Robert H. Silverman, Sr. Deputy, Orange County Marshal'sDepartment Lynnette Shaw Marin County Advisory Board on Alcohol andOther Drug Problems, Marin County, CA Clarence Lee Brooks LCSW, San Bernardino County Department ofMental Health, San Bernardino, CA Ruthann Simmons, Ph.D. Supervisor, Counseling & MedicalCenter, Montclair, CA Carmen A. McNamara Giordano Licensed Marriage, Family andChild Counselor, Mission Viejo, CA Kelly L. Holt Community Employment Trainer, Orange CountyAssociation for Retarded Citizens, Orange, CA Crystal Marie Knox Community Employment Trainer, OrangeCounty Association for Retarded Citizens, Orange, CA Sheri Y. Marsh Community Employment Trainer, Orange CountyAssociation for Retarded Citizens, Orange, CA Catherine Rupp Bell Assistant Program Manager, Orange CountyAssociation for Retarded Citizens, Orange, CA Angela M. Garcia Social Worker, New Life For Children, SanYsidro, CA Ann Alper, M.A. MFCT, Marriage, Family , Child Therapist, SanDiego, CA Marc Kern, Ph.D. Director/Psychologist, AddictionAlternatives, Santa Ana, CA Joseph N. Feinstein MFCC, Van Nuys, CA Hugh M. Tate Methadone Maintenance Program, Fullerton, CA Nancy Foutts (Former) Supervisory Patrol Officer, US CustomsService, Orange County Grand Jury, Garden Grove, CA Gregory L. Morgan Lieutenant, Los Angeles County Sheriff'sDepartment, Los Angeles, CA Sidney Mills Captain (Retired) Los Angeles County PoliceDepartment, Los Angeles, CA Ted Hunt Police Officer, Los Angeles County PoliceDepartment, Los Angeles, CA Joseph R. Rowan President and CEO, Criminal and JuvenileJustice International, Roseville, MN Robert K. Sager Laboratory Director (Retired) US DrugEnforcement Administration, Salmon, WA Eleanor R. Montano President, Mothers and Men Against Gangs,Wilmington, CA Diana Jo Leigh Social Worker, Shaker Heights, OH Richard M. Sullivan Social Worker, Certified Alcohol and DrugCounselor, Clarence, NY Lois D. Sullivan Social Worker, Clarence, NY Rebecca Michelson Child Care Counselor, American IndianFamily Healing Center, Berkeley, CA James T. Casey, C.P.P.C.A. San Jose, CA Deborah Mosby Social Worker, Roseville, MN Michael A. O'Connell, MSW Everett, WA Kathleen Cassil Director, Golden Hills Community ServicesDistrict, Tehachapi, CA Lawrence M. Baker Retired Psychologist, Frankfort, MI Dawn Day Sociologist, Princeton, NJ Barbara Drew, MFCC Program Chief, Lake County Mental Health,Lakeport, CA Janeen Karraker Coordinator, Criminal Justice Consortium,Oakland, CA Madelyn Burley-Allen Dynamics of Human Behavior, San Mateo,CA Sam Torres US Probation Officer, Adjunct Professor ofCriminal Justice, Long Beach State University, Long Beach, CA Robin L. Soule Secretary, San Bernardino County ProbationDepartment, San Berardino, CA Cheryl A. Lobbestael-Griffin Social Worker, Marquette, MI Dr. Stanford Green Psychologist, Newport Beach, CA Jim Ennis Certified Alcohol and Drug Counselor, Honolulu, HI Joseph S. Neill, Ph.D. Research Neurophysiologist, UCLA BrainResearch Institute, Los Angeles, CA Linda J. Smith Mental Health Social Worker, Ishpeming, MI Gary A. Petersen, MFCC, CADC Huntington Beach, CA Eileen Kelly Lieutenant, Los Angeles County Sheriff'sDepartment, CA Daniel Renfro Chemical Dependency Counselor, Yuba City, CA Carlo Parker Community Mental Health Worker, Sacramento, CA Carol M. Cross, MFCC Marriage and Family Counselor,Sacramento, CA Kathleen Jenkins Home Health Services Professional, RanchoMurietta, CA Brenda Ehutchell, MSW The Birthing Project Clinic,Sacramento, CA Vicki Dunn, CADC, NCACI Drug Program Administrator,Sacramento, CA Doyle Larwith, MFCC Santa Rosa, CA Dawn Stjepanic Nutrition System Specialist, Anaheim, CA John Tuscher Manager, Health Care Network, Anaheim, CA Darla Miller Dietician, Health Care Network, Anaheim, CA Nathaniel T. James Social Worker Murtis H. TaylorMulti-Services Center, Portland, Or Rollie Adelman, MSW San Diego Regional Center, San Diego, CA Kirsten M. Hagen Juvenile Legal Clerk, San Bernardino CountyProbation Department, CA Alix Majella McQueen, Social Worker, Alix's Street Outreach,Hilo, HI Elizabeth Mark, MFCC Marriage, Family, and Child Counselor,Sacramento, CA Steven G. Smith, ThM, MSW Social Worker, Fair Oaks UnitedMethodist Church, Fair Oaks, CA Marcia L. Rogers, LCSW Social Worker, Sacramento, CA Dorothy J. Jongeward Psychologist/Author/Consultant, WalnutCreek, CA Gloria Weston, MFCC Social Worker, Orinda, CA Dawn Marie Adams Case Manager, Treatment Specialist, Mt.Sterling, KY Walter F. Powers, Ph.D. Clinical Psychologist, Mt. Sterling,KY Jack Willis, DC, MFCC Los Angeles, CA Douglas K. Stacy Case Manager, Mt. Sterling, KY Gregory C. Pommerenk Direcotr, Kapoho Community Association,Pahoa, HI Lynette C. Flores Hearts United for Grandparents RaisingGrandkids, Placentia, CA Irene Koontz Founder, Director, Hearts United forGrandparents Raising Grandkids, Placentia, CA Kasha Baxter Founder, Against Our Will, Buffalo, NY Gladys Gleason Director of Counseling Services, Buena Park,CA Jane Lobel Family Therapist, Walnut Creek, CA Judy Ann Jones, CADC, NCACII Family Recovery Center, St. JudeMedical Center, Yorba Linda, CA Jose R. Mejins Counselor, St. Judes Hospital, Orange, CA Donald A. Cadogan, Ph.D. Psychologist, Monrovia, CA George C. Anderheggen, Ph.D. Psychotherapist, Newtown, CT Andrew Savicky, Ph.D. Clinical Psychologist, Clayton, NJ Kenneth D. Clements Psychotherapist, Altadena, CA Jessica B. Gillooly Marriage, Family, and Child Counselor,All Saints Church, Pasadena, CA Dr. Harold Kooden Psychologist, New York City, NY Ragnhild B. Klein, MSW, LCSW San Gabriel, CA Patricia A. Ochoa Program Director, Touchstones, MissionViejo, CA Deborah Williams Recovery Specialist, Touchstones, Downey, CA Donald G. Boss Counselor, Touchstones, West Covina, CA Kay Alina Administrator, Keystone Recovery, Fullerton, CA Debra Vogt Recovery Specialist, Touchstones, Downey, CA William John Woodbury, CADS, CASC Treatment Coordinator, St.Joseph Hospital, Belmont Shore, CA Steven R. Otto Counselor, River Community, Hacienda Heights,CA Clayton R. Sanderson Sr. Case Manager, Starting Point ofOrange County, CA Joan M. Hill Member, Board of Directors, New Directions forWomen, Lake Forest, CA Jim O'Connell Director of Outreach, Social Model RecoverySystems, Inc., Azusa, CA Pamela Doi Relief Counselor, The River Community, Glendale,CA Steve Stone Private Consultant, Psychological Services, SantaAna, CA Tracie Meinhardt Outreach Coordinator, Social Model RecoverySystems, Glendale, CA Anna Louise Pritchard Deputy Probation Officer, Orange CountyProbation Dept., CA Jill A. Herschman Director, Program Development forBehavioral Medicine, St. Joseph Hospital, Orange, CA Ruth Roseland,Ph.D. Clinical Psychologist, Quincy, MA Chris F. Conley Department Manager, Citizens for Treatmentand Training, Kingston, RI Chad M. McDonald Substance Abuse Counselor, Greenwich, CT Annabel Stehle Chairman, the Georgiana Organization, Inc.,Westport, CT Liberty Kovacs, Ph.D. MFCC, R.N. Center for Marriage andFamily Therapy, Sacramento, CA Leslie L. Hansen, MFCC Winters, CA Phyllis Watts, Ph.D. Sacramento, CA Marylinne L. Peacock, MSW Sacramento, CA Kristine Belnap, LCSW Sacramento, CA Deborah Anne Glassman, MSW, MFCC Sacramento, CA Fay Whittaker Program Manager, Loop Apt. Projects,Dorchester, MA Jocelyn Wender Clinical Social Worker, Jamaica Plain, MA Michael J. Catanzaro Family Therapist, Huntington Beach, CA Elizabeth Snyker, LCSW Encinitas, CA Warner M. Watkins, Jr. Chemical Dependency Counselor, NavyDrug/Alcohol Counselor School, San Diego, CA Joseph R. Newton, Ph.D. Sacramento, CA Lorrac Craig Jail Sergeant, Trinity County Sheriff, TrinityCenter, CA Media and Entertainment Abigail Van Buren (Dear Abby) Syndicated Columnist, LosAngeles, CA Richard Dreyfuss Actor, Beverly Hills, CA Hugh Downs ABC News, New York, NY Janis Paige Actress/President, Ipanema Music Corp.,Hollywood, CA Danny Glover Actor, Hollywood, CA Michael Moriarty Actor, New York, NY Mike Gray Screenwriter, Los Angeles, CA Jacob Sullum Editor, Reason Magazine, Los Angeles, CA Kip Konwiser Producer, Shadow Hill Entertainment, SantaMonica, CA Rudy De Luca Writer, Brooks Films, Hollywood, CA Gail H. Evans CNN, Atlanta, GA Phyllis Avery Author, San Diego, CA Susan Toffler CNN, Atlanta, GA Stephen Adams Editor, California Family Law Report,Sausalito, CA Brian Kelleher Publisher, Flush Rush Quarterly, San Diego, CA Shane N. Smith Comedian, Anaheim, CA Alan W. Bock Senior Columnist, Orange County Register, SantaAna, CA James Greer Radio Talk Show Host, Albuquerque, NM Lonnie Bee Artist/Illustrator, Orinda, CA Peter Jon Shuler KQED, Inc., San Francisco, CA Patricia Soberanis Editor and Publisher, American Voices, SanFrancisco, CA Ralph A. and Natalie Kennedy Editors, Fullerton Observer,Fullerton, CA Thomas R. Daly Publisher, Georgetown Gazette, Georgetown, CA Donald E. Armstrong Cartoonist, Redlands, CA Eldridge Cleaver Author, Soul On Ice Maralys Wills Author, Santa Ana, CA Buddy Nadler Director, Directors Guild of America Ken Von Helmolt Technical Editor, General Media, Canoga Park,CA Tobie Helene Shapiro Columnist, Phoenix Journal, Berkeley, CA Amy Franklin Music Director, KWUC, Orange, CA David F. Castasno Publisher/Editor, Screamer Magazine, LosAngeles, CA Nick Boicourt, Jr. Producer/Director, Garden Productions,Fullerton, CA Daniel Eastwood Editor, Spletter Magazine, Los Angeles, CA Neil Gido Writer/Photographer, Wild Ones Magazine, LosAngeles, CA Lawrence B. Fenton Reporter, S.F. Weekly, San Francisco, CA Barbara Faye Swain Author, Pasadena, CA K.E. Grubbs, Jr. Editorial and Commentary Director, OrangeCounty Register, Santa Ana, CA Jean F. Forsythe Publisher, American Eagle News, Northridge,CA Rose Marie Couch Editor-in-Chief, American Eagle News,Northridge, CA Steven D. Wallace Columnist, Chapel Hill Herald, Chapel Hill,NC Harry N. Norton Writer, Guest Columnist, Altadena, CA Seth Garrish Broadcaster, Worcester, MA Buster Jones Writer, Albany, GA Members of the Clergy Reverend Bruce Larson Co-Pastor of the Crystal Cathedral,Garden Grove, CA Father Joseph Ganssle OFM, President, Religious Coalition fora Moral Drug Policy, Denver, CO Pastor Andrew L. Gunn President, Clergy for an EnlightenedDrug Policy, St. Luke's United Methodist Church, Washington, DC Reverend David S. Sandberg Senior Pastor, FirstCongregational Church, Berkeley, CA Rabbi Haim Asa Temple Beth Tikvah of North Orange County, CA Reverend Grayson Atha Minister, Mt. Zion United MethodistChurch, Cincinnati, OH Rabbi Alan Frehling University Synagogue, Los Angeles Rabbi Steven Carr Rubin Vice-President, Board of Rabbis ofSouthern CA, Los Angeles, CA James W. Prescott, Ph.D. Director, Institute of HumanisticScience, San Diego, CA Reverend Thomas L. Sheridan S.J., St. Peter's College, JerseyCity, New Jersey Reverend Jonathan Tetherly Protestant Chaplain, HampdenCounty Correctional Center, Massachusetts Justice Network,Chicopee, MA Reverend Alexander A. Di Lella, OFM Professor of BiblicalStudies, Catholic University of America, Washington, DC Rabbi Rav A. Soloff, Ph.D. Lansdale, PA Sr. Francis Joseph Egan, O.P. Mt. St. Mary Convent, Newburgh,NY Father William J. Patrick Priest Chaplain, St. Jude Hospital,Fullerton, CA Reverend William Wallace Finlator Southern Baptist Minister(Retired) Raleigh, NC Father Joseph P. Kane, S.J. Chaplain, New York CityDepartment of Corrections Reverend Gabriel Camacho Chaplain, New York City Departmentof Corrections Sister Marion Defeis Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Salimov Djabi Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Reverend Charles Dunston Chaplain, New York City Departmentof Corrections Reverend Ann Dub Hare Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Abij Hasan Chaplain, New York City Department of Corrections Sister Marie A. Henry Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Sister Marie Hermann Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Malik A. Kareem Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Sister Constance Kennedy Chaplain, New York City Departmentof Corrections Anas Khalid Chaplain, New York City Department of Corrections Reverend Rufino Lecumberri Chaplain, New York City Departmentof Corrections Jane H. Leggett Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Reverend Maria Lopez Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Reverend Lawrence E. Lucas Chaplain, New York City Departmentof Corrections Father Walter Mitchell Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Askia Muhammad Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections S. Mary O'Connor Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Reverend Francis J. Passenant Chaplain, New York CityDepartment of Corrections Rabbi Herbert Richtman Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Father John Soles Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections John H. Wilkinson Chaplain, New York City Department ofCorrections Reverend Alan Albert Snow Independent Humanist Ministers,Balboa Island, CA Reverend Joan Torribio, M.A. Washington, DC Reverend James K. Babcock Pastor, Holy Cross Melkite-GreekCatholic Church, Fullerton, CA Farris Lee Huff Ministerial Service, Jehovah's Witnesses,Compton, CA Marian Gallagher Sisters of St. Joseph of Corondelet, LosAngeles, CA Sister Bernadette Floersch Sisters of St. Joseph ofCorondelet, Los Angeles, CA Sister Margaret Reilly Sisters of St. Joseph of Corondelet,Los Angeles, CA Cecilia Nevin Sisters of St. Joseph of Corondelet, LosAngeles, CA Reverend Dr. David J. Jamieson Conference Minister, UnitedChurch of Christ, San Francisco, CA Paul J. Masquelier, Jr. Executive Presbyter, The Presbyteryof San Jose, San Jose, CA Reverend Connie White Salinas, CA Reverend Deborah Haffner-Doll San Rafael, CA Bishop Felton E. May United Methodist Church, Harrisburg, PA Dr. Patrick W. Grace Conover Policy Advocate, United Churchof Christ, Washington, DC Donald P. Buteyn Senior Pastor, First Presbyterian Church,Bakersfield, CA Joseph Moss President, Men of Bethel A. M. E. Church, LosAngeles, CA Harold Wilke UCC Minister, The Caring Congregation,Claremont, CA Ms. Jerald L. Scott Program Director, The United MethodistChurch, Washington, DC Reverend Arthur E. Harrington Retired Minister, UnitedMethodist Church, Claremont, CA Virginia Wheeler Methodist Minister, South Laguna, CA Ralph H. Lightbody Senior Pastor, Gardena Valley BaptistChurch, Claremont, CA Jon S. West Pastor, Morningside Presbyterian Church,Fullerton, CA Kenneth E. Crouch Minister, Casas Adobes CongregationalChurch, Tucson, AZ Frances H. Bray Missionary (Retired) United Methodist Church,Claremont, CA Reverend William D. Auld Minister (Retired) Claremont, CA Philip A. Anderson Minister (Retired) United Church ofChrist, Claremont, CA Kirk A. Ballin Minister, Unitarian Universalist Church,Roanoke, VA Pierce Johnson Minister, United Methodist Church, Claremont,CA Reverend Lincoln B. Wirt Pastor (Retired) United Church ofChrist, Claremont, CA David M. Held Retired Clergyman, Claremont, CA Stanley H. Conover Minister (Retired), Claremont, CA Ray Gibbons Retired Clergyman, Claremont, CA George Aki Retired Clergyman, US Army Chaplain, Claremont, CA Reverend Dr. Marcia Ball Claremont, CA Elaine Asa Temple Beth Tikvah, Fullerton, CA Father Paul F. Murke Los Angeles, CA David J. Jamieson United Church of Christ, San Francisco, CA Carolyn A. Portanova Executive Director, Catholic FamilyCenter, Rochester, NY John Kilgore Pastor, United Methodist Church, Claremont, CA Barbara Kilgore Reverend, United Methodist Church, San Pedro,CA Jack F. Miller Chair, Administrative Board, Aldersgate UnitedMethodist Church, Tustin, CA Gary Barmore Pastor, Fairview Community Church, Costa Mesa,CA Rev. William Morris Pastor, Power of the SpiritAfrican-Methodist Episcopal Church, Los Angeles, CA Helen L. Morgan Retired Teaching Administrator, United Churchof Christ, Pomona, CA Corey June Minister, St. Cloud, FL Willie Jarrel Soul Release Prison Ministries Milton E. Stohs Lutheran Ministries Association, St. Louis,MO John Diehl Deacon, Fairview Community Church, Costa Mesa, CA Phyllis Soderberg Chaplain, Military Order of World Wars, SanClemente, CA Marion P. Parcell Program Chairman, All Saints Church,Pasadena, CA Clara Fehringer Director of Liturgy, Catholic Diocese ofLexington, KY Charles G. Skubick Catholic Criminal Justice Ministry,Archdiocese of Detroit, Oakland City Jail, Rochester, MI Marian E. Skubick Pastoral Minister, Catholic Chaplaincy,Archdiocese of Detroit, Oakland City Jail, Rochester, MI Fr. Michael Cody, SSC Catholic Chaplain, Mass. Dept. ofCorrections, Dorchester, MA Gerald J. Prives Deacon/Prison Chaplain, St. Vincent De PaulCriminal Justice Ministry, St. Louis, MO Peter J. Donohue Director, Detention Ministries, Archdioceseof Los Angeles, CA. Pauline Grady, ASC Chaplain, USMCP, Springfield, MO Mark C. Schmieder Prison Chaplain, Lebanon CorrectionalInstitute, Cincinnati, OH James E. Jacobson, S.J. Chaplain, Oregon State Penitentiary,Salem, OR Peter L. Houck Chaplain, Kentucky State Reformatory,Louisville, KY Rev. James A. Berry Chaplain Director, Catholic Ministry toPrison, Honolulu, HI Angelita Hurtado Chaplain, Detention Ministry, Archdiocese ofLos Angeles, CA Paul E. Rogers Chaplain, Dodge Correctional Institution,Waupan, WI Robert M. Gates Volunteer Minister, Catholic DetentionChaplain's Office, Central Juvenile Hall, Los Angeles, CA Anne H. Gates Volunteer Minister, Catholic DetentionChaplain's Office, Central Juvenile Hall, Los Angeles, CA Suzanne R. Spencer Minister, Unitarian Universalist Church,Studio City, CA Rev. Rosalind Russell Minister, Director of Drug and AlcoholHome, Laguna Beach, CA Virginia A. McCulloch Member, Unitarian Church SocialConcerns Committee, San Pedro, CA Rabbi Aaron Kriegel Encino, CA Desmond F. Marsh Chapel Catholic Ministry, Federal MedicalCenter, Springfield, MO Legal Profession George E. Bushnell, Esq. President, American Bar Association,Washington, DC Rufus King, Esq. Washington, DC Jean Wilcox, J.D. San Francisco, CA David M. McCarthy, Jr., Esq. Mansfield, MA David A.Robinson, Esq. Member, Board of Directors, OrangeCounty Bar Association, Irvine, CA Diane E. Tiberend, Esq. Midway City, CA Leona L. Lauder, Esq. San Francisco, CA Robert S. Rivkin, Esq. San Francisco, Ca Kate M. Schreuers, Esq. Orange, CA Marilynn Mika Spencer, Esq. National Lawyers Guild, SanDiego, CA Kay Palmer Gray Court Reporter, Superior Court, Santa Ana, CA Jay S. Bloom, Esq. Beverly Hills, CA John T. Dzialo, Esq. Orange, CA Bertrand E. Cottle, Esq. Orange, CA Charles L. Olobri, Esq. Santa Ana, CA Jerry Manpearl, Esq. Beverly Hills, CA Jan Goodman, Esq. National Lawyers Guild, Beverly Hills, CA Larry Cole, Esq. Tennessee Department of Mental Health,Memphis, TN William R. Mitchell, Esq. Tustin, CA Michael Pancer, Esq. San Diego, CA Kevin M. O'Connell, Esq. Royal Oak, MI Donald Peters, Esq. Newport Beach, CA Barbara Jo Peterson Senior Paralegal, Encino, CA Jeannie S. Rinner Legal Secretary, Orange, CA Marque Rubinn Paralegal, Los Angeles, CA James E. Biava, Esq. Malibu, CA Craig J. Bolton, Esq. Tempe, AZ Charles H. Carreon, Esq. Ashland, OR Terry Phillips Paralegal, San Diego, Ca Don Wyle, Esq. Agoura Hills, CA Alan J. Chaset, Esq. Alexandria, VA Robert A. Merring, Esq. Newport Beach, CA Sharon Campbell Court Reporter, Glendora, CA Barbara Evans Judicial Secretary, Orange County SuperiorCourt, Fullerton, CA Hal Gunning, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Allen Friel, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Roger C. Hope, Esq. Cambria, CA Peter Hirsch, Esq. New York, NY Heather MacKay Pelican Bay Legal Services, San Quentin, CA John Mullen, Esq. Sacramento, CA Laurence A. Young, Esq. Santa Ana, CA Jeff Thomas, Esq. Public Defender, San Diego, CA Stephen R. Ledoux, Esq. San Francisco, CA Eugene G. Iredale, Esq. San Diego, CA Ronald H. Gill, Esq. Oxnard, CA James E. Biana, Esq. Malibu, CA Morris J. Kushner, Esq. Culver City, CA Leah Singer, Esq. Deputy Public Defender,Chula Vista, CA Jack Hochman, Esq. Public Defender, San Diego, CA Katherine Mattes, Esq. Deputy Public Defender,Chula Vista, CA Garvin F. Shallenberger, Esq. Costa Mesa, CA Robert V. Wills, Esq. Tustin, CA Mark A. Hiller, Esq. Irvine, CA Alex Landon, Esq. San Diego, CA Charles K. Houry, Esq. Wilton, NH Elizabeth A. Missaikian, Esq. San Diego, CA Rodney J. Beede, Esq. Davis, CA DeVon W. Flaningam, Esq. Crawfordsville, IN Robert L. Bean, Esq. Fullerton, CA Nancy L. Ahlering, Esq. Fullerton, CA Ted L. Travis, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Jon Feder, Esq. Irvine, CA Michael Hannon, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Kay L. Sunday, Esq. San Diego, CA Edward M. Cauprynski, Esq. Essexville, MI Marshall Krause, Esq. Larkspur, CA James E. Gerach, Esq. Oak Lawn, IL Jeffrey T. Haley, Esq. Bellevue, WA Ellen L. F. Strauss, Esq. Weston, CT Thomas J. Cleary, Esq. Staff Attorney, Legal Aid Society,Brooklyn, NY Jeffrey Flynn Investigator, San Diego Public DefendersOffice, San Diego, CA Jeannette C. Holm, Esq. San Diego, CA Stephen J. Perrello, Esq. San Diego, CA Rodney L. Beade, Esq. Davis, CA Karen A. Lash The Law Center, University of SouthernCalifornia Law School, Los Angeles, CA Melvin S. Hirshowitz, Esq. New York, NY Michael Letwin, Esq. President, Association of Legal AidAttorneys, New York, NY R. Dufour, Esq. Hemsteede, The Netherlands Carlos Arguello, Esq. Deputy Public Defender, San Diego, CA David L. Wilkirson, Esq. Santa Ana, CA Alan Silber, Esq. Weehauken, NJ David J. Fried, Esq. Hoboken, NJ William J. Rold, Esq. New York, NY Conrad M. Wilkinson, Esq. Claremont, CA Patricia Jo. Wilk, Esq Claremont, CA Azalia Torres, Esq. Staff Attorney, The Legal Aid Society,New York, NY Warren H. Eckert, Esq. Seal Beach, CA Peter Spero, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Judy Ostrander, Esq. Grand Rapids, MI Edwin Vega, Esq. Staff Attorney, Legal Aid Society, Brooklyn,NY Lorne J. Brown, Esq. Former President, Pasadena BarAssociation, Flintridge, CA David McCarthy, Esq. Mansfield, MA Vaugh Spunaugle, Esq. El Cerrito, CA Jonathan K. Golden, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Robert A. Biorn, Esq. Palo Alto, CA John Hornor, Esq. Fair Oaks, CA Joan H. Allan, Esq. Glendale, CA John F. Bean, Esq. La Habra Heights, CA Nancy A. Breslow, Esq. New York, NY Gael Gallant Owens, Esq. Monterey, CA George Ballun, Esq. Escondido, CA William E. Hannan, III, Esq. San Francisco, CA Ronald H. Gordon, Esq. Lorain, OH James A. Gorton, Esq. La Crescenta, CA Carroll Strauss, Esq. Mission Vieho, CA Leatrice Lynne Latts, Esq. Pasadena, CA Andrew Von Sonn, Esq. Wailuku, HI Richard Helphand, Esq. Glendale, CA Thomas Moore, Esq. Monterey Park, CA Rima Gregorian, Esq. Glendale, CA Lorraine Grindstaff, Esq. Monrovia, CA George McDonald, Esq. So. Pasadena, CA Thomas W. Borden, Esq. La Canada, CA William P. Fonnett, Esq. Glendale, CA Jeffrey A. Kopczynski, Esq. Glendale, CA Michael R. Kirschbau, Esq. Santa Ana, CA Richard K. Stavin, Esq. Marina Del Rey, CA Donald W. Jordan, Esq. San Bernardino, CA Mark Tipperman, Esq. La Grande, OR Gordon H. Olson, Esq. San Clemente, CA Elinor L. Hood, Esq. Camarillo, CA Robert Sawicki, Esq. Amherst, NY Henry Coopersmith, Esq. Costa Mesa, CA Jim Schofield, Esq. Syracuse, NY Anthony E. Bell, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Manuel Klausner, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Rebecca A. Gomez, Esq. Long Beach, CA Kenneth O. Rhodes, Esq. Pasadena, CA Melissa S. Charos, Esq. Santa Ana, CA Wilton Roddy, Esq. Long Beach, CA John A. Major, Esq. Long Beach, CA Michael J. Pearce, Esq. Long Beach, CA Gary R. Mitchell, Esq. Long Beach, CA Sean M. Burke, Esq. Long Beach, CA Charles A. Palmer, Esq. Long Beach, CA John M. Minnott, Esq. San Clemente, CA James D. Prendergast, Esq. La Canada, CA Donald K. Garner, Esq. Santa Monica, CA E. S. Murachuer., Esq. Long Beach, CA Barbara R. Adler, Esq. Chestnut Hill, MA Nicole Lehman Legal Associate, Woodbridge, CT Nancy M. Wells Paralegal, San Pedro, CA Larry M. Scarpacci Paralegal, Goleta, CA Stephen Zaharias Assistant Law Librarian, County Law Library,Santa Maria, CA Lorraine M. Scarpace, Esq. Paso Robles, CA Eileen Mackin-Getzoff, Esq. Nipome, CA Richard E. Gardiner, Esq. Fairfax, VA Jeffrey Nadrich, Esq. Los Angeles, CA William V. Stephenson, Esq. Bowling Green, OH Clive S. Martin, Esq. Long Beach, CA Lenore Glaser, Esq. Jamaica Plain, MA Carol Klasuchie, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Michael J. Lightfoot, Esq. Los Angeles, CA John D. Vandevelde, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Charles J. Rossi, Esq. Laguna Beach, CA John Crouchley, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Melissa Widdifield, Esq. Los Angeles, CA John P. Martin, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Roberta Lee, Esq. Santa Monica, CA James C. Maupin, Esq. Los Angeles, CA Educators Dr. James Doti President, Chapman University, Orange, CA Father Paul Locatelli President, Santa Clara University,Santa Clara, CA W. Norman Johnson Rear Admiral, U.S. Navy (Retired), Dean andVice-President of Boston University Dr. Harry L. Hamilton Senior Vice President and Provost,Chapman University, Orange, CA Dr. Peter Duignan Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA Dr. Melvin Krauss Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA Dr. William Ratliff Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA Dr. Thomas Moore Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA Dr. William Evers Fellow, Hoover Institution, Stanford, CA Celia C. Anaya-Conboy Psychotherapist/Diversion Counselor,Orange County Center for Health, Anaheim, CA Charles T. Tart Professor of Psychology, University ofCalifornia at Davis Mary Sauer Teacher, (Retired), Santa Ana, CA Linda Avanzino High School Teacher, Santa Ynez, CA Stephanie Bolling Teacher, Berkeley Adult School, Berkeley,CA James Kopp Senior Tutor, Laubach Literary Council, El Reno,OK Mitch Palmer Master Tutor, Laubach Literary Council, El Reno,OK Judith Cohen Advocate, Learning Disabilities Association, SanDiego, CA Lester Cohen Professor (Retired), San Diego State University,San Diego, CA Marius A. Robinson Institute of Noetic Science,University ofCalifornia at Irvine William L. Mikulas Professor of Psychology, University ofWest Florida Sam Young, M.A., M.S. Teacher/Assistant Professor, MagnoliaHigh, National University, Santa Ana, CA Michael H. Horn Professor, California State University atFullerton, Fullerton, CA Neil Rosen School Counselor, Placentia, CA Bruce Henderson Associate Professor, Fullerton College,Fullerton, CA Mark Bockstahler Licensed Educational Psychologist, IrvineUnified School District, Irvine, CA Rosalinda Guzman Psychotherapist, Orange County Center forHealth, Anaheim, CA Robert E. Williams Sr. Fellow, Loker Hydrocarbon ResearchInstitute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Cheri Gilmour Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute,University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Brio Burgess Author, Sociologist, Russell Sage College,Albany, NY Stephen Blumenthal Educator, Los Angeles, CA Pamela Webster Teacher, Rossier School, Orange, CA Stephanie Harris Sign Language Interpreter, Los AngelesUnified School District, Los Angeles, CA John H. Engler Coordinator of In-Patient Mental HealthServices, Goddard Medical Associates, University of California atIrvine Frances Vaughan Psychologist, Anaheim, CA Katarina A. Thomas, MFCC Counseling and Medical Clinic,Montclair, CA Judith A. Lookabill Assistant Superintendent, Santa ClaraCounty Office of Education, San Jose, CA James Bunyan Parsons Professor of History, Emeritus,University of California at Riverside Max Holland, D.C. President, Friends of the Library, San JuanCapistrano, CA Evelyn R. Walter Teacher, Santa Ana, CA Richard Clarke Teacher, Anaheim Union School District,Anaheim, CA John Bopp Educator, Hingham, MA Ann G. Plunkett Teacher, Sisters of St. Joseph of Corondelet,Los Angeles, CA William R. Mead, Ph.D. Clinical Director, Mental HealthSystems, Inc., San Diego, CA Thomas B. Roberts, Ph.D. Department of EducationalPsychology, NIU, Portola Valley, CA Robert C. Fellmeth Professor and Director, Center For PublicInterest Law, University of San Diego, San Diego, CA Manfred A. Wallner, M.D., J.D. Professor of Law, WesternState University School of Law Kay J. Stenberg Licensed Clinical Social Worker, Teacher,Santa Monica, CA Ronald L. Alkana Professor, University of SouthernCalifornia, Los Angeles, CA Dr. Gregson Lawrence Associate Professor of Pharmacy,University of Southern California Scott Bollens Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Bruce Berg Assistant Professor, University of California atIrvine Victoria Bernal Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Michael L. Burton Professor, University of California atIrvine Kitty Calavita Associate Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Ken Chew Assistant Professor, University of California atIrvine Benjamin N. Colby Professor, University of California atIrvine Randall Crane Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Amrita Daniere Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine David Easton Professor, University of California at Irvine Jonathan Ericson Professor, University of California atIrvine J. G. Ferguson Associate Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Paula Garb Research/Lecturer, University of California atIrvine Robert Garfias Professor, University of California at Irvine Michelle Garfinkel Assistant Professor, University ofCalifornia at Irvine Kyle Johnson Assistant Professor, University of California atIrvine Sheen Kassouf Professor, University of California at Irvine Daniel Klein Assistant Professor, University of California atIrvine Karen Leonard Professor, University of California at Irvine R. Duncan Luce Professor, University of California at Irvine Lisa Malkki Assistant Professor, University of California atIrvine Keith McBurrett Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Raymond Novaco Professor, University of California at Irvine Richard Perry Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Ross Quillian Associate Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine Karen Rook Professor, University of California at Irvine Arthur J. Rubel Professor, University of California at Irvine Dorothy Solinger Professor, University of California atIrvine Alec Stone Assistant Professor, University of California atIrvine Rein Taagepera Professor, University of California at Irvine Bryan J. Vila Assistant Professor, University of Californiaat Irvine John Yellott Professor, University of California at Irvine Keith R. Stroud Principal, Capistrano Unified SchoolDistrict, California Janice Harmon Educational Therapist, Thousand Oaks, CA Mitch Palmer Master Tutor, Laubach Literary Council, El Reno,OK Judith Cohen Advocate, Learning Disabilities Association, SanDiego, CA Lester Cohen Professor (Retired), San Diego State University,San Diego, CA Marius A. Robinson Institute of Noetic Science,University ofCalifornia at Irvine Paul Maynard Professor, Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA Carter J. Ward, Ph.D. Professor, Pepperdine University,Malibu, CA Larkin M. Higgins Professor, Pepperdine University, Malibu,CA Linda Winer Professor, Pepperdine University, Malibu, CA Thomas B. Roberts, Ph.D. Professor, Northern IllinoisUniversity, DeKalb, IL Paula J. Hruby, M.S. Ed. Northern Illinois University,DeKalb, IL Penny Armstrong, Ph.D. Northern Illinois University, DeKalb,IL Carolyn Kinnear, M.S. Ed. Northern Illinois University,DeKalb, IL Betty L. Mellard Co-President, American Association ofUniversity Women, La Verne, CA Sally J. Alexander Public Relations Consultant, HuntingtonBeach, CA Loyd Carr Professor of English (Retired) Anaheim, CA Ruth V. Ronnquist Teacher (Retired) Portsmouth, NH Ethan Nadelmann Assistant Professor, Princeton University,Princeton, NJ Janet Hofmann Chemical Awareness Counselor, Park Center HighSchool, Brooklyn Park, MN Jo Ann W. Baum Chemical Dependency Counselor, Brooklyn Jr.High School, Brooklyn Park, MN Trina Hackbarth Chemical Awareness Counselor, Osseo JuniorHigh School, Brooklyn Park, MN Sally Lewis Wesem Chemical Awareness Counselor, Maple GroveJunior High School, Maple Grove, MN Della Van Dyke Chemical Awareness Counselor, North ViewJunior High School, Brooklyn Park, MN Ron P. Von Chemical Health Coordinator, Roseville HighSchool, Roseville, MN Mary Hoopman Chemical Awareness Counselor, Minneapolis PublicSchools, Minneapolis, MN Jack Griffin Chemical Health Specialist, Washburn HighSchool, Minneapolis, MN Timothy W. Titus Chemical Awareness Counselor, Brooklyn Park,MN Charlene P. Westrum Chemical Specialist, Robb SchoolDistrict, Golden Valley, MN Kate Cleveland Chemical Awareness Specialist, RobbinsdaleSchools, Long Lake, MN Caroline J. Acker, Ph.D. Fellow, Biomedical Science andTechnology, NIH Historical Office, Takoma Park, MD Richard W. Wilson, D.H.Sc. Professor of Public Health,Western Kentucky University, Bowling Green, KY Alan L. White School Teacher, Capistrano School District,Capistrano, CA Gary M. Anderson, Ph.D. Professor, California StateUniversity at Northridge, CA John Greenwood Director, Continuing Education, DartmouthAlumni Association, Fullerton, CA Patrick D. Yrrarraxaral-Correa School Counselor, Santa Ana,CA Fucshia Ward Assistant Principal, Bakersfield, CA Jeanne Curran Professor, Attorney, California StateUniversity at Dominguez Hills, CA John K. Russell Retired Teacher, Costa Mesa, CA James C. Blackburn Director of Admissions and Records,California State University at Fullerton, CA Laura Berend Associate Professor of Law, University of SanDiego, CA Jon A. Frederick, M.S. Graduate Student, University ofMichigan, Ann Arbor, MI Lauren C. Whaley Teacher, Los Angeles, CA John O'Neill Retired Teacher, Wrightsville Beach, NC Chris T. Owen Teacher/Administrator, Grass Valley, CA R. John Leigh Professor, Shaker Heights, OH Bart Carter Pate Associate Professor, University ofTennessee, Chattanooga, TN Jennifer S. Furness Special Education Teacher, Sierra Madre,CA Ruth Jones Scott Retired Teacher, Claremont, CA Gertrude M. Waterman Retired Missionary Teacher, Claremont,CA William D. Bray Professor, Claremont, CA Christine L. Stump Retired Teacher, Claremont, CA Beatrice Price Russell Retired Teacher, Claremont, CA Martha Millett Retired Teacher, Claremont, CA Virginia C. Lane Psychology Instructor, NOCCCD, Norwalk, CA Lester G. McAllister Professor Emeritus, ChristianTheological Seminary, Indianapolis, IN Tom Ilmanen Professor, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI Jerome K. Edwards Retired Teacher, Placentia, CA Barbara K. Parsons Teacher, Sierra Vista, CA Pat McCully Retired Teacher, Huntington Beach, CA Joy A. Gault Retired Teacher, Manhattan Beach, CA Nancy H. Grenier Teacher, Manhattan Beach, CA Judson A. Grenier Professor, Manhattan Beach, CA Tracy Levin Foreign Language Instructor, West CoastUniversity, Los Angeles, CA Jean S. Mickel Teacher, Monterey, CA Carl R. Levine Professor, California State University atDominguez Hills, CA Ralph D. Smith Professor Emeritus, Cerritos College RetiredFaculty Association, Cerritos, CA Sherill Moses President, Cerritos College Retired FacultyAssociation, Cerritos, CA Dr. Stanley D. Jennings Professor, Cerritos College RetiredFaculty Association, Cerritos, CA Helena T. Jennings Cerritos College Retired FacultyAssociation, Cerritos, CA Jack I. Medoff Cerritos College Retired Faculty Association,Cerritos, CA Helena S. Medoff Cerritos College Retired FacultyAssociation, Cerritos, CA James L. Frame Cerritos College Retired Faculty Association,Cerritos, CA Wendell Markham Cerritos College Retired Faculty Association,Cerritos, CA Wanda Sterner Cerritos College Retired Faculty Association,Cerritos, CA Ruth F. Laidlaw Cerritos College Retired Faculty Association,Cerritos, CA Nova Jean Weber Faculty Coordinator, Cerritos College,Cerritos, CA Evelyn R. Bibb Cerritos College, Cerritos, CA Robert Allen, Jr. Cerritos College Retired FacultyAssociation, Cerritos, CA Christine H. Joseph Library Clerk II, Cerritos College,Cerritos, CA Valencia Mitchell Librarian, Cerritos College, Cerritos, CA Lynda M. Sampson Librarian, Cerritos College, Cerritos, CA Betty Lou Jones Professor Emeritus, Cerritos College,Cerritos, CA Heidi Lambert Teaching Assistant, West Valley OccupationalCenter, Woodland Hills, CA Vickie McCorkendale Project Coordinator, USC/ InformationSciences Institute, Los Angeles, CA Janice S. Goodman Assistant Dean Emeritus, LA Pierce College,Woodland Hills, CA Kathryn Lambert Professor Emeritus, LA Pierce College,Woodland Hills, CA A. R. Hartman Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Rene von Swanger Criminologist, Rotterdam, ErasmusUniversity, The Netherlands Prof. Dr. Hans de Doelder Professor, Criminal Law, ErasmusUniversity, Rotterdam, The Netherlands T. Blan Lecturer, Criminal Law, Erasmus University,Rotterdam, The Netherlands Yolande uit Beijerse Erasmus University, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands G. van Lejen Master of Law, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,The Netherlands R.S. B. Kooe Criminologist, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,The Netherlands Dr. E. M. de Koning de Jong Lecturer, Criminal Law, ErasmusUniversity, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Michael Winkelman Director, Ethnographic Field School,Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ Phyllis Mathew Teacher, Woodland Hills, CA Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D. Curator, Fitz Hugh Ludlow MemorialLibrary, San Francisco, CA Theodore R. Vallance Associate Dean and Professor Emeritus,Penn State University, State College, PA Thomas Nicholson, Ph.D. Professor of Public Health, WesternKentucky University, Bowling Green, KY Joel Brown Senior Scientist, Pacific Institute for Researchand Evaluation, Los Angeles, CA Betty L. King Professor, Northern Virginia Community College,Alexandria, VA Marjorie Dixon Zamora Professor, Moraine Valley CommuityCollege, Palos Hills, IL Jonathan Kaplan The American University, Washington, DC William R. Mead, Ph.D. San Diego, CA Michael Bach Professor, Golden West College, HuntingtonBeach, CA Keith S. Harris, Ph.D. Lancaster, CA Alexandra Rogers, Ph.D. Anaheim Hills, CA Jean Keller Teacher, Oak Grove Middle School, Concord, CA Henk J. DanBlit Amsterdam Metropolink Consultancy Research,Amsterdam, The Netherlands Doris G. Wallace English Teacher, Retired, Hickory, NC Eve. C. Esche School Librarian (Retired) Westland, MI Maxine Olson Drug Free School Coordinator, Marquette, MI Chauncey A. Alexander Professor/Lecturer Dept. of SocialWork, California State University at Long Beach, CA Nance J. Reed Teacher, Plumas Unified School District,Quincy, CA Jeffrey a. Miron Professor, Department of Economics - BostonUniversity Boston, MA Cynthia Shacklett Career Guidance Officer, SaddelbackCollege, Mission Viejo, CA Melvin L. Zwillenberg, Ph.D. Maplewood, NJ Jean P. Brookhart Retired Teacher, Huntington Beach, CA Anne Walters Curator, Butterfield-Jay Foundation, OklahomaCity, OK Ronald C. Gresham Director, University Peace Center, Hilo,Hawaii Anthony J. Meyer, Ph.D. Washington, DC Julia Emerson Keily Research Assistant, University ofCalifornia at Irvine Eve Bonner, Ph.D. University of Chicago Great Books Club,Chicago, IL John A. Ward Supervisor, Stack Maintenance, California StateUniversity at Long Beach Anita Nuessle Administrative Services Manager,. CaliforniaState University at Long Beach Nelson Fuson Professor Emeritus, Physics, Fisk University,Nashville, TN John J. Pye Associate Professor, University of Hawaii,Kahului, HI James A. Kowalski Professor, Orange Coast College, Corona DelMar, CA Toni Iseman Counselor, Orange Coast College, Laguna Beach, CA Lee Bradley Professor, Counselor, Orange Coast College, CostaMesa, CA Stanley Peter Szczepanowski Scientist/Human Rights Advocate,Madison, WI Verna A. Hassouna Retired Teacher, Laguna Niguel, CA James M. Maloney Associate Editor, Fordham Law Review,Fordham University School of Law, New York, NY Debra A. Comer, Ph.D. Associate Professor, HofstraUniversity, Hempstead, NY I. Roop Doctoral Candidate, Nelson Rockefeller College ofPublic Affairs and Public Policy, School of Criminal Justice,Albany, NY Nancy Porter Teacher, Sierra Madre, CA Bonnie Hinton Teacher, Spokane, WA John T. Lyle Professor, Cal Poly Pomona, CA Thomas C. Wert Professor, Orange Coast College, Costa Mesa,CA Ann Harmer Professor, Orange Coast College, Costa Mesa, CA Stephen Arons, Esq. Professor of Legal Studies, University ofMassachussetts, Amherst, MA Bya D. Berger Teacher, Sierra Madre, CA Michael Anthony Bohalz Faculty, School of the Art Institute,Chicago, IL Helen M. Olson, Ph.D. San Clemente, CA Rose Norberg Retired Teacher, Honolulu, HI Marvin Klotz Professor Emeritus, California State Universityat Northridge Suzanne A. Schenck Special Education Teacher, Pasadena, CA Juan B. Llibre Executive Director, Polynesian LanguagesInstitute, Pasadena, CA Susana Green Teacher, All Saints Church, Pasadena, CA Samuel Walker, Esq. Professor of Criminal Justice, Universityof Nebraska at Omaha Elizabeth McBroom Professor Emeritus, School of Social Work,University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Darrell G. Wells Professor Emeritus, South Dakota StateUniversity, Brookings, South Dakota John C. Bradford Instructional Aide II, Santa Rosa JuniorCollege, Santa Rosa, CA Sue Scott, Ph.D. Newport Beach, CA John R. Baker, Ph.D. Moorpark College, Moorpark, CA Mr. Sundance Assistant to the Director, Center for East AsianStudies, University of Chicago, IL Dr. John J. McKee Executive Director, Institute for Socialand Educational Research, Tuscaloosa, AL Robert W. Roberts Professor Emeritus (retired), University ofSouthern California, Los Angeles, CA Kenneth B. Babb Teacher, Canadian Academy, Kobe, Japan Randy W. Friemel President, Society of Physics Students,Austin, TX Ronald Blum Associate Member, Institute of Noetic Science,Mill Valley, CA Bill Cross Professor of Psychology, Onondoga CommunityCollege, Syracuse, NY Paul Boyce Professor of Economics, Pepperdine University,Irvine, CA Dolores Newton, Ph.D. Assistant Professor, State Universityof New York at Stony Brook, NY Jefferson Fish, Ph.D. Professor, St. John's University,Jamaica, NY Victoria Seeley, M.A. Sacramento, CA Jean J. English Retired School Psychologist, Rancho PalosVerdes, CA Business Luis Corvalan President, Rigel Corporation, McLean, VA Stanley Marcus Founder, Neiman-Marcus Stores, Dallas, TX Wm. B. Wilson President, Wm. B. Wilson Companies, Midland, TX Robert K. Lester Chairman of the Board, Big Sky Western Bank,Big Sky, MTFormer Director, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Jean M. Forbath Past Chair, Orange County Human RelationsCommission, Costa Mesa, CA Marcel Groenewald President, Rochmanian David Productions,Los Angeles, CA Richard K. Lewis President, Dick Lewis Ford Sales, Vacaville,CA Clyde E. De Shields President, Smith & De Shields, Inc.,Hillsboro Beach, FL Kenneth M. Genard President, Central Utility Coal Co, St.Simons Island, GA Alfred V. Bertero President, Bertco Enterprises, Davis, CA Anton Lukas President, Inside Edge Mfg., Costa Mesa, CA Vaughn L. Carter President, Career Management Services,Lincoln, NB John Milton Shepherd President, Catawba Computers &Communications, Catawba, VA Cliff Jansen President, Able Hardwood Floors, Chino, CA Alexander Khan President, Geofon, Inc. Cypress, CA Thomas J. McCammon President, Ironworkers Local Union #627,San Diego, CA William L. Bridgford President, Bridgford Foods Corporation,Anaheim, CA Alvin Shemesh, M.D. President, Kiwanis Club of CapistranoValley, CA Steven E. Phair, CPA President, Rotary Club of Newport Beach,CA Irv Weidel President, Overseas Marketing Exchange Charles F. Bennett President, Bennett & Associates, Ojai,CA Thomas James Cleary Chief Executive Officer, T. C. Steel,Inc., Spring Valley, CA Gary Barnhill President, Barnhill & Associates, CoronaDel Mar, CA Robert B. Collette Owner, Collete's Discount Appliances,Parker, AZ Bob Collete Owner, Lakeside Air Conditioning, Parker, AZ Theodore P. Horwitz President, Price Charities, La Jolla, CA Christopher J. Boucher Chief Executive Officer, The HempsteadCo., Costa Mesa, CA D. E. Stafford President, Cultural Access Network, LagunaBeach, CA Patricia Soberanis Editor and Publisher, American VoicesMagazine, San Francisco, CA Michael Puschak Owner, Essex General Construction,Parsippany, NJ Don Coulson President, Don Coulson and Associates, NewportBeach, CA Gary L. Davidson Chairman, American Retirement Villas Corp.,Costa Mesa, CA Harrell Graham Owner, EarthSpace Enterprises, Barbara G. Sianez President, California Visitor Corporation,Folsom, CA Bill Somerville President, Philanthropic Ventures Foundation,Menlo Park, CA David Dobbins Chief Executive Officer, Genlabs, Inc. Fern Siegel President, Bnai B'rith Women of Laguna Hills, CA John and Susan Johnson Owner, Sentinel Property TaxConsultants, Chatsworth, CA Penny Fleck President, Women's Club of San Juan Capistrano,CA Don C. Stott Past President, Kiwanis Club of CapistranoValley, CA Allan S. Tingey Past President, Rotary Club ofNewport-Balboa, CA Carl T. Clement President, Clement Associates, Los Altos, CA Verne F. Potter President, Rotary Club, Laguna Niguel, CA Owen R. Dean President, Realty Investment Association ofAmerica, Fullerton, CA Mark Zane Freilich President, Interbrand, Inc., Fullerton, CA Frank P. Forbath President, Harbor Scientific, Inc., CostaMesa, CA Michael C. Coleman, Ph.D. President, Coleman FinancialServices, Huntington Beach, CA Roy O. Chesley President, Sierra Pacific Building Corp.,Burbank, CA Clarke G. Kugler, Jr. President, Kugler Surveying &Mapping, Fullerton, CA John O. Khacherian Owner, Tailor Shop, Irvine, CA Philip James Sikorski President, Sikorski ConstructionServices, Santa Ana, CA Donald E. Grady Owner, Park Central Realty & Investments,Newport Beach, CA Larry Beausoleil President, Fidelity Capital Mortgage, LosAngeles, CA Marvin H. Minor Owner, Inland Home & Office Furniture,San Bernardino, CA Ronald A. Johnson Owner, The Advisor Consulting Service,Westlake Village, CA William Ruhle President, Ruhle and Associates, Newport Beach,CA Dennis A. Bowman President, Bowman Distributing Co, Inc,Harlingen, TX Ted Charbonneau President, South Coast Investment, GardenGrove, CA Gaynor A. Peet C.E.O. Wm. A. Peet & Sons, Inc., NorthHollywood, CA Lindsay Peet President, Plumbing, Heating, CoolingContractors of Greater Los Angeles, CA Robert F. Gorgon President, Continental Paper, Union City, CA Melinda Joan McBride President, Global Hope, Hilo, HI Sheldon Rucker Owner, Santa Barbara Door & Window Works,Santa Barbara, CA Rodney D. Utt Owner, Utt Construction Co, Santa Barbara, CA Jacqueline Lowell President, Creativity Games, San Diego, CA Edware R. Possumato President/CEO, Andrex ConsultingServices, Matawan, NJ Odile Nicolette President, Nicolette Associates, HuntingtonBeach, CA Don C. Whaley President, Essex Mortgage Corp., Los Angeles,CA Laura O'Donovan Owner, REVCA Commercial Real Estate, SanFrancisco, CA Irene Koontz Founder/Director, Hearts United GrandparentsRaising Children, Buena Park, CA John C. Docter President, Big Springs Co., Denver, CO Pen Rose Baldwin Owner, Design Form, Stanton, CA Nancy F. Burkholder, E.A. Owner, Income Tax PreparationService, Huntington Beach, CA G. Frank Kimmel Owner, Kimmel Real Estate, Huntington Beach,CA John O. Guptill President, John Guptill, Inc, Yorba Linda, CA Russell O'Ja Owner, Century 21 Realty, Tustin, CA Robert P. Wardell Owner/Broker, Palos Verdes Estates, CA Richard D. Seaman President, Richard D. Seaman, Broker, SantaAna, CA Ben O. Millar Owner, Millar Properties, Bakersfield, CA Walter J. Beecher Owner/Broker, Beecher Realty, Tucson, AZ Otto Stampe President, Stampe Import Co., Orange, CA David Dobbins Ceo, Genlabs, Berkeley, CA Craig E. Grace Chairman, Grace Foundation, Inc, HaciendaHeights, CA Francis E. Trowbridge Owner, Wonderland Nursery, Riverside,CA Raymond L. Smart Smart Family Foundation, Inc. Greenwich, CT Dirk C. Eldredge President, Clines Stationers, Inc. LongBeach, CA Bob Harless Owner, Sequoia Gardening, Davis, CA W. J. Kennedy President, Kennedy Enterprises, Paramount, CA Max Hulland Hulland Chiropractic Clinc, San Juan Capistrano,CA William Hamilton Editor, Parlay International, Daly City, CA Kathryn G. Thompson Chairman/CEO Kathryn G. ThompsonConstruction Co. Jeffrey A. Brinklow Owner, A&D Printing, Quincy, CA John Terhorst Owner, A&D Printing, Quincy, CA John Harwer President, AnyBus Technology, Orange, CA Dietrich Nicholson Chairperson of the 68th Assembly DistrictCommittee of the Democratic Party - State of California Marjorie Nyland President of the Task Force DemocraticNational Committee and Member of the Democratic Club of WestOrange County - 67th Assembly District, CA Dorianne B. Garcia Chairperson, Democratic Party of OrangeCounty, CA Chauncey A. Alexander President, First Amendment Foundation,Huntington Beach, CA Judith E. Kilpatrick Owner, The Kilpatrick Co., Long Beach,CA Robert J. Kilpatrick Owner, The Kilpatrick Co., Long Beach,CA Glenn C. Griffith Owner, Organize Your Life, Santa Barbara,CA Larry Fairfield Owner, Fairfield Folk Art, La Habra, CA Seymour G. Gresser President, Systems Documentation, SilverSprings, MD Susan Droker Past President, Newport Beach Business Club,Fountain Valley, CA Charles Cirino President, Charles Cirino, Inc., Van Nuys, CA Larry De Crona President, Southern California Land Corp.,Newport Beach, CA Diane M. Martin De Crona Owner/Partner, Martin &Robinson, CPAs, Newport Beach, CA Joh B. Halverson Owner, MicroLife America Corp., Tecate, CA Bryan Bridges Director, Gun Owners Action Committee, ViceChairman - Orange County Coordinatting Republican Assembly,Huntington Beach, CA Jeanner R. McCullough Owner, Meridian Gallery, Bisbee, AZ Margaret T. Webb, Ph.D. President, Masterworks, Inc.Midlothian, VA James A. Baskin President, ABBA Computer Systems, LagunaHills, CA Zoltan A. Stacho President, Holmes & Narver, Inc.,Orange, CA Robert S. Divine Partner, O'Shea, Divine & Company, Inc.Newport Beach, CA Timothy J. O'Shea Partner, O'Shea, Divine & Company, Inc.Newport Beach, CA Richard R. Duggan Principal, Duggan and Associates, MissionViejo, CA Gary C. Gray President, Orange Coast Automobiles, Costa Mesa,CA Robert W. Ranstrom Owner, Chips R Us, Pahoa, HI Parful M. Kulkarni President, GKK Corporation, Corona DelMar, CA William R. Piercey President, Piercey Automotive, Inc. CostaMesa, CA Paul Moser Partner, Stratford Winery, St. Helena, CA Greg M. Walker President, Priority Management, La Mirada, CA Edward C. Hartman President, Edward Hartman Associates,Moraga, CA Josie Plunkett Committee Chair, California Democratic Party,67th Assembly District, Tustin, CA Norval D. Crutcher President, Rainbow Sound, Inc. LosAngeles, CA Cynthia Rose Reynolds Owner, Reynolds, and Associates, CostaMesa, CA Gary Driez, CDC President, Ignatia Group, Inc., NewportBeach, CA Lyn Harris-Hicks Business Owner, San Clemente, CA Constance D. Yambert President, CDY and Associates, Pasadena,CA Kathryn J. Cronebaugh Business Owner, San Clemente, CA Ken Waters President, Waters M&S, Martinez, CA A. D. Cannon, Jr. Owner, Cannon Co., Atlanta, GA Ted Nissen President, Behavioral System, San Clemente, CA Byron C. Craven Bank Director, First National Bank, FortSmith, AR Thomas L. Brocato President, REVCA Commercial BrokerageCorp., San Francisco, CA Madeleine Andor Chair, No To Drugs Committee, HuntingtonBeach/Fountain Valley Board of Realtors, Huntington Beach, CA Harold D. Duncan Director, J.D. Property Management, CostaMesa, CA David A. McBurney Owner, Laser Print & Graphics,Oceanside, CA William N. Byers, Jr. President, Assets, Networth, andInvestments, Los Angeles, CA Daniel Dalton President, Twin Concepts Printing, Signal Hill,CA Roland Kelly Partner, Spectrum Asset Management, NewportBeach, CA Clinton Roe Co-Owner, Mulhearn Realtors J. Robert Gilroy President, First West Capital Corp., NewportBeach, CA John F. Blokker President, Luxcom, Inc., Fremont, CA Robert Jesse Vice-President, Oracle Corporation, SanFrancisco, CA Jack P. Lauderbaugh First Vice President - Investments,Prudential Securities, San Jose, CA Jan Charles Gray Senior Vice President, General Counsel andSecretary, Ralphs Grocery Company, Los Angeles, CA Jo Ann Brissenben Manager, Committee Software, Ojai, CA Daniel Paul Plainhill Marketing Director, Rock Balloons,Hermosa Beach, CA N. Gayle Eads Director of Shops, Marriott Hotel Corp., RanchoMirage, CA Frank Fernandez CPA, Rancho Cordova, CA James L Rushing Owner, Retail Store David G. Slaton Vice-President, Sandlin Associates, Downey,CA Susan B. Karter Collette's Discount Appliances, Parker, AZ Richard B. Dickson Realtor, Newport Beach, CA Gary A. Gagnon Night Plant Superintendent, Cergro, FountainValley, CA Mark Johnson Mark A. Johnson Tribal Arts, Irvine, CA Michael Paul Bartz Executive Fellow, Air Resources Board,Sacramento, CA Steve Bergren Principal, Real Estate Strategies, Santa Clara,CA Ethel Tagister CPA, Commerce, CA Don Bradshaw Kiska Oil Company, Tulsa, OK Thomas L. Young Young Radio, Inc, Napa, CA Henri A. Jarrat Jarrat Global Enterprises, Inc., San Jose, CA Janice Neiman Real Estate Broker, Sherman Oaks, CA David T. Martyn General Manager, The Hempstead Co., CostaMesa, CA Bart Ellis, LCSW Executive Director, Re-Socialiation Skills,Inc, Santa Monica, CA Michael J. Salisbury, Sr. Administrative Staff Engineer,Xortech, Inc., Woodland Hills, CA Martin Vangerov Technical Manager, Xortech, Inc., WoodlandHills, CA Peggy Howard Vice-President, Wiseman & Burke, Inc.,Glendale, CA T. I. Ridley Consultant, Jefferson Associates Sarah James Sarah James Tax Consultants, Long Beach, CA Sandra L. Sisk Regional Manager, National ATM Systems,Anaheim, CA Margaret E. Miller Regional Manager, National ATM Systems,Anaheim, CA Madelyn Burkey-Allen Owner, Dynamics of Human Behavior, SanMateo, CA Phil Storkenburg, President Kiwanis Club of Corona Del Mar,CA Patricia Teal Teal Literary Agency, Fullerton, CA William R. Kincaid Fullerton Rotary, Fullerton, CA Steve White Operations Manager, Orange Julius, City ofIndustry, CA Ulrich E. Keller, Jr. Managing Partner, Keller, Coad, &Collins John Hakopian Portfolio Manager, Keller, Coad & Collins Dale C. Schumacher Rotary Club, Fullerton, CA Max J. Rosenberg Rearguard Productions, Inc., Los Angeles, CA Noel Santiago Manager, SLP, San Francisco, CA Russell E. Shaw The Life Project, Inc., Longmont, CO Theodore Rosenbaum Vice President, People for a NationalHealth Program Mark Jones Lt. Col. USMC (Retired), President, EffectiveManagement Specialists, Los Angeles, CA Harold D. Duncan Director, J.D. Property Management, Inc.Costa Mesa, CA Dale G. Wier Counselor, Rational Recovery, Palm Springs, CA Lisa Heinz Marino Executive Assistant, C.S. Heinz Trust,Newport Beach, CA Ron Hamady Music Publisher, The Crystal Jukebox, ThousandOaks, CA Carol H. Geujen Sales Manager, Ramada Inn, Sierra Vista, AZ S. J. Herman Valencia Shrine Club, Long Beach, CA Susan Cranson Realtor, Phoenix, AZ Michael Minky, C.P.A. Los Angeles, CA Sarah Russell Director, Sunrise Palms HOA, Palm Springs, CA Gregory J. Hammill Rotary Club, Anaheim, CA Walter J. Pray Director of Community Relations, Pioneer Bank,Fullerton, CA Nedra Lee Mading Broker, BLAOC, Orange, CA David Knoll U.S.E., Redondo Beach, CA Betty Lakin Broker Agent, Realty Executives, Redondo Beach,CA Sharon Hayes Alaska Rainbow Lodge, Ft. Worth, TX Linda O. Stay Vice President, S.P. Parks Employees FCU,Sparks, NV Leo V. Lano Realtor, Century 21 Beachside Realtors,Huntington Beach, CA Myrna L. Allen Program Chairman, RIAOC, Yorba Linda, CA K. M. Webb President, North County Financial, Fullerton, CA Julius I. Simmons Associate Director, Beechbrook Children'sServices, Pepper Pike, OH Walter Barnes Executive Director, National Association ofReal Estate Brokers, Fullerton, CA Jerry Logan VP, Business Owner, Paramount, CA Amber Ferrano Cool Marmalade Productions, Los Angeles, CA Georgia Hill Manager, Arrowhead Vet Hospital, Cedar PinesPark, CA Deborah Mytels Executive Director, Peninsula ConservationCenter, Palo Alto, CA Melvin Rhow Branch Manager, Kennebunk Savings, Rye, NH Richard Hanstine Secretary/Treasurer, Hydrocynth, Halstad, MN Charlie Krank Director of Sales and Marketing, Chaosium, Inc, Anita Anderson Vice-President, Laissez Faire Books, SanFrancisco, CA Bart Marsala Realtor, Uptown Real Estate and Investment,Whittier, CA Martin Chang Realtor, Century 21 Realty, La Puente, CA Anne M. Odgers Realtor, Century 21 Realty, Upland, CA Patricia D. Kimmel Administrator, Kimmel Financial Services,Huntington Beach, CA Samuel D. Giacoletti, Jr. Broker, RIAOC, Tustin, CA Armand M. Lopez Real Estate Broker, RIAOC, Anaheim, CA Simon C. Varghese Broker, Tiffany Mulhane Realtors, FountainValley, CA Elias D. Oviedo Realtor, Century 21, Westminster, CA Martin Sklena Real Estate Broker, RIAOC, Costa Mesa, CA Lee R. Albright Cal Verdes Inc., Rancho Palos Verdes, CA Gordon Kingston Broker/Owner, RIAOC, Huntington Beach, CA Fred I. Gibson Real Estate Broker, RIAOC, La Habra, CA Sam E. Yee Real Estate Broker, Realty Investment Associationof California, Downey, CA Philip Jay Daly Real Estate Broker, Realty InvestmentAssociation of California, Garden Grove, CA Mary Lou Mayes Owner, How-To To Go, Petaluma, CA Nancy Holling Director, International Speakers, Laguna Beach,CA Malcolm C. Patten Retired Eng. Sales, M. C. Patten & Co,Laguna Niguel, CA Cheryl Ramirez Ramirez Reporting Services, Elsinore, CA Margaret Von Biesen Assistant Manager, Co-Opportunity, SantaMonica, CA Hilda Overstreet Weiss Owner, Topanga-Valley Karate School,Topanga, CA Juanita W. Langsford Office Manager, Los Angeles UnifiedSchool District, Los Angeles, CA Florence Darnall Real Estate Broker, Cerritos, CA Nancy A. Jaffe Advertising Director, CCH Computax, Inc,Glendale, CA Richard Sollman Associate Vice President, C.B.I. Properties,Inc, Fullerton, CA Iman Assad Manager, CopyMat, Santa Ana, CA R. S. Robertson Board Member/Treasurer, Transcriptions, Inc.,Williamsburg, VA Tim Tuck Promoter, Raveyard Promotions, Berkeley, CA Ron Roth Portfolio Manager, Arrowhead Mutual Fund Mgmt., BlueJay, CA Eddy J. Secco Manager, Split Second Food Stores, El Toro, CA R. Choskins Vice-President, Atlantic Pacific AirlineAssociation, San Francisco, CA Richard D. Lott Executive Vice-President, Atlantic PacificAirline Association, San Francisco, CA David S. Burback Senior Vice President, CB Commercial,Redlands, CA Martha J. Bowman Director of Health Care Sales, RicheyEnterprises, Anaheim, CA Philip S. Braun Real Estate Broker, Westminster, CA Apryl Battin Jay Jacobs Advertising, Seattle, WA Lewis D. Lee Associate Vice-President, Dean Witter Reynolds,Bakersfield, CA Scott White Associate Vice-President, Dean Witter Reynolds,Bakersfield, CA Bulent Ezal Account Executive, Dean Witter Reynolds,Bakersfield, CA Herbert L. Nealy, Jr. Account Executive, Dean WitterReynolds, Bakersfield, CA George Rushforth Professional Engineer (Retired) Corona DelMar, CA George R. Trayer Owner, Marianne Fair Fashions, Long Beach,CA Steven L. Green, CPA Santee, CA Kathleen M. Brown Manager, Haiekulani Hotel, Honolulu, HI Marc C. De Saussure Secretary, East Bay Region, LibertarianParty, Castro Valley, CA Emily C. Furnell Escrow Officer (Retired) ValleyRidge Escrow,Chatsworth, CA Thomas V. Eaton Union Steward, National Association of LetterCarriers, Northampton, MA Mike Hufford Engineer, Lamb Recordings, Stillwater, OK Velda DeBoynton Chief Financial Officer, Soto Non-ProfitResearch -- Cedarcrest, NM Helen and Harold Tieger Members of the Democratic Club ofWest Orange County and 67th Assembly District Committee, CA Charlotte J. Cohen Teacher, and member of the Democratic Clubof West Orange County, CA Ethel Stern Editor, Dynamic Democrat Newsletter, HuntingtonBeach, CA Patricia McCabe Treasurer, Orange County Democratic CentralCommittee and Asst. Controller, Health Care Partners Med. Group.Huntington Beach, CA Louise Giacoppe Corresponding Secretary, Democratic Club ofWest Orange County; Instructor, GAIN progran, Rancho SantiagoCollege Huntington Beach, CA Yolanda B. Gutierrez Realtor, Long Beach, CA John R. Cosand President La Habra Travel Agency, La Habra, CA Stephen Robert Burrows Manager, Atlas Escrow Corporation,Anaheim, CA Pamela J. Brown, Ph.D. Economist, Northridge, CA Joyce S. Jensen Vice-President, Orla Jensen Associates, Inc.,La Habra Heights, CA John F. Swint Architect, Keystone Design Associates, Anaheim,CA Richard J. Mitchell Former Co-Chair, Central Kentucky Councilfor Peace and Justice, Lexington, KY Eleanor R. Sternberg Member, Tustin Area Republican Assembly,Tustin, CA Larry F. Sternberg Member, Tustin Area Republican Assembly,Tustin, CA John Lee Phillips Consultant, White Rose Consulting, DanaPoint, CA Shalesh R. Adhav, CPA Pocatello, FL Maxwell S. Doyle Vice-President, Retired, Bank of America,Mission Viejo, CA Anthony Almada Vice President, Mandala Ltd., Pahoa, HI Scott F. Duncan Contractor, Scott's Valley, CA Dennis Paully President, Metropolitan Van and Storage,Benicia, CA K.C. Hicks Retired Roofing Contractor, San Slemente, CA Dale De Atley Consultant, Outlook and Associates, Costa Mesa,CA Anne D. Hahn Director, Hahn Foundation, Buffalo, NY Michael S. Mills Treasurer Monterey County Central Committeeof the Peace and Freedom Party, Monterey, CA Mark Ike Vice President, Ike Properties, Costa Mesa, CA Richard A. Demmer Director, North Santa Ana Kiwanis Club,Santa Ana, CA Paul J. Riordan Lt. Governor Elect, Kiwanis Club, Santa Ana,CA Marion M. Powers Treasurer, American Association ofUniversity Women, San Clemente, CA Brian A. King President, Ethical Society of Boston, MA Arthur D. Clarke Principal, ADC & Co. InvestmentAdvisors, Boston, MA C. Roy Epps President, Civic League of Greater New Brunswick,NJ Mary S. Johnson Enrolled Agent, San Dimas, CA Marian Smithson, CPA West Covina, CA John Fulton Director, Pioneer Rail Corp. Peoria, IL Alberic de Laet Chairman of the Board, Peters, de Laet, Inc.,San Francisco, CA Anthony F. Crocker Actuary, Transamerica Life Insurance ,Glendale, CA Richard Rood Sr. Financial Analyst, ARCO, Los Angeles, CA John E. Kulli President, AltaMed Management Council,Pasadena, CA W. B. Chilcote President, Calmont Engineering and Electrical,Dana Point, CA Martin Kavanaugh Senior Partner, Heritage Financial,Saratoga, CA Greg Hetter Senior Vice President, Kidder, Peabody, Co.,Morris Township, NJ Lyman Ennis Architect, Old Pasadena Business &Professional Association, Pasadena, CA R. Stanley Anderson Agronomist, Norton AFB, CA Daniel Kemp, CPA Milwaukee, WI Robert Leavitt President, Priest Construction, Orange, CA Tom B. Miller Director, West Newport Homeowners Association,Newport Beach, CA Jeffrey Hansler President, Oxford Company, Huntington Beach,CA Jeffrey M. Lazerson Program Director, Jewish BusinessAssociation, Laguna Niguel, CA Kenneth J. Gordon Board Member, Jewish Business Association,Laguna Niguel, CA Fred Eckstein Business Appraiser, Huntington Beach, CA Stuart Friedman Owner, SLF Insurance Services, Inc., Irvine,CA Sandra B. Fine Owner, Bat Kol Services, N. Hollywood, CA Marvin Winchell President, Bat Kol Services, N. Hollywood, CA Margaret E. Goodwin Owner, Ojai House, Ojai, CA Jim Agate President, Agate Printing, Los Angeles, CA Shannon M. Brown Administrator of New Business and AnnuityProducts, Lincoln National Life Insurance Co., Costa Mesa, CA Doug Koester Environmental Health Specialist, Nome, AK Susan F. White Member, Laguna Beach Rotary Club, LagunaBeach, CA Steve Miller Supervisor, Valley Cab Co., Tarzana, CA Robert A. McGraw Principal, Robert A. McGraw Architects,Laguna Beach, CA Mitchell Halbreich Product Specialist, Lincoln Financial,Santa Ana, CA Fernando Zucca Technical Associate, Rockwell Science Center,Simi Valley, CA Frederick Vachss, Ph.D. Optical Physicist, Thousand Oaks, CA Kenneth D. Pedrotti, Ph.D. Rockwell Science Center, Moorpark,CA David Pletcher Technical Associate, Rockwell Science Center,Simi Valley, CA Bruce B. Willats, Ph.D. President, Laguna Riviera, Inc.,Laguna Beach, CA Jim Seagondollar, CPA Costa Mesa, CA William F. Juptner Owner, Juptner Associates, Laguna Beach,CA David N. Hartman Chair, International Relations Committee,Santa Ana Kiwanis Club, Santa Ana, CA Diane Martin Legal Secretary and Apartment Manager, LongBeach, CA David Millison President, Mission Investment Management, LosAngeles, CA Leslie Rabb Producer, I.R. Productions, Los Angeles, CA Michelle Rosenblatt Egg Pictures, Beverly Hills, CA Christine L. Reineke Accounting Manager, Kool ManagementServices, Irvine, CA Betty Roberts Manufacturing Engineer, Tustin, CA Bonnie Raisin Real Estate Broker, Santa Barbara, CA Joseph Cuadras Property Manager, Temecula, CA Linda Dyer Hart President, South East Charlotte PoliticalAction Committee, Charlotte, NC Sean C. Simpson Programmer/Analyst University of Californiaat San Diego Wilfred Leyland Media Director, Amherst, NY Scott R. Mills Member, Technical Staff, Hughes Space andCommunications, Torrance, CA Robert A. Monzinge Senior Scientist, Hughes Space andCommunications, Torrance, CA CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-37IA088-000636-B010-279http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/atlanta.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100718 text/html 25185HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:07:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:06 GMTContent-length: 24967 The Atlanta Resolution on drug legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate THE ATLANTA RESOLUTION We, the Mayors of the United States of America, believethat drug abuse is one of the most critical problems facing ourcities, and that it is inextricably linked to crime and violence.Cutting across all cultural, racial and economic lines, illicitdrugs impair millions of Americans. Drug use and addictioncontribute to the breakdown of our families, the abuse of adultsand children, the spread of HIV/AIDS, school dropouts and thedeclining quality of education, homelessness, urban decay, highhealth care costs, and low economic productivity that compromisesour ability to compete in the global marketplace. We must reducethe number of people who use drugs and the number of people withthe disease of addiction to significantly improve the mostpressing domestic issues we face. Drug use is a preventablebehavior and drug addiction is a treatable disease. 1. We, the nation's mayors, reject all proposals tolegalize illicit drugs. This is not the answer to the drugproblem in our cities. We reject legalization, and othersimplistic forms such as decriminalization, because it is morallyreprehensible to consider an action that would a) simultaneouslyerode our children's anti-drug attitudes of perceived risk andsocial disapproval and b) make harmful and addictive drugs farmore accessible to far more people. We support the medical use ofany drug that research proves is safe and effective underguidelines established by the Food and Drug Administration. Whilewe support attempts to reduce harm, we believe that the way todecrease such problems is to prevent drug use from starting andto help those who are already in trouble with drugs. 2. Prevention works: We have achieved real progressin decreasing drug use and in understanding what works. Since1979, dramatic increases in public attitudes of perceived riskand social disapproval toward illicit drugs produced a decline ofnearly 50 percent in the number of first-time users andnonaddicted users through all segments of the population.Throughout the nation, drug prevention efforts came together atthe community level-in families, schools, the media, lawenforcement, youth groups and workplaces-to establish nonuse asthe behavioral standard and social norm. This progress inprevention has also significantly reduced the numbor of peoplewho would have become addicted. 3. However, diminishing resources and public focusnow threaten future success. The gains so preciously earnedin anti-drug attitudes and declining use are now threatened.Since the early 1990s there has been decreased attention to thedrug issue and increased pro-drug and pro-legalization publicity.This has contributed to a reversal in the attitudes ofperceived risk and social disapproval that distinguish nonusersfrom users, and significant increases in the number ofyoung people using illicit drugs. Finally, and despiteincreasing evidence of the cost-effectiveness of drug treatment,we have made little progress in reducing the number of peoplealready addicted. This reflects a current system that can treatonly one-fifth of the estimated 6 million people in trouble withdrugs. 4. We must provide significantly greater resourcesand leadership-from governmental, corporate and nonprofit sectorsat national, state and local levels-for the demand reductionefforts of prevention, intervention, treatment and research. Effectivedrug policy requires investment in both supply and demandreduction, but our nation is not providing enough funding forprevention or treatment. These are proven, cost-effectivesolutions for reducing both drug use and addiction and theirimpact on other critical domestic problems. Initial drug use is amatter of choice, and with sufficient resources, we can influencethat choice positively. When addiction overtakes choice, we cantreat addiction for those who require it. Our focus must combineefforts to reduce both the number of people who use and thenumber of people who are addicted to illicit drugs. a) Preventing drug use by young people, and by allwho influence them, must be the cornerstone of national, stateand local drug strategies and resources if we are to build safeand healthy families and communities. We must reestablish andaffirm the individual choice to remain drug-free. We mustconsistently reinforce the message that drug use is harmful andunacceptable. This message is vital to preventing drugexperimentation and reducing drug use before it becomesaddiction. We must effectively influence the decisions our youngpeople make about illicit drugs by providing drug education athome and in school and by involving local law enforcementofficers and judges, the faith community, health careprofessionals, the media, employers, and other communityresources. Comprehensive community prevention programssignificantly reduce adolescent drug use. We support the recentlycreated National Prevention League, designed to coordinateprevention efforts and to emphasize the need for prevention asthe first priority in reducing substance abuse. b) We must make treatment more available, more effectiveand more accessible if we are to reduce the impact of drugs inour cities. Treatment is critical to reducing the socialpathology conveyed by those already addicted to drugs. Most acuteis the lack of treatment for those who are least able to functionor whose drug involvement has profound implications forthemselves, their families and society at large. People in thecriminal justice system, pregnant women and women with children,the homeless, and those infected with HlV/AlDS face intolerableshortages of treatment slots. Early intervention in the drugabuse process, aimed especially at adolescents but includingadults as well, decreases harm and increases rehabilitation. c) Law enforcement must remain a strongcomponent of, and be better linked to, demand reduction efforts. Onthe national, state and especially the local level, lawenforcement and the judicial system are critical to the successof preventing and treatingdrug abuse. We need to increasecooperation among law enforcement agencies and between lawenforcement and prevention and treatment programs within thecommunity. d) Research is critical to understanding,replicating and improving the effectiveness and cost efficiencyof demand reduction efforts. Research, not ideology, mustprovide the foundation for drug policies and practices. Moreresearch is needed to improve our understanding of the ways drugsaffect the brain and change behavior, of the reasons forreversing drug attitude and use trends, of the importance ofcommunity-based prevention programs, and of why particulartreatment approaches are more successful than others. e) Worldwide cooperation in reducing illicit drugabuse will not only help the international community, butalso will reduce the flow of drugs into our cities. Thespread of illicit drugs throughout Europe and other parts of theworld imperils our ability to reduce drug abuse in our cities. Wesupport European Cities Against Drugs, which organized last yearto fight the legalization movement abroad. Today, we announce theformation of American Cities Against Drugs to support our sisterorganization in Europe and similar organizations that may formthroughout the world. We believe that reducing drug abuse is essential to themost important things all Americans care about: our childrenand families, our safety, our neighborhoods and communities,our health, our economy, our freedom to grow and prosper and ourobligation as citizens to help each other build healthy familiesand communities. We must maintain our public will. We must elicitleadership from all segments of society, especially fromindividuals and communities. We must recognize that each of ushas a role to play in the solution and all of us have a stake inthe outcome. Drug abuse is a preventable behavior and drugaddiction is a treatable disease. We, the Mayors of the UnitedStates of America, commit ourselves to reducing drug abuse bymobilizing our citizens and concentrating our resources toprevent this behavior and treat this disease. Mayors Who Authorized NFIA to Place Their Names on TheAtlanta Resolution May 15, 1995 Mayor Bill Campbell Atlanta, Georgia Mayor Victor Ashe President, U.S. Conference of Mayors Knoxville, Tennessee Alabama Mayor Richard Arrington Birmingham Mayor Alfred Saliba Dothan Mayor Larry Langford Fairfield Mayor James Atkinson Homewood Mayor Frank Skinner Hoover Mayor Lillian Howard Hueytown Mayor Jesse M. Norwood Prichard Mayor Alvin P. DuPont Tuscaloosa Mayor Johnny Ford Tuskeegee Arizona Mayor Jay Tibshraeny Chandler Mayor Christopher J. Bavasi Flagstaff Mayor William Arnold Goodyear Mayor Ken C. Forgia Peoria Mayor Neil G. Giuliano Tempe Mayor George Miller Tuscon Mayor Marilyn R. Young Yuma Arkansas Mayor Fred B. Hanna Fayetteville Mayor Patrick Henry Mays North Little Rock California Ralph J. Appezzato Alameda Mayor Leonard K. Herendeen Antioch Mayor Barbara Loux Apple Valley Mayor Randy Bomgaars Bellflower Mayor Shirley Dean Berkeley Mayor Donald R. Burr Campbell Mayor Michael I. Mitoma Carson Mayor Jeffrey P. Bennett Corona Mayor Sid Hollins Escondido Mayor Marge Tandy Hemet Mayor Cathie Brown Livermore Mayor Elihu M. Harris Oakland Mayor Dick Lyon Oceanside Mayor William M. Paparian Pasadena Mayor Rosemary M. Corbin Richmond Mayor Ronald O. Loveridge Riverside Mayor Claire L. Mack San Mateo Mayor Harriet Miller Santa Barbara Mayor Jo Anne Darcy Santa Clarita Mayor Albert Robles South Gate Mayor Anthony John Intintoli, Jr. Vallejo Mayor Steve Herfert West Covina Colorado Mayor Wellington Webb Denver Mayor Ray Emerson Loveland Connecticut Mayor Joseph Ganim Bridgeport Mayor Paul Audley Fairfield Mayor Delores E. Hauber Groton Mayor Stephen T. Cassano Manchester Mayor Linda A. Blogoslawski New Britain Delaware Mayor James Sills Wilmington District of Columbia Mayor Marion Barry, Jr. Washington Florida Mayor Carol G. Hanson Boca Raton Mayor Roger G. Butter Cape Coral Mayor John Sommerer Coral Springs Mayor Thomas Lynch Delray Beach Mayor Jim Naugle Fort Lauderdale Mayor Raul I. Martinez Hialeah Mayor Mara Giulianti Hollywood Mayor John F. Festa Key Bescayne Mayor Arthur J. Bross Margate Mayor Joe Mullins Melbourne Mayor Vicki Coceano Miramar Mayor Frank R. Satchel, Jr. Mulberry Acting Mayor Gerald K. Ergle Ocala Mayor Glenda Hood Orlando Mayor Girard L. Clemons, Jr Panama City Mayor John R. Fogg Pensacola Mayor Cecil W. Bradbury Pinellas Park Mayor Robert E. Minsky Port St. Lucie Mayor David Fischer St. Petersberg Mayor Norman Abramowitz Tamarac Mayor Thomas R. Mariani Titusville Georgia Mayor Paul A. Keenan Albany Mayor Patsy Jo Hilliard East Point Mayor David L. Carter Macon Illinois Mayor Robert W. Towse Alton Mayor Thomas G. Shaughnessy Berwyn Mayor Jesse R. Smart Bloomington Mayor Roger C. Claar Bolingbrook Mayor Richard M. Daily Chicago Mayor Greg Sparrow DeKalb Mayor Gordon D. Bush East St. Louis Mayor Richard C. Weis Freeport Mayor Ronald L. Selph Granite City Mayor Raymond J. Geraci Highland Park Mayor Michael J. O'Malley Hoffman Estates Mayor Arthur Schultz Joliet Mayor Donald E. Green Kankakee Mayor Stanley F. Leach Moline Mayor Rita L. Mullins Palatine Idaho Mayor Linda Milam Idaho Falls Indiana Mayor Robert A. Pastrick East Chicago Mayor Thoams V. Barnes Gary Mayor Stephen Goldsmith Indianapolis Mayor Douglas B. England New Albany Mayor Roebrt E. Williams Shelbyville Iowa Mayor Ed Stachovic Cedar Falls Mayor Tom Hanafan Council Bluffs Mayor Robert E. Scott Sioux City Kansas Mayor Edith L. Stunkel Manhattan Kentucky Mayor Johnny D. Webb Bowling Green Mayor Denny Bowman Covington Deputy Mayor William Summers Louisville Louisiana Mayor Edward G. Randolph, Jr. Alexandria Mayor Barry P. Bonvillain Houma Mayor Aaron F. Broussard Kenner Mayor Kenny Bowen Lafayette Mayor Robert E. Powell Monroe Mayor Cliff Aucoin New Iberia Mayor Marc Morial New Orleans Mayor Robert W. 'Bo' Williams Shreveport Maine Mayor William D. Burney, Jr. Augusta Mayor Richard W. Paulson, Jr. Portland Maryland W. Edward Bohrer, Jr. Gaithersburg Massassachusetts Mayor Charles Lyons Arlington Mayor Harold E. Tobey Barnstable Donna R. Kalikow Chairwoman of the Board of Selectmen Brookline Mayor John R. Mitchell Fall River Mayor Jeffrey A. Bean Fitchburg Mayor James A. Rurak Haverhill Mayor Patrick J. McManus Lynn Mayor Thomas B. Concannon, Jr. Newton Mayor Robert T. Markel Springfield Mayor Raymond Mariano Worcester Michigan Mayor Michael J. Buda Bay City Mayor Dennis W. Archer Detroit Mayor Ed Annen, Jr. Kalamazoo Mayor Billie M. Ireland Rochester Hills Mayor Beverly McAnally Romulus Mayor Jeanne M. Stine Troy Mayor Ronald L. Bonkowski Warren Minnesota Mayor Gary L. Doty Duluth Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton Minneapolis Mayor Chuck Winkelman St. Cloud Mississippi Mayor C. C. 'Frank' Self Greenville Mayor Ken Combs Gulfport Mayor J. Ed Morgan Hattiesburg Mayor Kane Ditto Jackson Mayor John Robert Smith Meridian Missouri Mayor Duane Schreimann Jefferson City Mayor Emanuel Cleaver II Kansas City Mayor Robert L. Moeller Saint Charles Mayor Larry R. Stobbs St. Joseph Mayor Freeman Bosley, Jr. St. Louis Mayor Janet Majerus University City Montana Mayor Gayle Morris Great Falls Nevada Mayor Jan Laverty Jones Las Vegas New Jersey Mayor Leonard P. Kiczek Bayonne Mayor James T. Dowden Bridgewater Mayor Arnold Webster Camden Mayor Cardell Cooper East Orange Mayor Georga A. Spadoro Edison Mayor Sandra L. Love Gloucester Township Mayor John. K. Rafferty Hamilton Mayor Timothy C. McDonough Hope Mayor Douglas H. Palmer Trenton Mayor Joseph E. Romano Vineland New York Mayor Richard A. Bucci Binghamton Mayor Sandra L. Frankel Brighton Mayor Anthony Masiello Buffalo Mayor Richard A. Kimball, Jr. Jamestown Mayor Rudolph Giuliani New York City Mayor Bill Johnson Rochester Mayor Joseph A. Griffo Rome Mayor Frank J. Duci Schenectady Mayor Louis D. La Polla Utica North Carolina Mayor Russell M. Martin Asheville Mayor Richard Vinroot Charlotte Mayor James B. Garland Gastonia Mayor Carolyn S. Allen Greensboro Mayor Rebecca R. Smothers High Point Mayor M.C. (Joe) Choate Jacksonville North Dakota Mayor Bruce W. Furness Fargo Ohio Mayor Donald L. Plusquallic Akron Mayor Jimmy Dimora Bedford Heights Mayor Richard D. Watkins Canton Mayor Greg Lashutka Colombus Mayor Richard P. Hartmann Kettering Mayor Thomas L. Kruse Marysville Mayor Edward J. Boyle North Olmsted Oklahoma Mayor Ronald J. Norick Oklahoma City Mayor M. Susan Savage Tulsa Oregon Mayor Alice L. Schlenker Lake Oswego Pennsylvania Mayor William B. Heydt Allentown Mayor Kenneth R. Smith Bethlehem Mayor Barbara Bohannan-Sheppard Chester City Mayor Joyce A. Savocchio Erie Mayor Stephen R. Reed Harrisburg Mayor Jack Salarrione Norristown Deputy Mayor John Wilder Puerto Rico Mayor Melania Bobe Acevedo Hormigueros Mayor Julio Cesar Lopez Gerona Humacao Rhode Island Mayor Rolland R. Grant East Providence Mayor G. Richard Fossa North Providence Mayor Vincent A. Cianci, Jr. Providence South Carolina Mayor Bob Coble Columbia Mayor W. D. Workman, III Greenville Mayor Cheryll N. Woods-Flowers Mount Pleasant Mayor James Talley Spartanburg Tennessee Mayor Gene Roberts Chattanooga Mayor Donald W. Trotter Clarksville Mayor Tom Rowland Cleveland Mayor Willie Herenton Memphis Mayor Phil Bredesen Nashville Texas Mayor Richard E. Greene Arlington Mayor Richard D. Hurt Bedford Mayor Henry Gonzalez Brownsville Mayor Larry J. Ringer College Station Mayor Mary Rhodes Corpus Christi Mayor Ed Purcell Duncanville Mayor Larry Francis El Paso Mayor James B. Ratliff Garland Mayor Bob Lanier Houston Mayor Bobbie J. Mitchell Lewisville Mayor Cathye Ray Mesquite Mayor James N. Muns Piano Mayor Nelson W. Wolff San Antonio Mayor Kathy M. Morris San Marcos Mayor Charles T. Doyle Texas City Mayor Smith P. Reynolds, Jr. Tyler Mayor Ted B. Reed Victoria Mayor Robert Sheehy, Jr. Waco Utah Mayor Deedee Corradini Salt Lake City Vermont Mayor Clavelle Burlington Virginia Mayor William E. Ward Chesapeake Mayor James S. Whitaker Lynchburg Mayor Paul D. Fraim Norfolk Mayor Gloria O. Webb Portsmouth Mayor Leonidas B. Young, II Richmond Mayor David A. Bowers Roanoke Mayor Meyera E. Oberndorf Virginia Beach Washington Mayor Jack Geraghty Spokane Wisconsin Mayor Richard T. De Broux Appleton Mayor Timothy T. Seider Greenfield Mayor Patrick L. Zielke La Crosse Mayor James Smith Racine CNNI Mayor Jesus Sablan Diguerrero Saipan Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-38IA087-000632-B023-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/psycviol.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122094105 text/html 43460HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:40:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:29 GMTContent-length: 43242 Psychoactive Substances and Violence Psychoactive Substances and Violence by Jeffrey A. Roth Series: Research in Brief, US Dept. of Justice Published: February 1994 19 pages Issues and Findings Discussed in the Research in Brief: The current status ofresearch on the links connecting violence to alcohol and illegalpsychoactive drugs, and evaluations of interventions to preventviolence related to these substances. Key issues: Correlations between violence and psychoactivesubstances; the social, economic, cultural, psycho-social,neurobehavioral, and other factors that explain the correlations;and prevention strategies for reducing the violence associatedwith these substances. Key findings: Research has uncovered strong correlations between violence and psycho-active substances, including alcohol and illegal drugs, but the underlying relationships differ by type of drug. The links between violence and psychoactive substances involve broad social and economic forces, the settings in which people obtain and consume the substances, and biological processes that underlie all human behavior. These factors interact in chains of events that may extend back from an intermediate triggering event such as an argument to long-term predisposing processes that begin in childhood. Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. After large doses of amphetamines, cocaine, LSD, and PCP, certain individuals may experience violent outbursts, probably because of preexisting psychosis. Research is needed on the pharmacological effects of crack, which enters the brain more directly than cocaine used in other forms. Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. The most promising strategies for reducing alcohol-related violence are to reduce underage drinking through substance abuse preventive education, taxes, law enforcement, and peer pressure. Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. The most promising strategy for reducing violence related to illegal drugs appears to be reducing the demand that fuels violent illegal markets. Promising tactics include preventive education, pretrial monitoring of arrestees through urinalysis and, for convicted violent offenders, in-prison therapeutic communities integrated with postrelease treatment followup. In the future, medications may reduce violence by reducing cocaine craving and by blocking the aggression-promoting effects of opiate withdrawal and alcohol consumption. Target audience: State and local policymakers, courtadministrators, law enforcement and juvenile justicepractitioners, and drug treatment program staff. As noted by the Panel on the Understanding and Control ofViolent Behavior, the character of violence presents simultaneouschallenges to understanding and opportunities for prevention.First, violence is diverse. Acts as different as spontaneousdrive-by shootings and met-iculously planned serial killings, forexample, are both included in the legal and statistical categoryof murder. Second, the causes of violence are complex, involvinga very wide variety of factors. The panel found it useful toclassify these factors in terms of four levels of analysis atwhich they are usually studied: Broad social and economic forces (macrosocial). Encounters between people in particular settings (microsocial). Individual behavioral development from childhood through adulthood (psychosocial). Neurobehavioral and other biological processes that underlie all human behavior (neurobehavioral). Factors at these four levels operate and interact in chainsof events that may begin long before the violent event thatresults. Therefore, the panel's classification framework alsocategorized causal factors in terms of their temporal proximityto the violent event itself: from the immediate triggeringmechanism (for example, a response to an insult), back throughthe situation that led up to the triggering event, topredisposing factors that months or years earlier increased therisk of a future violent event. This diversity and complexity might at first glance seem todiscourage efforts to prevent violence. In fact, however, theycreate promising opportunities. Merely acknowledging thediversity breaks the overall "violence problem" intoseparate problems that may be preventable through interventionsby different public agencies. Recognizing the causal complexityexpands the list of options for preventing a particular violenceproblem by highlighting all the points at which chains of eventsleading to it may be breakable. Problem-solvinginitiatives--programs that involve design and evaluation ofpreventive interventions at various links in these chains ofevents, that revise these interventions in light of theevaluation findings, and that replicate the evaluations--have thepotential to simultaneously reduce violence and increase theunderstanding of its causes. Many chains of causal events for violence include links toalcohol or to illegal psychoactive drugs. The panel found theselinks worth exploring in depth for at least three reasons. First,statistics consistently demonstrate correlations between violentevents and involvement with alcohol and other psychoactive drugs.Second, the variety of potential causal links between violenceand different psychoactive substances--alcohol, opiates, cocainein smokable and powdered form, amphetamines, hallucinogens, andother illegal drugs--presents an especially rich example of thepanel's classification framework. Third, preliminary evidencefrom research and evaluations suggests that certain interventionsrelated to psychoactive substances should be considered indeveloping strategies for controlling violence. Correlations between violence and psychoactive substances Research supported by the National Institute of Justice andother organizations has repeatedly found strong correlationsbetween violence and psychoactive substances: For at least the last several decades, alcohol drinking--by the perpetrator of a crime, the victim, or both--has immediately preceded at least half of all violent events, including murders, in the samples studied by researchers. Chronic drinkers are more likely than other people to have histories of violent behavior. Criminals who use illegal drugs1 commit robberies and assaults more frequently than do nonuser criminals, and they commit them especially frequently during periods of heavy drug use. In a study of New York City murders in 1988, researchers classified more than half the homicides (53 percent) as drug-related: 39 percent in the course of drug distribution, 8 percent through pharmacological effects on the offender, 2 percent while the offender was obtaining money to buy drugs, and 4 percent through more than one of these links.2 Data from the National Institute of Justice Drug UseForecasting (DUF) program, which tests for drug use among bookedarrestees in 24 sites nationwide, showed the following patternsin 1989: Most males and females who were interviewed after arrest for a violent crime reported drinking alcohol within 72 hours before the crime for which they were arrested. About 60 percent of arrestees booked for violent crimes were confirmed by laboratory test to have used at least one illegal drug3 in the hours before arrest. Explaining the correlations While these statistical patterns strongly suggest thatpsychoactive substances play significant roles in acts ofviolence, they do not explain the nature of those relationships.In trying to sort out links between violence and psychoactivesubstances, the panel categorized potential links in terms of thefour levels noted above: o Social and economic forces (macrosocial): Processes that affect large social units such as nations orcommunities. Examples include cultural practices related toalcohol use and, in the United States, economic and socialprocesses surrounding the illegal markets in which psychoactivedrugs other than alcohol are sold. o Encounters between people (microsocial): Characteristics of encounters between people. Examplesinclude group drinking in settings where violence is expected andsocially acceptable; arguments that are begun or aggravatedbecause the participants are under the influence of drugs oralcohol; and disputes involving organizations, buyers, andsellers in illegal drug markets. o Psychosocial: Influences on individuals' behavior patterns, which begindeveloping in early childhood and continue to evolve throughoutadulthood. Examples include patterns of heavy drinking andaggression that develop during adolescence and psychoses thatpredispose a few individuals toward violent psychotic episodeswhile under the influence of certain drugs. o Neurobehavioral: Processes in the brain that underlie all human behavior andthat may be altered by pharmacological effects of alcohol andother drugs. Examples include effects of substance abuse duringpregnancy on fetal development, effects of chronic substanceabuse on brain functioning, and temporary neurological effects ofbeing "high" or "blue." These and other examples of links at all four levels betweenviolence and alcohol or other drugs are displayed in table 1.Much of the evidence for specific links is suggestive rather thanconclusive. One challenge in understanding and verifying thelinks is the complexity of interactions among factors atdifferent levels. It would be difficult at best to sort out suchinteractions. What makes the challenge even greater is that moststudies measure factors at only one or two levels at a time, sothat the full range of interactions is rarely observed in asingle study. In addition, it is difficult to study violentevents using methods that yield generalizable conclusions.Controlled experiments under laboratory conditions produce thestrongest confirmation of factors that influence behavior, butpractical and ethical constraints generally limit those methodsto studies of behaviors that are far milder than the potentiallylethal violence that occurs in homes and communities. At present,therefore, there are only fragments of scientific evidenceproviding partial support for the existence of many causal linksbetween psychoactive substances and violence. These findingsneither explain definitively how the links interact nor provide abasis for ranking them in order of importance in explainingvariation in violence related to alcohol or other drugs. Neurobehavioral explanations Research on humans and many animal species suggests there areseveral neurobehavioral links between violence and psychoactivesubstances: Expectant mothers' use of psychoactive substances during pregnancy adversely affects fetal development. The resultant damage causes learning and communication problems that, in turn, increase the risk of early grade school failure, a well-documented precursor of violent behavior. Alcohol is the only psychoactive drug that in many individuals tends to increase aggressive behavior temporarily while it is taking effect. However, factors at other levels--behavior patterns when people are not drinking, the setting in which people drink, and local drinking customs, for example--influence the strength of this relationship. Among alcohol abusers, those who also abuse other psychoactive substances, who are diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, and whose parents have been diagnosed as alcohol abusers are at especially high risk of chronic violent behavior. Some researchers have suggested that a genetic process may contribute to this relatively rare pattern. Marijuana and opiates temporarily inhibit violent behavior, but withdrawal from opiate addiction tends to exaggerate both aggressive and defensive responses to provocations. Individual humans and animals deviate widely from these"average" behaviors. For example, theaggression-promoting effects of alcohol are strongest in animalshaving high blood levels of testosterone, the principal malehormone that distinguishes males from females; humans may or maynot exhibit the same pattern. A study of violent Finnish alcoholabusers suggests that the alcohol-violence link may be associatedwith abnormally low levels of blood sugar (that is, hypoglycemia)and of metabolites of the brain chemical serotonin. Another studysuggests that the alcohol-violence link is especially strong inpeople who exhibit certain abnormal brain wave patterns, both atrest and while responding to outside stresses. Common Assumptions Called Into Question On the other hand, several common assumptions aboutconnections between drugs and violence are called into questionby research findings: There is no evidence to support the claim that snorting or injecting cocaine stimulates violent behavior. However, research is urgently needed on the behavioral effects of smoking cocaine in crack form, which affects the brain more directly. Anecdotal reports notwithstanding, no research evidence supports the notion that becoming high on hallucinogens, amphetamines, or PCP stimulates violent behavior in any systematic manner. The anecdotes usually describe chronic users with histories of psychosis or antisocial behavior, which may or may not be related to their chronic use of drugs. Occasional anecdotes about " 'roid rages"--violent outbursts by men who use anabolic steroids to accelerate muscle growth--appear to describe isolated coincidences rather than any common, systematic effect. Psychosocial links Evidence from research on animals and humans indicates thatpatterns of substance abuse and aggressive behavior reinforceeach other. It cannot be said that one "causes" theother. For example, alcohol may trigger violent episodes inaggressive animals and people, but rarely in submissive ones. Patterns of aggressive behavior and substance abuse oftenbecome intertwined starting in childhood. Early childhoodaggression is a predictor of later heavy drinking, and thecombination is associated with an above-average risk of adultviolent behavior, especially among those who also abuse otherpsychoactive drugs. Research suggests at least four possible explanations for thelink between substance abuse and violent behavior in adolescents.First, adolescents may chronically use psychoactive substances tohelp them temporarily escape from such feelings as rage, guilt,worthlessness, or depression--emotions that often precedeaggressive behavior. Second, repeated family arguments overteenage substance abuse may eventually take on a violentcharacter. Next, underlying family problems or socially expectedresponses may lead some adolescent males to patterns of heavydrinking and fighting as ways to demonstrate their masculinity.Last, boys who regularly observe older males fighting whiledrinking may learn to expect that violent behavior accompaniesalcohol use. All of these processes may be at work, but theirroles, interactions, and importance as explanations have not yetbeen sorted out. Preexisting psychosis appears to account for occasionalviolent outbursts by people who are under the influence ofamphetamines or hallucinogens, especially PCP. While these drugsare well known to cause disorganized, bizarre behavior, theytrigger violence in very few people who are not also psychotic.In studies of laboratory mice and monkeys, bizarre behavior onthe part of animals under the influence of PCP fairly commonlyprovokes violent attacks by others in the group. Anecdotalinformation and newspaper accounts report similar attacks onhumans using alcohol, amphetamines, powdered cocaine, or LSD, butthis relationship has not been systematically studied in humans. Encounters between people In a variety of ways, alcohol and drugs modify encountersbetween people in ways that make these substances greater hazardsfor violence. In the case of alcohol, these hazards tend to berelated to use, while for illegal psychoactive drugs they tend tobe related to distribution and purchase. Alcohol use and sexual violence. Some therapists who treatviolent sex offenders have reported that their patients tend tohave both histories of alcohol abuse and high blood levels oftestosterone. Without comparisons to men who are not violent sexoffenders, these clinical observations cannot demonstrate thatalcohol abuse or high testosterone levels cause sexual violence.Studies of many animal species suggest a causal connection--thatalcohol reduces testosterone levels but has strongeraggression-promoting effects in individual high-testosteroneanimals. However, that relationship has not yet been tested inhumans. The frequent involvement of alcohol in acquaintance rapessuggests that social expectations may also be at work; that is,young men who expect to have sex after drinking may try tosatisfy their expectations, sometimes forcibly if they encounterresistance. Illegal drug markets. Illegal drug markets operate outsidethe world of contract law, courts and mediators for resolvingdisputes, and business customs that distinguish sociallyacceptable from unac- ceptable approaches to buying and selling.Illegal markets often develop substitute mechanisms that involvethe threat or actual use of violence. Examples include: Violence by drug distributors in the course of territorial disputes between rival organizations, threats of violence to make "staff" obey organizational rules, violent punishment of rulebreakers to keep the threats credible, battles with police, and protection of sellers or drugs on the street. Violence between buyer and seller during a drug transaction, caused, for example, by attempted robbery of one or the other, failure to hand over drugs or money, or "honest" misunderstandings of local rules of the game on the part of buyers and sellers. Violence involving people other than buyers and sellers who are found around drug markets--third parties such as innocent bystanders and people operating in related illegal markets for "protection," guns, or prostitution. As places where violence tends to occur for the reasonslisted above, illegal drug markets may also serve as"magnets." As such, they attract valuable drugs andcash, weapons, and people who are accustomed to violence. The mixof these ingredients creates hazardous conditions for robberiesand other forms of violence that may not be directly related todrugs. Obtaining drug purchase money. In some settings, the need formoney to buy drugs also increases the chance of a violentencounter. A taxi driver carrying a passenger late at night, forexample, is presumably at greater risk of being robbed if thepassenger wants to buy drugs but lacks the cash to do so. Whilerobbery is still a common way to obtain money to buy drugs, ithas been replaced by drug selling in some large cities. Using alcohol and drugs. If alcohol caused violence only bymaking individuals behave more aggressively, violence would beequally common in all places where drinking occurs. In fact,however, most drinking places are rarely scenes of violence. Afew acquire reputations as "animal houses" or"fighting bars," where people expect drinking andviolence to go hand in hand. Just what characteristics of a drinking place make it ahazard for violence are not precisely known, but there issupporting evidence for several possible explanations. People whodrink in fighting bars may behave violently in order to "fitin" or to advance socially. People who experience anger orfrustration may seek out such settings, because they believe thatdrinking in these types of establishments means social permissionto engage in violent behavior. One study of a group of young menwho were observed during an evening of drinking illustrates thisby suggesting that behavior patterns and situational influencesmay play off each other. As the evening progressed, the groupbegan both to behave more aggressively and to move on toestablishments where aggressive behavior was more sociallyacceptable. Connections between drinking and violence have beenidentified by researchers in many countries with predominantlyEuropean cultures. But they have not been found in many tribaland folk societies, even where binge drinking is common. Forreasons not yet known, expectations that violence followsdrinking have failed to develop in those cultures. Finally, it seems likely that substance abuse is indirectlyrelated to violence in ways that are difficult to identify andcount. Examples of indirect relationships include robberiescommitted to replace household money spent on drugs or alcohol,or spouse assaults arising from disputes over money or time spentaway from home drinking or taking drugs. Violence is related to the distribution, purchase, and use ofillegal drugs or alcohol in a wide variety of human interactions.Unfortunately, the difficulty of counting such interactions makesit also difficult to rank them in order of importance. Bettercounts would help in focusing violence prevention strategies onthe most common interactions in which drug- and alcohol-relatedviolence occurs. Social and economic forces If the patterns of behavior discussed above were the onlylinks between illegal drug distribution and violence, every citythat experienced a crack epidemic in the 1980's would also haveseen a substantial increase in homicide at the same time. Indeed,policymakers have occasionally claimed a "uniform, straightline relationship" between illegal drug use and murder.4 The reality is more complex. The murder rate increased 350percent in Washington, D.C., and by a smaller amount in New YorkCity as their crack epidemics unfolded. However, during the crackepidemics in Detroit and Los Angeles these cities experienceddecreases in the murder rate. This suggests that therelationships between illegal drug market activity and lethalviolence are intertwined with social and economic processes inthe surrounding community. What are these processes? Because causal patterns at thesocial level are especially difficult to establish, the answersare necessarily speculative. Fragments of evidence suggest thatsome or all of the following factors may influence therelationship between levels of violence and illegal drug marketactivity: Stability of drug market control: Situations that produce violent encounters--fights over territorial allocations or misunderstandings between buyers and sellers, for example--arose relatively infrequently in markets controlled by old, stable organizations that had developed operating rules decades ago and enforced them through a standing threat to punish violators violently. Where the spread of crack manufacturing technology encouraged new organizations to enter the markets, the resulting destabilization may temporarily have increased the frequency of violent encounters. Community access to legitimate economic opportunities: Where the rise of crack markets followed the exodus of legitimate economic opportunities from central cities, economic rewards shifted away from skills valued by legitimate employers to those valued by crack distribution organizations; these included the ability to threaten and use violence. Strength of informal violence controls: Where the exodus of legitimate economic opportunities from urban communities took with it many people committed to legal, nonviolent values, those people were no longer available for roles in preventing drug-related violence. They were not available, for example, as nonviolent role models for adolescents, as passers-by who might discourage drug buyers or intervene in emerging violent events, or as concerned individuals who might inform parents if their children began drifting toward involvement in drug markets. Social status and moral authority: During crack epidemics in some communities, successful young drug entrepreneurs either supplanted or intimidated neighborhood "old heads"--unofficial community leaders who upheld traditional values and had exercised moral authority in the neighborhood. Where this occurred, it tended to weaken cultural restraints against violence in all contexts, including drug markets. Because such relationships are difficult to verify, evidencesupporting their influence is only suggestive and fragmentary,and new research is needed to explore them more fully. Preventive interventions A number of intervention strategies for preventing violencerelated to psychoactive substances have been proposed: Police disruption of illegal drug markets. Selectively longer incarceration of violent drug-using criminals. Reducing teenagers' access to alcohol. Substance abuse prevention. Drug abuse treatment. Pharmacological therapies to reduce drug craving and aggressive tendencies associated with alcohol use and heroin addiction. Some of these strategies have been evaluated to test theireffectiveness in reducing violence. Only a few have demonstratedsuccess under any conditions; none have shown universaleffectiveness. Developing better interventions will requirecollaborative problem-solving initiatives that involverepresentatives of criminal justice agencies, providers ofsubstance abuse treatment and other social services, andevaluation researchers. These initiatives are needed to turnpromising ideas into workable programs, to evaluate the programs,and to refine them in light of the evaluation results. Thefindings of evaluations conducted thus far are summarized in thefollowing sections. Disrupting illegal drug markets. Policeattack illegal drug markets through a number of tactics:undercover investigations leading to dealers' arrests;cooperation with community antidrug efforts; and large-scale,high-visibility crackdowns. Evaluations of these tactics inBirmingham, Alabama; Lawrence and Lynn, Massachusetts; New YorkCity; Oakland, California; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; andWashington, D.C., present a mixed picture. Perhaps the strongestsupportable statement is that their chance of success is improvedby intervening early in emerging markets, by creating a highlycommitted police force, and by generating community receptivityand cooperation in advance. NIJ's Drug Market Analysis (DMA)program is helping with the first prerequisite--early detectionof drug markets. Specific techniques for creating supportiveclimates in police departments and the surrounding communitiesare less well understood, although many approaches are now beingtested as part of community policing initiatives. Incarcerating violent drug-using criminals. Researchershave generally found that compared to other violent offenders,those who use drugs tend to have higher average frequencies ofviolent crimes such as robbery and assault. This finding raisesthe possibility that sentencing drug-involved offenders who areconvicted of these crimes to longer prison terms might reduceviolence. However, analyses suggest that this strategy of"selective incapacitation" would reduce violent crimelevels very little unless it were accompanied by massiveincreases in prison populations. A related strategy--monitoring pretrial releasees'drug use through urinalysis--showed rather surprisingeffects in a Washington, D.C., evaluation. Although positive drugtest results did not predict significantly higher pretrialrearrest rates, failure to show up for the test was a strongpredictor of subsequent new crimes leading to rearrest. Reducing teenagers' access to alcohol.Evidence is fairly clear that increases in tax rates and othermeasures that reduce the availability of alcohol to adolescents(social pressure and enforcement of underage drinking laws) inturn reduce drinking and certain associated problems such asdeath rates due to auto collisions. Therefore, these strategiesmay also reduce adolescents' disproportionate share of violence.That conjecture remains to be tested, however. Substance abuse prevention. By reducing thedemand that fuels violent, illegal drug markets, substance abuseprevention should, in theory, reduce violence levels. Manysubstance abuse prevention programs have been evaluated,including the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE), whichbrings police officers into classrooms as instructors.Evaluations of prevention programs have generally found themeffective in delaying the onset of tobacco, alcohol, andmarijuana use. Evaluations have not generally found thateducation succeeds in preventing use of "harder" drugs,perhaps because use of those drugs was rare even in the controlgroups that did not receive preventive education. However, to theextent that minor drugs are "stepping stones" to theharder ones,5 the programs may have meaningful, yet delayed,effects for violence reduction. Prevention may have an especially importantrole to play for one category of adolescents--males whosebehavior meets diagnostic criteria for antisocial personalitydisorder and whose parents abuse alcohol. Research indicates thatthese two factors, coupled with both alcohol and drug abuse,create a high-risk profile for violent behavior in adulthood. Drug abuse treatment. Successful drugtreatment programs reduce criminal activity among adult clients.For drug abusers who are not in prison, stays of at least 3months in therapeutic communities reduce the tendency to commitcrime after discharge. Up to about 18 months, longer stays in thetherapeutic community produce greater reductions. For drug abusers in prison, treatment usually involves onlyindividual or group sessions a few times a week with nopostrelease followup. Evaluations of this approach have not foundit sufficient to reduce criminal behavior following release.However, a more intensive approach--combining inprisontherapeutic communities, planning for postrelease treatment, andpostrelease treatment in the community--reduces overall rearrestrates of inmates who complete the program. At least threeprograms have used this approach: Stay 'n Out (in a New Yorkprison), Cornerstone (in the Oregon State Hospital), and theCalifornia Civil Addict Program. In addition to these beneficial effects of drug treatment onoffenders' behavior, successful treatment may reduce aggregatelevels of violence related to drug markets by lowering the demandthat fuels the markets. Such an effect would, however, bedifficult to measure. Pharmacological interventions. Like otherforms of drug treatment, pharmacological therapies that reducedrug craving may also lower the demand that supports violent drugmarkets. For decades, methadone and related chemicals have beenused to reduce craving for heroin. There is no analogue tomethadone for treating addiction to cocaine in powdered orsmokable form. However, using animals as test subjects,researchers have identified the receptors for certain subtypes oftwo brain chemicals, dopamine and norepinephrine, as promisingsites to begin developing such medications. Animal research alsosuggests neurochemical starting points for developing medicationsthat reduce violence in other ways: by disrupting theaggression-promoting effects of alcohol and by preventingaggression during withdrawal from heroin addiction. Conclusion Too few of the links between violence and psychoactivesubstances have been established with enough certainty toadvocate a comprehensive national policy for preventing violencerelated to those substances. Instead, a program of testing andevaluating tactics for implementing a variety of promisingstrategies is called for. Among these strategies, criminaljustice agencies have particular roles in developing and testingtactics to disrupt illegal drug markets, in monitoring drug useof pretrial releasees, in establishing drug abuse treatment forconvicted criminals, and in creating effective substance abuseprevention programs. Fulfilling these roles will requirecooperation between the criminal justice system and drugtreatment, prevention, and education authorities. Eventually,efforts to prevent drug-related violence may be assisted bypharmacological therapies to reduce the aggression-promotingeffects of alcohol and the craving for other psychoactive drugs. Notes 1. Among studies of this relationship, many group all illegaldrugs together. Those that distinguish among drugs usually listcocaine, heroin, amphetamines, barbiturates, and hallucinogensother than marijuana. See, for example, Elliott, D.S., and D.Huizinga, The Relationship Between Delinquent Behavior and ADM[Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health] Problems, National YouthSurvey Report No. 26. Boulder, Colorado: Behavioral ResearchInstitute, 1984. 2. Goldstein, P.J., H.H. Brownstein, P.J. Ryan, and P.A.Bellucci, "Crack and Homicide in New York City, 1988: AConceptually Based Event Analysis," Contemporary DrugProblems 16 (Winter 1989):651--687. 3. The DUF program uses urinalysis to confirm self-reports.The urine specimens are tested for cocaine, opiates, marijuana,PCP, methadone, benzodiazepine (Valium), methaqualone,propoxyphene (Darvon), barbiturates, and amphetamines. Samplesare collected at the time of arrest on a voluntary basis; anaverage of 80 percent of arrestees voluntarily cooperate. Testcriteria are set to detect use of most drugs in the preceding 24to 48 hours, but marijuana and PCP can be detected in the urineseveral weeks after use. 4. Isikoff, M., and K. Sawyer, "Thornburgh Says All DrugAbusers Fuel Nation's Crisis," Washington Post, August 17,1990. 5. Until recently, research on developmental pathwaysconsistently found these drugs to be "gateways" or"stepping stones" to cocaine use. Preliminary findings,presented after the Panel completed its report, suggest thatsince the New York City "crack epidemic" of the early1980's, crack-using youth in increasing numbers are skipping thegateway drugs and starting directly with crack. Author's Biography Dr. Jeffrey A. Roth served as study director for the Panel onthe Under-standing and Control of Violent Behavior. Currently heis research director in the Bethesda, Maryland, office of the Lawand Public Policy area of Abt Associates, Inc. Sidebar 1 Panel on the Understanding and Control of Violent Behavior Violence is universally recognized as a pervasive part ofcontemporary American society and of our Nation's past as well.Many of the attempts to understand the phenomenon have been madein response to specific situations, such as the lawlessness ofthe Prohibition era, the assassination of President John F.Kennedy, and the urban riots of the mid-1960's. Other attempts atunderstanding violence singled out particular causes foranalysis. In none of these studies, however, was the full body ofresearch on violence reviewed comprehensively, and none of themtook an interdisciplinary approach. The Panel on the Understanding and Control of ViolentBehavior was set up to meet the need for a more comprehensiveassessment of what is known about violent behavior. It wasestablished in response to a request made by three Federalagencies: the National Science Foundation (NSF), the NationalInstitute of Justice (NIJ), and the Centers for Disease Controland Prevention (CDC). NSF asked for a review of current knowledgeabout the causes of violent behavior and recommendations forfuture research. The other two agencies shared these goals, buttheir areas of interest reflected their particular missions. Asthe research arm of the U.S. Department of Justice, NIJ wanted tofind out about means to prevent and control violent crime. TheCDC wanted assistance in setting priorities for preventinginjuries and deaths caused by violence. Created in 1989, the panel reviewed research on"interpersonal violence"--events involving at most afew perpetrators and victims. This limitation excluded suicideand self-mutilation as well as large-scale collective and Stateviolence. The focus was on describing, understanding, andcontrolling violence in the United States. Research inbiomedical, psychological, and other social sciences wasreviewed. The work of the panel was intended both to help guidefuture research and evaluation projects aimed at prevention andcontrol and to suggest strategic directions for violence controlpolicy. The findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the panelwere published in Volume 1 of Understanding and PreventingViolence, published by the National Academy Press. Three volumesof background papers commissioned by the panel are forthcoming.The panel concluded that numerous, often interacting factors giverise to violent events. Although the underlying interactions arenot well understood, attention to the factors suggests manypromising preventive interventions. Testing and evaluating theseinterventions creates opportunities to prevent particular typesof violence while gaining better understanding of them. The panelmade recommendations in a number of areas, among them developmentof problem-solving initiatives to control and understandviolence; better statistical systems for measuring violence; anda program of research to identify underlying causes. ThisResearch in Brief is one of a series that summarizes the panel'sfindings. NIJ is committed to implementing the recommendations of thepanel. Its commitment has begun through support for the Programon Human Development and Criminal Behavior, a longitudinal,multicommunity research project that is exploring the factorsassociated with violence. In addition, the panel'srecommendations have helped shape the goals of NIJ research andevaluation activities and its long-range plans for research. Copies of Understanding and Preventing Violence are availablefrom the National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue N.W.,Washington, DC 20418 (800-624-6242). . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-39IA087-000632-B018-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/cureport.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092313 text/html 1801HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:23:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:50 GMTContent-length: 1584 The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of Consumer ReportsMagazine, 1972 The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs isperhaps the best book ever written on the subject of drug policy.The authors did five years of research in preparation to writingit and the facts they found are absolutely fascinating,regardless of what you may believe about drugs or drug policy. If you have not read the full text, you should go to thelibrary immediately and read it. It is a fascinating book and iscertain to change many of your opinions. This book is a copyrighted work and we have not yet obtainedpermission to put it on the net. However, we will include achapter-by-chapter synopsis of the major points. We will alsopost information where you can buy a copy of the full text. Readthis book! Orderthe Consumers Union Report CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-40IA031-000652-B040-106http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/savings.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130211 text/html 3608HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:02:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:20 GMTContent-length: 3391 Federal Financial Analysis of the Legalization of Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Federal Financial Analysis of Legalization of Drugs This Federal financial analysis of legalization comes fromTheodore R. Vallance, Former chief of the Planning Branch of theNational Institutes of Mental Health. His main professionaleffort for many years was directed at just this sort of analysis.The analysis was published in the 7-10-95 issue of NationalReview. Reductions (in millions of $)     From      To        Saving  DirectLaw Enforcement                   13,203    3,300      9,903*Interdiction costs                2,200        0      2,200*International anti-drug             768      384        384*OCDETF (Organized Crime & Drug      399       40        359          Enforcement Task Force)            ONDCP (the "drug czar")               69       17         52IndirectVictims of Crime                     842      210        632Incarceration                      4,434      887      3,547Crime careers                     13,976    2,679     11,297                                                    ________Subtotal                                              28,374Less increase in prevention research and service      (3,572)Less increase in treatment research and service       (2,802)                                                    ________Subtotal                                              22,000Plus net income from drug taxes                       15,000                                                    ________Total                                                 37,000*1993 Figures. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT01-B33-41IA086-000615-B002-30http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/basicfax.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024456 text/html 46075HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:44:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:43:13 GMTContent-length: 45857 Basic Facts About the War on Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Basic Facts About the War on Drugs by Clifford A. Schaffer A summary of the basic facts about drugs and the drugwar. 1. Why were the laws against drugs passed in thefirst place? 2. How many people use drugs in the UnitedStates? 3. How many people are actually killed by drugs? 4. Which drug causes the greatest burden on ourmedical facilities? 5. Which drugs are the most addictive? 6. Do illegal drugs cause violent crime? 7. Can we win the war on drugs this way? 8. How many millions of people will have to goto prison? 9. What does it cost to put a single drug dealerin jail? 10. What does this drug policy do to the blackcommunity? 11. How does our policy compare with thepolicies of other countries? 12. Do the illegal drugs have any legitimateuses? 13. Does marijuana lead to harder drugs? 14. What should we do about drugs? Charts and Graphs on Drug War Statistics 15. How dangerous is marijuana, really? 16. Would "legalization" cost morethan it saves? 17. How Many People are currently in prison,and what are they in for? 1. Why were the laws against drugs passed in thefirst place? The first American anti-drug law was an 1875 San Franciscoordinance which outlawed the smoking of opium in opium dens. Itwas passed because of the fear that Chinese men were luring whitewomen to their "ruin" in opium dens. "Ruin"was defined as associating with Chinese men. It was followed byother similar laws, including Federal laws in which traffickingin opium was forbidden to anyone of Chinese origin, andrestrictions on the importation of smoking opium. The laws didnot have anything really to do with the importation of opium as adrug, because the importation and use of opium in other forms --such as in the common medication laudunum -- were not affected.The laws were directed at smoking opium because it was perceivedthat the smoking of opium was a peculiarly Chinese custom. Inshort, it was a way of legally targeting the Chinese. Cocaine was outlawed because of fears that superhuman"Negro Cocaine Fiends" or "CocainizedNiggers" (actual terms used by newspapers in the early1900's) take large amounts of cocaine which would make them go ona violent sexual rampage and rape white women. There is littleevidence that any black men actually did this, if only because itwould have been certain death. The United States set a record in1905 with 105 recorded lynchings of black men. At the same time,police nationwide switched from .32 caliber pistols to .38caliber pistols because it was believed that the superhuman"Negro Cocaine Fiend" could not be killed with thesmaller gun. Dr. Hamilton Wright is sometimes referred to as the"Father of American Drug Laws". Dr. Wright was theOpium Commissioner at the time and had previously become famousbecause he had "scientifically proved" that beri-beriwas a communicable disease. Beri-beri is a vitamin deficiency. The Harrison Act which "outlawed" these drugs was,on its face, a simple licensing law which simply required sellersto get a license if they were going to handle the opiates andcocaine. As the Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugshas said, it is doubtful that very many members of Congress wouldhave thought that they were passing what would later be regardedas a general drug prohibition. The law even contained a provisionthat nothing in the law would prohibit doctors from prescribingthese drugs in the legitimate practice of medicine. In fact, even the people who wrote the Harrison Act and theMarijuana Tax Act in 1937 agreed that a general prohibition onwhat people could put into their own bodies was plainly anunconstitutional infringement on personal liberties. Forcomparison, see the history of the constitutional amendment whichwas required to prohibit alcohol. There is no fundamental reasonwhy a constitutional amendment should be required to prohibit onechemical and not another. The trick was that the bureaucrats who were authorized toissue licenses never did so, and there was a heavy penalty fornot having the license. This heavy penalty required that theenforcing bureaucrats needed more staff and, therefore, morepower, which, in turn required tougher laws. Over the years,through a series of court rulings, they gradually got the courtsto change what had been well-established constitutional law.Specifically, they got the courts to accept the notion that itreally was a tax violation when people got arrested for drugs,and that the fact that the government would not issue anylicenses was not a defense. They also got the courts to bypassthe old issue of whether the Federal Government had the right tocontrol what an individual puts into their own bodies by creatingthe fiction that whatever the person puts into their bodies musthave come as a result of some form of interstate commerce, whichis regulated by the Federal Government in the form of taxes andlicenses and, therefore, since the Federal Government is allowedto levy a tax it is -- by rather indirect logic -- allowed toregulate what anyone may put into their own bodies. Marijuana was outlawed in 1937 as a repressive measure againstMexican workers who crossed the border seeking jobs during theDepression. The specific reason given for the outlawing of thehemp plant was its supposed violent "effect on thedegenerate races." (Testimony of Bureau of NarcoticsCommissioner Harry J. Anslinger, in testimony before Congress inhearings on the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937). The American MedicalAssociation specifically testified that they were opposed to thelaw. When the supporters of the law were asked about the AMA'sview on the law on the floor of Congress, they lied and said thatthe AMA was in favor of the law because they knew the law wouldnever pass without the AMA's endorsement. The law passed, and theAMA later protested, but the law was never repealed. In both cases, newspapers across the country carried luridstories of the awful things that these drugs did to racialminorities, and of the horrors that people of racial minoritiesinflicted on innocent white people while they were under theinfluence of these drugs. Later research has shown that not asingle one of the stories used to promote these laws could besubstantiated. There never was any scholarly evidence that the laws werenecessary, or even beneficial, to public health and safety andnone was presented when the laws were passed. Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs, by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors ofConsumer Reports, 1972 The American Disease, The Origins of Narcotics Control,by Dr. David F. Musto, 1973 The Report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1973 The History of the Drug Laws,a short speech by Professor Charles Whitebread, of USC LawSchool. Guinness Book of World Records (information onlynching) "Cocaine Fiends: New Southern Menace," New YorkTimes, February 18, 1914 2. How many people use drugs in the UnitedStates? This is a difficult question to answer with any certainty. The Federal Government's Household Survey on Drug Abuse,conducted annually, is the most commonly cited set of statisticson the prevalence of drug use. According to the latest surveys,cited by the DEA themselves, there are about 12.7 million peoplewho have used some illegal drug in the last month and perhaps 30to 40 million who have used some illegal drug within the lastyear. Of the 12.7 million who used illegal drugs in the lastmonth, about 10 million are presumed to be casual drug users, andabout 2.7 million are addicts. But there are a number of problems with these figures. Thesurvey is conducted by calling people on the telephone at randomand asking them about their use of illegal drugs. Some of theproblems with this technique are: It only reaches people who have a telephone. If the effects of drugs are as bad as some people claim, it seems only reasonable that a lot of addicts would no longer have a telephone. It only reaches people who answered the telephone. There are many groups of people who would not necessarily answer the phone, including addicts who are out looking for drugs, as well as business people out for a two-martini lunch. The survey crew calls people they don't know and asks them if anyone in their household has committed a felony (used drugs) recently. In a time of increasing penalties for drug use, and increasing publicity about those penalties, it seems only logical that most people would not answer this question entirely honestly, particularly if they were currently using drugs and, therefore, were acutely aware of the penalties. Rather than a measure of the number of people who use drugs, the Household Survey may be a better measure of the number of people stupid enough to answer the question. Other surveys put the number of drug users at levels that areperhaps twice as high as the figures produced by the HouseholdSurvey on Drug Abuse. The very disparity of the estimates ofvarious surveys points to one of the problems caused by a generaldrug prohibition. Because these drugs are illegal, it isdifficult to get accurate information about their use. The source for the number of drug users comes from, amongother sources, the Household Survey on Drug Abuse, a Federalsurvey, available through any of the sources listed here. Thecosts to imprison them are based upon figures published by theDepartment of Justice, available through the sources mentionedhere. 3. How many people are actually killed by drugs? The number of drug deaths in the US in a typical year is asfollows: Tobacco kills about 390,000. Alcohol kills about 80,000. Sidestream smoke from tobacco kills about 50,000. Cocaine kills about 2,200. Heroin kills about 2,000. Aspirin kills about 2,000. Marijuana kills 0. There has never been a recorded death due to marijuana at any time in US history. All illegal drugs combined kill about 4,500 people per year, or about one percent of the number killed by alcohol and tobacco. Tobacco kills more people each year than all of the people killed by all of the illegal drugs in the last century. Source: NIDA Research Monographs 4. Which drug causes the greatest burden on ourmedical facilities? Alcohol and tobacco are the clear leaders. Some authoritieshave estimated that up to forty percent of all hospital care inthe United States is for conditions related to alcohol. As a medical hazard, few drugs can compete with alcohol ortobacco on any scale. A study at Rockefeller University in 1967concluded that "Tobacco is unquestionably more hazardous tothe health than heroin." 5. Which drugs are the most addictive? This is a difficult question to answer because it depends upona lot of factors in both the drug and the person who uses it. Inan attempt to define clearly what is meant by addiction, andwhich drugs are the most addictive, Dr. Jack E. Henningfield ofthe National Institute on Drug Abuse and Dr. Neal L. Benowitz ofthe University of California at San Francisco ranked sixpsychoactive substances on five criteria. Withdrawal -- The severity of withdrawal symptoms produced by stopping the use of the drug. Reinforcement -- The drug's tendency to induce users to take it again and again. Tolerance -- The user's need to have ever-increasing doses to get the same effect. Dependence -- The difficulty in quitting, or staying off the drug, the number of users who eventually become dependent Intoxication -- The degree of intoxication produced by the drug in typical use. The tables listed below show the rankings given for each ofthe drugs. Overall, their evaluations for the drugs are veryconsistent. It is notable that marijuana ranks below caffeine inmost addictive criteria, while alcohol and tobacco are near thetop of the scale in many areas. The rating scale is from 1 to 6. 1 denotes the drug with thestrongest addictive tendencies, while 6 denotes the drug with theleast addictive tendencies. HENNINGFIELD RATINGS Substance   Withdrawal   Reinforcement   Tolerance   Dependence  Intoxication Nicotine         3             4             2           1            5       Heroin           2             2             1           2            2       Cocaine          4             1             4           3            3       Alcohol          1             3             3           4            1       Caffeine         5             6             5           5            6       Marijuana        6             5             6           6            4       BENOWITZ RATINGS Substance   Withdrawal   Reinforcement   Tolerance   Dependence  Intoxication Nicotine        3*             4             4           1            6       Heroin           2             2             2           2            2       Cocaine         3*             1             1           3            3       Alcohol          1             3             4           4            1       Caffeine         4             5             3           5            5       Marijuana        5             6             5           6            4       *equal ratings 6. Do illegal drugs cause violent crime? Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. After large doses of amphetamines, cocaine, LSD, and PCP, certain individuals may experience violent outbursts, probably because of preexisting psychosis. Research is needed on the pharmacological effects of crack, which enters the brain more directly than cocaine used in other forms. Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. . . . Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. Psychoactive Substances andViolence, by Jeffrey A. Roth, Department of JusticeSeries: Research in Brief, Published: February 1994 All major authorities agree that the vast majority ofdrug-related violent crime is caused by the prohibition againstdrugs, rather than the drugs themselves. This was the samesituation which was true during alcohol Prohibition. AlcoholProhibition gave rise to a violent criminal organization. Violentcrime dropped 65 percent in the year Prohibition was repealed. There are about 25,000 homicides in the United States eachyear. A study of 414 homicides in New York City at the height ofthe crack epidemic showed that only three murders, less than onepercent, could be attributed to the behavioral effects of cocaineor crack. Of these, two were victim-precipitated. For example,one homicide victim tried to rape someone who was high on crackand got killed in the process. 7. Can we win the war on drugs this way? We could win the war on drugs if we could be successful in atleast one of three areas: We could stop drug production in other countries. On December 28, 1992 ABC Television aired a major special onthe drug war in Bolivia which, according to the BushAdministration, is our "best hope" for winning the drugwar in South America. They concluded decisively that there was nohope and that the war on drug production has already been lost. By the US Federal Government's own estimates, the entireUnited States consumption of illegal drugs could be supplied byapproximately one percent of the worldwide drug crop. In theirbest year, US Drug Enforcement Agents working together withforeign governments seized about one percent of the worldwidedrug crop, leaving 99 percent free to supply the US. The USGovernment also states that, in the unlikely event that drugproduction was stopped in South America, several countries wouldsuffer a major economic collapse. There is no credible evidence anywhere to suggest that thereis any possibility that drug production can be eliminated inother countries. "Peter Jennings Reporting: The Cocaine War, Lost inBolivia," ABC News, December 28, 1993 US Department of State, Bureau of International NarcoticsMatters, International Narcotics Control Strategy Report(INCSR) (Washington: US Department of State, April, 1993 We could stop drugs at the border. No. Any examination of the statistics regarding borderinterdiction shows quite clearly that border interdiction is anexpensive failure. In 1990, the General Accounting Officecompleted a major study on border interdiction. They reportedthat border interdiction was a waste of money and that noconceivable increase in funding or effort would make it anybetter. In 1988, Stirling Johson, the Federal prosecutor for New York,stated that the police would have to increase drug seizures by atleast 1,400 percent to have any impact at all on the drug market,assuming there were no corresponding increases in production.That was before the police busted twenty tons of cocaine in asingle location and had to revise all their estimates of thecocaine market upward. The best Federal Government evidence has concluded that thereis no way to stop, or even greatly reduce, either production ofdrugs in foreign countries or the smuggling of drugs into the US. There is no credible evidence anywhere that we could stop, oreven greatly reduce, the flow of drugs across our borders. Infact, all of the Federal Government's own evidence shows thatthis is impossible and it is a waste of money to try. Sealing the Borders: The Effects of Increased MilitaryParticipation in Drug Interdiction, Peter Reuter, The RandCorporation, Santa Monica, CA, 1988 "Drug Control: Impact of the Department of Defense'sDetection and Monitoring on Cocaine Flows," GeneralAccounting Office, September 19, 1991 We could stop the sale of drugs within the UnitedStates, The first question to address is how many drug dealers arethere? Under the law, all drug users are drug dealers because thelaws in most states state that any distribution of illegal drugsis considered a sale, regardless of whether there is a profit ormonetary interest involved. Therefore, under the law, anyone whoever passed a joint to the next person at a rock concert is a"drug dealer". If we use the strict legal definition ofa "dealer" then there are somewhere between 12 and 40million drug dealers in the United States. We might use a more restricted definition and assume that wewill imprison only the drug dealers who distribute drugs on aregular basis. Research has long established that most drug salesare between friends who have known each other for a long time.Still, under this tighter definition, most drug users would beclassed as "drug dealers" and we are left with the sameproblem of potentially incarcerating tens of millions ofAmericans. No. Most of the prisons and jails in the United States arealready far in excess of their planned capacity and correctionalinstitutions in 24 states are under Federal court order torelease prisoners. Arresting all of the drug dealers wouldrequire construction of at least five new prison beds for everyone which now exists, assuming that no new drug dealers camealong to fill the gap. In September, 1992 Sheriff Sherman Block announced that hewould release 4,000 prisoners, about twenty percent of the totalLos Angeles County jail population, because there was no room tokeep them and no more tax dollars to build more jails. For everyperson who goes to jail from now on, another one will bereleased. Tough drug laws have done all they can do and they havenot solved the problem. The "get-tough" policy is over. There is no credible evidence anywhere that we could stop, oreven greatly reduce, the sale of drugs within the United States.In fact, all of the Federal Government's own evidence shows thatthis is impossible and not only is it a waste of money to try,but it actually does more harm than if we did nothing at all. Many sources, including the list of major studies and SterlingJohnson, Federal Prosecutor for the District of New York, intestimony before the House Select Committee on Narcotics and DrugAbuse, September, 1988. 8. How many millions of people will have to goto prison? There are currently about 1.5 million people in state andFederal prisons and jails throughout the United States. At thecurrent time, at least 24 states are under Federal court ordersto relieve prison overcrowding. The following chart shows the growth of the US prisonpopulation since 1960. The US prison population was relativelystable from about 1926, when figures were first compiled, through1970. After this point, the effects of Nixon's war against drugs,and later the Reagan and Bush war against drugs, produced adramatic increase in the number of prisoners. There are an estimated thirty to forty million people who haveused illegal drugs in the last year. If we imprisoned all ofthem, we would have to build a prison large enough to hold thecombined populations of California, Arizona, and New Mexico. Thetotal cost to imprison them for five years, including the costsof arrest and prosecution would be roughly ten to fifteentrillion dollars, or about ten times the total Federal annualbudget. This does not include the related costs to society whichwould be caused by the imprisonment of millions of gainfullyemployed, tax-paying citizens. There doesn't seem to be any clear answer to this question. Ihave asked public officials of all kinds, including lawenforcement officers, elected officials and all three of the USFederal Drug Czars. To date, the only person who has ever repliedwith an actual numerical estimate is Michael Levine, one of theDEA's former top agents. He estimated that the optimum number ofdrug offenders to put in prison would be about 2.7 million -- inaddition to the people who are currently in prison. Hisassumption, he said, was that we would put all of the addicts inprison, and he estimated the number of addicts at about 2.7million, based on other government figures. Mr. Levine's planwould require that, for every prison cell which now exists, wewould have to build three more just like it. He did not say whathe would do about the fact that even this plan would leave tensof millions of recreational drug users free to continue theirdrug use with little fear of prosecution. 9. What does it cost to put a single drug dealerin jail? The cost to put a single drug dealer in jail is about$450,000, composed of the following: The cost for arrest and conviction is about $150,000. The cost for an additional prison bed is about $50,000 to$150,000, depending upon the jurisdiction. It costs about $30,000 per year to house a prisoner. With anaverage sentence of 5 years, that adds up to another $150,000. The same $450,000 can provide treatment or education for about200 people. In addition, putting a person in prison producesabout fifteen dollars in related welfare costs, for every dollarspent on incarceration. Every dollar spent on treatment andeducation saves about five dollars in related welfare costs. 10. What does this drug policy do to the blackcommunity? At the present time, one-fourth of all of the young black menin America are either in prison or on parole. Most of them werearrested on non-violent drug charges. In Washington, DC, the Bush administration's"demonstration" city, half of all of the black men inthe city are currently in jail or on parole. More than ninetypercent have arrest records. The same is true of inner city blackmen in Baltimore, New York, New Jersey, and Florida. Two-thirds of all of today's black male high school studentswill be dead, disabled, or in prison before their thirtiethbirthday. The majority will go to prison because of non-violentdrug charges. For every black man who goes to college, three willgo to prison. By the year 2000, about half of all black men in America willhave gone to prison. Most of them will go to prison fornon-violent drug charges. Most of those who go to prison will bereleased into society again. Because they are black men with aprison record, they will be permanently unemployable. "The Prevalence of Imprisonment," US Department ofJustice, 1980, and The Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics. "Incarceration of Minorities," The SentencingProject, Washington, DC, 1992 Employment Problems of Released Prisoners, Department ofJustice, Bureau of Prisons, 1992 11. How does our policy compare with thepolicies of other countries? Europe is beginning to form uniform drug laws as a result ofEuropean unification. Europe is decriminalizing drugs along thelines of the programs used in England and the Netherlands. Mostof the countries have already approved the Frankfort Accord,which adopts decriminalization as the primary approach to drugs. Let's compare the results of two roughly comparable majorcities which both have a drug problem. The cities are New York,and Liverpool, England. In New York, heroin and cocaine addicts suffer from tremendous medical problems. In Liverpool, England, most heroin and cocaine addicts suffer few medical problems. In New York, most drug addicts are unemployed criminals. In Liverpool, most drug addicts are gainfully employed taxpayers. In New York, crime committed by drug addicts is a major problem. In Liverpool, it is a very minor problem. In New York, drug addicts often have their children taken away and live under miserable conditions. In Liverpool, most addicts live with their families in stable homes and manage to raise healthy, well-adjusted children. In New York, thousands of babies are permanently damaged every year by their mother's drug use. In Liverpool, health authorities report no cases of harm to infants as a result of their mother's drug use. In New York, sixty percent of all intravenous drug users are infected with AIDS, and they are a major cause of the spread of AIDS. In Liverpool, only one percent of the intravenous drug users are infected with AIDS and they are a very minor source of infection for the rest of the population. In the United States, drug use is illegal and the police hunt down drug users to throw them in prison. Four thousand people died from illegal drugs in the US last year and we now have more than 600,000 people in prison on drug charges. In Liverpool, England, the police do not arrest drug users any more. Instead, health care workers seek them out and encourage them to come in for counseling and medical treatment. Both counseling and medical treatment are provided on demand. The medical treatment often includes maintenance doses of narcotics under the management of a physician. Liverpool, England, has adopted the same approach as theNetherlands and has had substantially the same results. They bothchose decriminalizatiion. Many sources, including "Rx Drugs" Sixty Minutes,December 27, 1992. For additional information and resources on the situation inEurope, see DrugText 12. Do the illegal drugs have any legitimateuses? Heroin is a powerful pain-killer and could be used to controlextreme chronic pain or the pain of severe diseases, such ascancer. The medical literature shows that heroin is significantlyless hazardous than most of the drugs which are given in itsplace. Cocaine is used as a topical anesthetic in medicine. There are about 50,000 products which can be made from themarijuana (hemp) plant. It has been used since the dawn ofhistory for the widest variety of uses. These uses includefibers, fuels, materials, and medicine. The first American lawsregarding marijuana were passed in the 1700's and requiredfarmers to grow hemp (marijuana) because of its tremendouscommercial value for dozens of uses. It was grown throughout theUnited States as a commercial product well into the 1940's. Itwas made illegal in 1937 largely as a result of pressure from oiland chemical companies who feared the competition from marijuana.Despite the laws, during World War II marijuana was considered sovital to the national interest that the US Government exemptedfarmers from military duty if they grew marijuana. Local 4-Hclubs were encouraged to have their members grow marijuana andthe US Government produced a film called "Hemp forVictory"' Marijuana produces fibers which are ideal for ropes, cloth,paper, and dozens of other products. The fiber is unusuallystrong, soft, absorbent and cheap to produce. If we grewmarijuana solely for paper production, we could completelyeliminate cutting forests for paper. Marijuana produces eightytimes as much usable fiber per acre as a comparable stand offorest. Marijuana can produce several different kinds of fuel. In the1800's and 1900's hempseed oil was the primary source of fuel inthe United States and was commonly used for lamps and other oilenergy needs. The diesel engine was originally designed to run onmarijuana oil because Rudolf Diesel assumed that it would be themost common fuel. Mairjuana is also the most efficient plant forthe production of methanol. It is estimated that, in one form oranother, marijuana grown in the United States could provide up toninety percent of the nation's entire energy needs. Marijuana is useful for a wide variety of medical problemsand, according the the Drug Enforcement Administration's ChiefAdministrative Law Judge, "marijuana is probably the safesttherapeutically active substance known to man," and "itis safer than many of the foods we commonly eat." Marijuanais often the most effective treatment for chronic pain, glaucoma,nausea from chemotherapy, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and othermedical conditions. Marijuana can also be used to restore the life of depletedfarmland. It grows quite readily under even extreme conditionsand actually replenishes and extends the life of the soil inwhich it is grown. Depleted soil is now becoming a major problemin some of our most productive agricultural farmlands, such asthe Central Valley of California. For much of this farmland,marijuana could be the cheapest and most effective remedy. 13. Does marijuana lead to harder drugs? There is no evidence that smoking marijuana leads to the useof harder drugs. In the first place, it is chemically illogicalthat the consumption of any drug could give someone the cravingfor another drug they have never had. When the Marihuana Tax Act was first passed in 1937, HarryAnslinger, then head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics testifiedbefore Congress and was asked specifically if there was anyassociation between the use of marijuana and the use of harderdrugs. He replied specifically that there was no such connectionand that the users of the different types of drugs commonly didnot associate with each other. This myth arose in the 1950's when it became apparent that theold motives for the law against marijuana would no longer beviable. It was then that Anslinger contradicted his earliertestimony and started saying that marijuana led to harder drugs.This change occurred most prominently in the hearings for theBoggs Act of 1951, after a series of doctors had just destroyedeverything Harry Anslinger had said about marijuana in 1937. For Harry Anslinger's testimony, see the hearings for the Marihuana Tax Act. For a short discussion of the origins of the"gateway" myth and how it arose at the hearings for theBoggs Act see The History of theDrug Laws, a short speech by Professor Charles Whitebread, ofUSC Law School. For a more complete discussion of some of these issues, pleasesee The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effectby John P. Morgan, M.D. and Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. 14. What should we do about drugs? The overwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence on drugpolicy supports decriminalization. Every major study of drugpolicy in history has recommended a non-criminal approach. Thisis irrefutable. I recommend that you start with: The Consumers Union Report onLicit and Illicit Drugs, published by the Editors of ConsumerReports Magazine. 15. How dangerous is marijuana, really? Not very. The DEA's own Chief Administrative Law Judge, afterlistening to the evidence for two years concluded that marijuanain its natural form is safer than many of the foods we commonlyeat. More detailed information can be found in the followinglinks: Report of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. This is thelargest study of drugs and drug policy ever conducted by the USFederal Government. It contains detailed information on allaspects of the medical effects of marijuana. DEADocket No. 86-22, Sept. 6, 1988, ANSWERS TO FREQUENTLY ASKEDQUESTIONS ABOUT MARIJUANA USE This is an excellent summary of many of the questionsregarding marijuana. It is very well-documented. Contributed byChristopher Reeve. PHARMACOLOGY OFMARIJUANA: JUST ANOTHER SEDATIVE by Frederick H. Meyers,M.D., Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, SanFrancisco, Ca. A Review of theScientific Literature Re Amotivational Syndrome This is an excellent synopsis of the information regarding the"amotivational syndrome" and marijuana. Complete withcitations for further reference. Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. 16. Would "legalization" costmore than it saves? No. The best analysis done to date by any Federal officialshows that "legalization" of the now illegal drugswould result in a net $37 Billion annual savings. This estimateis considered conservative. That is, it is likely that thesavings would be more. Federal Financial Analysis ofLegalization of Drugs This Federal financial analysis of legalization comes fromTheodore R. Vallance, Former chief of the Planning Branch of theNational Institutes of Mental Health. His main professionaleffort for many years was directed at just this sort of analysis.The analysis was published in the 7-10-95 issue of NationalReview. Reductions (in millions of $)           From            To              Saving  DirectLaw Enforcement                        13,203          3,300           9,903*Interdiction costs                     2,200           0               2,200*International anti-drug                768             384             384*OCDETF (Organized Crime & Drug         399             40              359          Enforcement Task Force)ONDCP (the "drug czar")                  69              17              52 IndirectVictims of Crime                        842             210             632Incarceration                           4,434           887             3,547Crime careers                           13,976          2,679           11,297                                                                        ________Subtotal                                                                28,374Less increase in prevention research and service                        (3,572)Less increase in treatment research and service                         (2,802)                                                                        ________Subtotal                                                                22,000Plus net income from drug taxes                                         15,000                                                                        ________Total                                                                   37,000                                                                        *1993 Figures. 17. How many are in prison and what arethey in for? How many are in prison? The Department of Justice announced that there are now 1.5million people in prisons across the United States? Who are they? What are they in for? TYPE OF OFFENSE (Sentenced Pop. Only) - FederalPrisoners Drug Offenses 59.6% Robbery 9.8% Property Offenses 5.5% Extortion, Fraud, Bribery 6.8% Violent Offenses 2.7% Firearms, Explosives, Arson 8.6% White Collar 1.0% Immigration 2.8% Courts or Corrections 0.8% National Security 0.1% Continuing Criminal Enterprise 0.8% Miscellaneous 1.5% Federal Bureauof Prisons Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B33-42IA030-000641-B027-208http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/NONMED.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122141334 text/html 5933HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:13:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:16 GMTContent-length: 5716 Canadian Government Commission - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Le Dain Commission Report The Report of the Canadian GovernmentCommission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs This report, the largest study ever conducted by theGovernment of Canada, is coming soon to these pages. CONTENTS Chapter 1 - THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2 - THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Alcohol Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines LSD Cannabis Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Volatile Solvents References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3 - THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USEIN CANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4 - SOME CAUSES OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5 - PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6 - THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among Canadian HighSchool and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and Other Drugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND 'TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT01-B33-43IA030-000641-B028-24http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nylawyer/iif1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141513 text/html 17403HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:14:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:44:29 GMTContent-length: 17185 Costs of Prohibition - Threatens Public Health Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | AWiser Course, Ending Drug Prohibition Part II Continued The Costs of Prohibition Prohibition Threatens Public Health Spread of Disease Sharing Needles Because the possession of hypodermic needles isgenerally illegal, users of injectable drugs routinely shareneedles and syringes with one another, often in "shootinggalleries" where dozens of addicts may line up to use asingle needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilizedbetween uses. This sharing of needles has become a major source of transmission ofblood-borne diseases such as acquired immune deficiency syndrome("AIDS") and hepatitis. According to a recent nationalreview, "more than 33% of newAIDS cases occur among injecting drug users or people havingsexual contact with them." In New York State, the majorityof new AIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users ofinjectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers forDisease Control and the New York State Department of Health haveestimated that more than 75% ofpediatric AIDS cases are children whose mothers eitherinjected drugs or were the sexual partners of persons whoinjected drugs. The data suggest, at the very least, that sterilehypodermic needles should be readily and freely available to drugusers. So long as drug use remains unlawful, however, free needle distribution is notlikely to attract a substantial portion of the user population.In response, some courts havecircumscribed laws dealing with the unlawful possession ofhypodermic needles by applying defenses of medical necessity. Trading Sex for Drugs Because illicit drugs are expensive, manyaddicts turn to prostitutionto make money to support their habits, or exchange sexualservices directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts often do notprotect themselves from contracting sexuallytransmitted diseases carried by their customers, and theypass such diseases on to other customers, their lovers, and theirchildren. The crack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed forthe recently noted resurgence of syphilis and other sexuallytransmitted diseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for DiseaseControl placed the blame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: People---especially women---have high-risk sex and practice prostitution to support their habits. And it is occurring in a relatively poor population where people have a lot of things that prevent their access to treatment. Therefore, they stay infected longer and are more likely to pass their infections on to others. [133]. Fewer addicts would be forced to resort to prostitution if thecurrent prohibitions against drugs were lifted. Neglect of Health Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtainingand using drugs, and the debilitating effects of some of thedrugs themselves, many addicts are in very poor health. Malnutrition is a frequent problemand, in turn, contributes to many others. Addicts' poor healthmakes them especially susceptible to diseases ranging from scurvyand shingles to tuberculosis and the flu. Addicts are also morelikely to contract communicable diseases and therefore morelikely to spread them. The interrelated urban problems ofhomelessness and illegal drug abuse have contributed to thedevelopment of multi-drug-resistantstrains of diseases such as tuberculosis, which was oncethought to be on the verge of eradication. These more virulentdiseases know few geographical limitations and pose risks to thegeneral population. Avoidance of the Health-Care System Individuals who use illegal drugs often put offaddressing their health problems for fear of prosecution or otheradverse consequences (e.g.,rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). This reluctance to seek medicalcare is compounded by the fact that many drug addicts have noprivate physicians and rely instead on public hospitals orclinics for any care they might get. Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drugabusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and whentheir need for care is acute, which is also when care is mostcostly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natalcare, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight andother medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seekingtreatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in theemergency room and the intensivecare ward. Mothers and pregnant women face the additional and justifiablefear that any detectable drug use may be reported as a possibleindication of child abuse or neglect. In many large cityhospitals, the urine of newborn babies is tested for prohibiteddrugs, and mothers whose babies test positive for pre-natalexposure are reported to the child abuse authorities. Untilrecently, in New York City, such babies were routinely kept fromtheir mothers pending investigations that often lasted manymonths, interfering with normal bonding and necessarily adverselyaffecting the infant's development and relationship with theparent. Moreover, these women have, in some jurisdictions, been prosecuted for pre-partum distributionof prohibited drugs. In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who becomeinfected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughoutsociety, particularly to the sexual partners and children ofinfected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are morelikely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglecttheir children after they are born, or to have their children placed in foster care. Lack of Information and Quality Control Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, andDrugs of Unknown Potency Because drugs are manufactured anddistributed in secret, it is impossible for users to guardagainst adulteration or to determine the purity and potency ofthe drugs they use. The problem is compounded by drug growers,manufacturers, and distributors who, to minimize the risks ofapprehension, develop and purvey the drug varieties that pack themost intoxicating effect into the smallest package. According toan experienced New York City researcher, The fact that cocaine, heroin and related drugs are illegal encourages the use of injection. Severe statutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of illicit substances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a way to economize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are much more concentrated than traditional forms, such as opium or coca tea. Injection provides an intense and economical effect by maximizing the amount of drug that reaches the brain. People who sniff or smoke drugs say that if they inject they need only one third of the amount of the drug to maintain a habit. Because the injection forms of illicit drugs are concentrated, they are [also] relatively easier to ship. [140]. It has been demonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminalpenalties intensify, dealers also find other ways to economize byinventing new drugs---so-called "designer drugs"---thatare not yet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers ofsuch drugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction ofdangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have beenused with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due tovariations in potency, and (3) the development of "designerdrugs" intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicantswith new chemical compositions that put them beyond the reach of current laws.Just as the prohibition against alcohol led to sales of poisonouswood alcohol and the prohibition against abortion led tocoat-hanger abortions, the prohibition against drug manufacture,sale, and possession results in unnecessarydeaths due to adulteration, variable purity, and"designer drugs." This contrasts sharply with thegovernment's current regulation of alcoholic beverages, whichensures that the beverages are pure and that buyers know howstrong they are and what some of their health effects may be.Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce drug lawsand amend them to encompass new formulations or ban precursorsubstances may only push dealers totake greater risks, selling ever more potentially dangeroussubstances. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Because many drugs are outlawed, individualsconsidering drug use rarely have access to accurate informationabout the effects of drugs. While a cautious user may err on theside of avoiding certain activities while under the use of drugs,he or she may have no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, thepossible adverse health consequences of certain combinations ofdrugs and his or her individual tolerance for particularsubstances. Because of its penchant for exaggeration andcartoonish treatment of the issues, most current education aboutdrugs is not taken seriously by young people. As a result, it isfar less effective than other health education (e.g., aboutnutrition, fitness, and smoking cigarettes). Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of"Soft Drugs" Alcohol and tobacco arecompletely legal yet do much more harm, statistically speaking,than illegal drug use. It is also generally recognized thatalcohol, at least when used to excess, can cause aggressive, anti-social behavior.The current prohibitionist laws against marijuana, generallyconsidered an "a-motivational" drug, and otherso-called "soft drugs" have the effect of influencingsome people to choose alcohol over these "soft drugs."Peter Reuter, an economist at the Rand Corporation, concludesthat "If marijuana is a substitute for alcohol..., alcoholis, by definition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough marijuana enforcement must increasedrinking." Similarly, Frank Chaloupka, an economist atthe University of Illinois, found through statistical analysis"that states without criminal sanctions against marijuanapossession suffered fewer autofatalities." Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate atHarvard, found that "states decriminalizing marijuanareported lower overall rates ofdrug- and alcohol-related emergencies." To the extentthat users are choosing alcohol rather than marijuana or other"soft drugs," the overall public health effects areprobably worse than they would be otherwise. Injuries Due to Violence The high prices commanded by prohibited drugscreate competition among groups and individuals willing to breakthe law to supply drugs to consumers. Their competition oftenbecomes violent and has contributed to the build-up of arms andthe pervasiveness of violencein many areas. Gunshot wounds and other traumas due to theillegal drug business have become commonplace in big-cityhospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, but also lawenforcement officers and innocent bystanders are often the victims. Mayor Rudolph Giulianirecently noted: The victims of the [ ] gun battles [of street-level drug dealers] are innocent bystanders---and often young children. Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot; of these, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. [151]. The cost of prohibiting drugs must be measured in terms oflost lives and expensive medical care and include the hiddencosts of lost productivity and the psychological damage toindividuals and entire communities living in fear, helpless andhopeless. With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, drugs themselves do not generally causeviolent behavior. It is, instead, turf wars for the controlof black markets and the drug users' need for money to purchasesuch substances that leads to violence. Indeed, marijuana andheroin have been shown to render their users disinclined toviolence or incapable of violence while under the influence.These substances are much lessdangerous in this regard than alcohol. Diversion of Resources from Treatment andPrevention Prohibition diverts moneythat could otherwise be used for preventing and treating drugabuse. Federal anti-drug legislation provides a single budget for"supply reduction" and "demand reduction"efforts. Law enforcement agencies have always received much morethan prevention, treatment, and research programs combined. TheABA recently reported that "[s]ince the early 1980s,treatment has been a declining priority. In 1991, treatmentreceived 14% of the $10.5 billion federal drug budget compared to25% ten years earlier." During the same period,"federal spending on lawenforcement increased 737%, with interdiction efforts leadingthe increase." Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for druginterdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of lawenforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and qualityof life issues. Forward A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Report of The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June 14, 1994 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | AWiser Course, Ending Drug ProhibitionWT01-B33-44IA030-000641-B029-150http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122142029 text/html 8025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:20:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:12 GMTContent-length: 7808 Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies THE NON-MEDICAL USE OF DRUGS Interim Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CONTENTS Chapter 1. THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2. THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS 29 Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Barbiturates and Other Drugs Alcohol Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Short-Term Effects Long-Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence Alcohol and Other Drugs Minor Tranquillizers Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution, and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Moderate-Dose Effects Tolerance and Dependence with Moderate Doses High-Dose Effects High-Dose Dependency 'Speed Kills' Amphetamines and Other Drugs LSD Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence LSD and Other Drugs Cannabis Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects of Cannabis Overview of Effects Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Cannabis and Other Drugs Initiation of Cannabis Use Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Crime The Development of Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Other Drugs Volatile Solvents Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Tolerance and Dependence Solvents and Other Drugs References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3. THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE INCANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4. SOME CAUSES OFNON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5. PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6. THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among CanadianHigh School and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and OtherDrugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT01-B33-45IA086-000619-B006-335http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/omintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034124 text/html 14015HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:38 GMTContent-length: 13797 The Opium Monopoly -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE INTRODUCTION We first became interested in the opium traffic during a visitto the Far East in 1916. Like most Americans, we had vaguelyheard of this trade, and had still vaguer recollections of a warbetween Great Britain and China, which took place aboutseventy-five years ago, known as the Opium War. From time to timewe had heard of the opium trade as still flourishing in China,and then later came reports and assurances that it was all over,accompanied by newspaper pictures of bonfires of opium and opiumpipes. Except for these occasional and incidental memories, wehad neither knowledge of, nor interest in the subject. On our wayout to Japan, in the July of 1916, we met a young Hindu on theboat, who was outspoken and indignant over the British policy ofestablishing the opium trade in India, as one of the departmentsof the Indian Government. Of all phases of British rule in India,it was this policy which excited him most, and which caused himmost ardently to wish that India had some form ofself-government, some voice in the control and management of herown affairs, so that the country could protect itself from thisevil. Without this, he declared, his country was powerless to puta stop to this traffic imposed on it by a foreign government, andhe greatly deplored the slow, but steady demoralization of thenation which was in consequence taking place. As he produced hisfacts and figures, showing what this meant to his people-thisgradual undermining of their moral fiber and economic efficiencywe grew more and more interested. That such conditions existedwere to us unheard of, and unbelievable. It seemed incrediblethat in this age, with the consensus of public opinion sternlyopposed to the sale and distribution of habit-forming drugs, andwith legislation to curb and restrict such practices incorporatedin the laws of all ethical and civilized governments, that here,on the other side of the world, we should come upon opium trafficconducted as a government monopoly. Not only that, but conductedby one of the greatest and most highly civilized nations of theworld, a nation which we have always looked up to as being in thevery forefront of advanced, progressive and humane ideals. Soshocked were we by what this young Hindu told us, that we flatlyrefused to believe him. We listened to what he had to say on thesubject, but thinking that however earnest he might be, howeversincere in his sense of outrage at such a policy, that he must ofnecessity be mistaken. We decided not to take his word for it,but to look into the matter for ourselves. We did look into the matter. During a stay in the Far East ofnearly a year, in which time we visited Japan, China, Hong Kong,French IndoChina, Siam and Singapore, we looked into the matterin every country we visited. Wherever possible we obtainedgovernment reports, and searched them carefully for thosepassages giving' statistics concerning the opium trade-the amountof opium consumed, the number of shops where it was sold, and thenumber of divans where it was smoked. We found these shopsestablished under government auspices, the dealers obtainingtheir supplies of opium from the government, and then obtaininglicenses from the government to retail it. In many countries, wevisited these shops and divans in person, and bought opium inthem freely, just as one goes to a shop to buy cigarettes. Wefound a thorough and complete establishment of the opium traffic,run by the government, as a monopoly. Revenue was derived throughthe sale of opium, through excise taxes upon opium, and throughlicense fees paid by the keepers of opium shops and divans* -Acomplete, systematic arrangement, by which the foreign governmentprofited at the expense of the subject peoples under its rule. InEuropean countries and in America, we find the governments makingevery effort to repress the sale of habit-forming drugs. Here, inthe Far East, a contrary attitude prevails. The government makesevery effort to encourage and extend it. Two notable exceptions presented themselves. One was Japan. There are no opium shops in Japan, and theJapanese Government is as careful to protect its people from theevils and dangers of opium as any European country could be. Itmust be remembered, however, that Japan is a free and independentcountry. It has never been conquered by a European country, andperhaps one explanation as to why the Japanese are a powerful,virile people, is because Japan is the one Oriental nation thathas never been dominated by a European power, and in consequence,never drugged. The other exception is our own possession of the Philippines,which although a subject country, has never had the opium trafficestablished as part of the machinery of an alien government. On our return to America, we were greatly exercised over thesefacts which we had unearthed. We continued our researches as tothe opium traffic in the New York Public Library, and in theLibrary of Congress, in Washington, in both of which places thereis a rich and abundant literature on the subject. We obtainedready access to official blue books and government reports,issued by the British Government, and it is from these sourcesthat the material in this book is largely drawn. We were somewhathampered in our investigations by the fact that because of thewar, these blue books have not always been of recent date, someof them being two or three years old. For this reason, it has notalways been possible to give the most recent figures as to opiumconsumption and distribution in the various countries. However,we feel that we have obtained enough information to uphold ourcase, and in any event, there is no doubt that the opium traffic,as fostered by the British Government, still continues. Inlooking over the list of British colonies where it isestablished, we may find here and there a diminution in theamount of opium consumed, but this is probably due to theexigencies of war, to the lack of shipping and transportation,rather than to any conscientious scruples or moral turnover;because the revenue derived from the opium trade is precious. Insome instances, as in the case of the Straits Settlements, thelocal British Government derives from forty to fifty percent ofits revenue from this source. Yet, taken in relation to thewhole, it is not large. However valuable it may be, however largethe percentage in the case of any particular colony, it cansurely never be large enough to compensate for the stigmaattached.- It is a blot upon the honor of a great nation to thinkthat she deliberately runs her colonies on opium: No revenue,whether large or small, can be justified when coming from such asource as this. In all these blue books and official reports, the question ofthe Opium Monopoly, as it is called, is dealt with freely. Thereis no attempt to hide or suppress the facts. The subject isreported frankly and fully. It is all there, for any one to readwho chooses. How then, does it happen that we in America knownothing about Great Britain's Opium Monopoly? That the facts arenew to us and come to us as a shock? One is because of ouradmiration for Great Britain. Those who know and there are afew-hesitate to state them. Those who know, feel that it is apolicy unworthy of her. We hesitate to call attention to theshortcomings of a friend. There are other reasons also for thisconspiracy of silence-fear of international complications, fearof endangering the good feeling between the two countries,England and America. Consequently England has been able to relyupon those who know the facts to keep silent, either throughadmiration or through fear. Also the complete ignorance of therest of us has been an additional safeguard. Therefore, fornearly a century, she has been running her Opium Monopolyundisturbed. It began as a private industry, about the time ofthe East India Company, but later on passed out of the hands ofprivate individuals into the department of Opium Administration,one of the branches of the colonial government" But, loyalas we have been all these years, we can remain silent no longer.The time is now rapidly approaching when the two countries,England and America, are to become closely united. How can webecome truly united, however, when on such a great moral questionas this we stand diametrically opposed? There is still another reason why we should break silence. Thewelfare of our own country is now at stake. The menace of opiumis now threatening America, and our first duty is to ourselves.Little by little, surreptitiously, this drug has been creeping inover our borders, and to-day many thousands of our young men andyoung women are drug addicts, habituated to the use of one of theopium derivatives, morphia or heroin. The recent campaign againstdrug users, conducted by the New York Department of Health, hasuncovered these addicts in great numbers; has brought them beforeus, made us see, in spite of ourselves, that thousands of themexist and that new ones are being created daily. The questionarises, how do they obtain the drug? It was the fortune of thewriter to be present during the first week of the opening of theHealth Department Clinic for Drug Addicts, and her work consistedin taking the histories of these pitiful, abject wrecks of menand women who swarmed to the clinic in hundreds, seeking suppliesof the drug which they could not obtain elsewhere. The history ofthese patients was almost invariably the same-there was amonotony in their tragic, pathetic recital as to how they becamevictims, how they first became acquainted with the drug. As arule, they began in extreme youth, generally between fifteen andtwenty years of age, one boy having begun at the age of thirteen.In nearly every case they had tried it as a lark, as anexperiment. At "parties,' they said, when some one of thecompany would pass round a box full of heroin, inviting them tosnuff it. To snuff it, these children, very much as a small boygoes behind the barn to try his first cigarette. In manyinstances those who produced the box were peddlers, offering itas a gift at first, knowing that after a dose or two the fatalhabit would be formed and another customer created. Thesepeddlers doubtless obtained their supplies from smugglers. Butthat takes us back to our argument, namely, the part played bythat great nation which grows and distributes opium to the world.For that nation produces an oversupply of opium, far more than isneeded by the medical profession for the relief of pain. Opium isnot profitable in its legitimate use. It is only profitablebecause of the demands of addicts, men and women deliberatelydebauched, either through the legalized machinery of colonialgovernments, or through the illegal activities of smugglers. Amoral sentiment that will balk at this immense over-production,the sole object of which is to create drug victims, is the onlyweapon to fight it. In giving this book to the public, we arecalling upon that moral sentiment. We feel that we shall numberamong our staunchest supporters that great body of men and womenin England who have for years been vainly fighting the opiumtraffic. No more bitter opponents of this policy are to be foundthan amongst the English people themselves. From time to time, inParliament, sharp debates have arisen as to the advisability ofcontinuing it, and some of the greatest men in England have beensteadfastly opposed. The great Gladstone has described it as"morally indefensible." The time has now come for us,people of both countries, to unite to stop it. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-46IA086-000619-B006-354http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034134 text/html 8884HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:46 GMTContent-length: 8667 Great Britain's Opium Monopoly Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE I - GREAT BRITAIN'S OPIUM MONOPOLY In a book shop in Shanghai, we came upon a small book with anarresting title, "Drugging a Nation," by Samuel Merwin.It was published in 1908, eight years before we chanced upon it,shabby and shop worn, its pages still uncut. The people ofShanghai, the great International Settlement of this largest cityand most important seaport of China, did not have to read it.They knew, doubtless, all that its pages could disclose. We,however, found it most enlightening. In it there is thisdescription of the British Opium Monopoly: "In speaking of it as a 'monopoly' I am not employing acant word for effect. I am not making a case. That is what it isofficially styled in a certain blue book on my table which bearsthe title, 'Statement Exhibiting the Moral and Material Progressof India during the year 1905-'6,' and which was ordered by theHouse of Commons to be printed, May 10, 1907. . . . Now to getdown to cases, just what this Government Opium Monopoly is, andjust how Goes it work? An excerpt from the rather ponderous bluebook will tell us. It may be dry but it is official andunassailable. It is also short. "'The opium revenue'-thus the blue book-'is partly raisedby a monopoly of the production of the drug in Bengal and theUnited provinces, and partly by the levy of a duty on all opiumimported from native states. . . . In these two provinces, thecrop is grown under the control of a government department, whicharranges the total area which is to be placed under the crop,with a view to the amount of opium required.' "So much for the broader outline. Now for a few of thedetails: 'The cultivator of opium in these monopoly districtsreceives a license, and is granted advances to enable him toprepare the land for the crop, and he is required to deliver thewhole of the product at a fixed price to opium agents, by whom itis dispatched to the government factories at Patna and Ghazipur.' "The money advanced to the cultivator bears no interest.The British Indian government lends money without interest in noother cases. Producers of crops other than opium are obliged toget along without free money. "When it has been manufactured, the opium must bedisposed of in one way and another; accordingly: 'The supply ofprepared opium required for consumption in India is made over tothe Excise Department . . . the chests of " provision "opium, for export, are sold at monthly sales, which take place atCalcutta.' For the meaning of the curious term, 'provision opium'we have only to read on a little further. 'The opium is receivedand prepared at the government factories, where the out-turn ofthe year included 8,774 chests of opium for the ExciseDepartment, about three hundred pounds of various opiumalkaloids, thirty maunds of medical opium; and 51,770 chests ofprovision opium for the Chinese market.' There are about i4o poundsin a chest. . . . Last year the government had under poppycultivation 654,928 acres. And the revenue to the treasury,including returns from auction sales, duties and license fees,and deducting all 'opium expenditures' was nearly $22,000,000. As the blue book states, this opium is auctioned off once amonth. At that point, the British Government, as a government,washes its hands of the business. Who buys the opium at thesegovernment auctions, and what afterwards becomes of it? "Themen who buy in the opium at these monthly auctions and afterwardsdispose of it are a curious crowd of Parsees, Mohammedans,Hindoos and Asiatic Jews. Few British names appear in the opiumtrade to-day. British dignity prefers not to stoop beneath thetaking in of profits; it leaves the details of a dirty businessto dirty hands. This is as it has been from the first. Thedirectors of the East India Company, years and years before thatsplendid corporation relinquished the actual government of India,forbade the selling of its specially-prepared opium direct toChina, and advised a trading station on the coast whence the drugmight find its way 'without the company being exposed to thedisgrace of being engaged in illicit commerce."' "So clean hands and dirty hands went into partnership.They are in partnership still, save that the most nearlyChristian of governments has officially succeeded the company asparty of the first part." You will say, if the British Government chooses to deal inopium, that is not our concern. It is most emphatically ourconcern. Once a month, at these great auction sales, the BritishGovernment distributes thousands of pounds of opium, which arethus turned loose upon the world, to bring destruction and ruinto the human race. The buyers of this opium are not agents of theBritish Government. They are merely the distributors, throughwhom this drug is directed into the channels of trade.' TheBritish Government derives a certain portion of its revenue fromthe sale of opium, therefore depends upon these dealers to find amarket for it. ' They are therefore, as distributors, theunofficial agents of the British Government, through whom it issold legitimately, or smuggled around the world. In seeking toeradicate the drug evil, we must face the facts, and recognizeclearly that the source of supply is the British Government,through whose agents, official and unofficial, it is distributed. America, so they tell us, is now menaced by the drug evil. Nowthat prohibition is coming into effect, we are told that we arenow confronted by a vice more terrible, far more deterioratingand dangerous. If that is true, then we must recognize our dangerand guard against it. Some of the opium and morphia which reachesthis country is smuggled in; the rest is imported by the bigwholesale drug houses. There is an unlimited supply of it. As wehave seen, the British Government encourages poppy production,even to the extent of lending money without interest toall those who are willing to raise this most profitable crop. Themonopoly opium is sold once a month to the highest bidders, andsome of these highest bidders are unscrupulous men who must findtheir markets how and where they can. That fact, of course, is ofno moment to the British Government. It is of deepest concern toAmericans, however. To the north of us we have the Dominion ofCanada. To the south, the No-Man's Land of Mexico. At the presentmoment, the whole country is alarmed at the growing menace of thedrug habit, which is assuming threatening proportions. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-47IA086-000619-B007-7http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034143 text/html 6063HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:11 GMTContent-length: 5846 The Indian Opium Monopoly Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE II -- THE INDIAN OPIUM MONOPOLY LET us quote from another dry officialrecord, of unimpeachable veracity-the Statesman's YearBook, for1916. On page 140, under the heading of The BritishEmpire: India and Dependencies, we read: "Opium. In Britishterritory the cultivation of the poppy for the production ofopium is mainly restricted to the United Provinces, and themanufacture of the opium from this region is a State monopoly. Alimited amount is also grown in the Punjab for local consumptionand to produce poppy seeds. In the monopoly districts thecultivator receives advances from Government to enable him toprepare the land for the crop, and he is bound to sell the wholeof the produce at a fixed price to Government agents, by whom itis despatched to the Government factory at Ghazipur to beprepared for the market. The chests of manufactured opium aresold by auction in Calcutta at monthly sales. A reserve is keptin hand to supply the deficiencies of bad seasons, and aconsiderable quantity is distributed by the Indian excisedepartments. Opium is also grown in many of the Native States ofRajaputana and Central India. These Native States have agreed toconform to the British system. No 6 opiummay pass from them into British territory for consumption withoutpayment of duty. "The bulk of the exports of opium from India has been toChina. By arrangements with that country, the first one being inI907, the exports from India have been limited, and provisionmade for the cessation of the export to China when the nativeChinese production of opium shall be suppressed. The trade withChina is now practically suspended." The important things to notice in the above statement arethese: The growing of poppies, the manufacture of opium, and themonthly auction sales continue. Also, the opium trade with Chinais practically at an end. The history of the opium traffic inChina is a story complete in itself and will be dealt with inanother chapter. At present, we must notice that the trade withChina is practically suspended, but that the British Governmentis still auctioning off, once a month at Calcutta, greatquantities of opium. Where does this opium go--who are theconsumers? If not to China, then where? The same reliable authority, the Statesman's Year-Book for1918, has this to say on the subject. On page 130 we read:" Opium: In British territory the cultivation of the poppyfor the production of opium is practically confined to the UnitedProvinces, and the manufacture of opium from this region is aState monopoly. The bulk of the exported opium is at presenteither sent to the United Kingdom, or supplied direct to theGovernments of consuming countries in the Far East; a certainquantity is also sold by auction in Calcutta at monthly sales.Opium is also grown in many of the Native States of Rajputana andCentral India, which have agreed to conform to the Britishsystem." The following tables, taken from most reliableauthority, give some idea of the exports to the "consumingcountries of the Far East." Note that Japan began buyingopium in 1911-122. We shall have somethingto say about the Japanese smuggling later. Also note that it wasin 1907 that Great Britain and China entered intoagreement, the outcome to be the suppression of the opium tradein China. But see the increasing imports into the treaty ports;up till almost the very last moment British opium being pouredinto China. In the second table, observe the increasingimportation into England, (United Kingdom), synchronous with theincreased exports to Japan, which will be discussed later. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-48IA086-000619-B007-27http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034152 text/html 11024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:06 GMTContent-length: 10806 Japan as an Opium Distributor Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE III -- JAPAN AS AN OPIUM DISTRIBUTOR IN an article which appeared in the NewYork Times, under date of February 14, 1919, we read:"A charge that the Japanese Government secretly fosters themorphia traffic in China and other countries in the Far East ismade by a correspondent in the North China Herald in itsissue of December 21st last. The correspondent assertsthat the traffic has the financial support of the Bank of Japan,and that the Japanese postal service in China aids, although'Japan is a signatory to the agreement which forbids the importinto China of morphia or of any appliances used in itsmanufacture or application.' "Morphia no longer can be purchased in Europe, thecorrespondent writes. The seat of industry has been transferredto Japan, and morphia is now manufactured by the Japanesethemselves. Literally, tens of millions of yen are transferredannually from China to Japan for the payment of Japanese morphia.. . . "In South China, morphia is sold by Chinese peddlers,each of whom carries a passport certifying that he is a native ofFormosa, and therefore entitled to Japanese protection. Japanesedrug stores throughout China carry large stocks of morphia.Japanese medicine vendors look to morphia for their largestprofits. Wherever Japanese are predominant, there the tradeflourishes. Through Dairen, morphia circulates throughoutManchuria and the province adjoining; through Tsingtao, morphiais distributed over Shantung province, Anhui, and Kiangsu, whilefrom Formosa morphia is carried with opium and other contrabandby motor-driven fishing boats to some point on the mainland, fromwhich it is distributed throughout the province of Fukien and thenorth of Kuangtung. Everywhere it is sold by Japanese underextra-territorial protection." The article is rather long, and proves beyond doubt theexistence of a well-organized and tremendous smuggling business,by means of which China is being deluged with morphia. In thebody of the article we find this paragraph: "While the morphia traffic is large, there is everyreason to believe that the opium traffic upon which Japan isembarking with enthusiasm, is likely to prove even morelucrative. In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan has become oneof the considerable purchasers of Indian opium. . . . Soldby the Government of India, this opium is exported under permitsapplied for by the Japanese Government, is shipped to Kobe,and from Kobe is transshipped to Tsingtao. Large profits are madein this trade, in which are interested some of the leading firmsof Japan." This article appears to be largely anti-Japanese. In fact,more anti-Japanese than anti-opium. Anti Japanese sentiment inAmerica is played upon by showing up the Japanese as smugglers ofopium. The part the British Government plays in this traffic isnot emphasized. "In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan hasbecome one of the considerable purchasers of Indian opium . . .sold by the Government of India." We are asked to condemnthe Japanese, who purchase their stocks of opium as individuals,and who distribute it in the capacity of smugglers. We are notasked to censure the British Government which produces,manufactures and sells this opium as a State monopoly. We areasked to denounce the Japanese and their nefarious smuggling andshameful traffic, but the source of supply, which depends uponthese smugglers as customers at the monthly auctions, is abovereproach. A delicate ethical distinction. However, there is no doubt that the Japanese are ardentsmugglers. In an article in the March, 1919, number of"Asia" by Putnam Weale, we find the following bit: *"At all ports where Japanese commissioners of MaritimeCustoms (in China) hold office, it is undeniable that centres ofcontraband trade have been established, opium and its derivativesbeing so openly smuggled that the annual net import of Japanesemorphia (although this trade is forbidden by InternationalConvention) is now said to be something like 20 tons ayear-sufficient to poison a whole nation." * " A Fair Chance for Asia," byPutnam Weale, page 227. Mr. Weale is an Englishman, therefore more anti-Japanese thananti-opium. We do not recall any of his writings in which heprotests against the opium trade as conducted by his Government,nor the part his Government plays in fostering and encouragingit. However, there are other Englishmen who see the situation in amore impartial light, and who are equally critical of both GreatBritain and Japan. In his book, Trade Politics and Christianityin Africa and the East," by A. J. Macdonald, M. A., formerlyof Trinity College, Cambridge, we find the facts presented withmore balance. Thus, on page 229: ". . . In the north ofChina another evil is springing up. The eradication of the opiumhabit is being followed by the development of the morphiatraffic. . . . The morphia habit in northern China, especiallyManchuria, is already widespread. The Chinese Government is alertto the evil, but their efforts to repress it are hampered by theaction of traders, mainly Japanese, who elude the restrictionsimposed by the Chinese and Japanese Governments. . . . China isbeing drenched with morphia. It is incredible that anythingapproaching the amount could possibly be devoted to legitimatepurposes. It is said that in certain areas coolies are to be seencovered all over with needle punctures.' An injection of the drugcan be obtained for three or four cents. In Newchang 2,000 Victimsof the morphia habit died in the winter of 1914-15. Morphiacarries off its victims far more rapidly than opium. . . .Morphia is not yet manufactured in any appreciable quantities inthe East, and certainly even Japan cannot yet manufacture thehypodermic injectors by means of which the drug is received. Thebulk of the manufacture takes place in England, Germany andAustria. . . . In this traffic, two firms in Edinburgh and one inLondon are engaged. The trade is carried on through Japaneseagents. The Board of Trade returns show that the export ofmorphia from Great Britain to the East has risen enormouslyduring the last few years. 1911 - 5.5 tons 1912 - 7.5 tons 1913 - 11.25 1914 -- 14 The freedom which allows three British firms to supply Chinawith morphia for illicit purposes is a condemnation of EnglishChristianity. This book of Mr. Macdonald's was published in 1916. Mr.Weale's article was published in 1919, in which he speaksof an importation of about twenty tons of morphia. Apparently thethree British firms which manufacture morphia, two in Edinburghand one in London are still going strong. Japan, however, appearsto be growing impatient with all this opprobrium cast upon her asthe distributor of drugs, especially since much of the outcryagainst this comes from America. Our own country seems to beassisting in this traffic in a most extensive manner. The JapanSociety Bulletin No. 60 calls attention to this: NEW TURN IN MORPHIA TRAFFIC The morphia traffic in China has taken a new turn, accordingto the Japan Advertiser. It quotes Putnam Weale to theeffect that whilst in recent years the main distributors havebeen Japanese, the main manufacturers have been British. Themorphia has been exported in large quantities from Edinburgh toJapan, but as the result of licensing the exports of this drugfrom Great Britain, the shipments to Japan dropped from 6oo,229 ounces in 1917 to one-fourth that amountin 1918. The Japan Chronicle, speaking from"absolutely authentic information," states that 113,000ounces of morphia arrived in Kobe from the United States in thefirst five months of 1919. These figures are not given asthe total shipments received in Kobe, but merely as the quantityof which The Chronicle has actual knowledge. It statesfurther that this morphia is being transhipped in Kobe harbor tovessels bound for China. Dr. Paul S. Reinsch, who has resignedhis post as Minister to China, has stated that he will use everyresource in his power to stop the shipment from America ofmorphia intended for distribution in China, in defiance of theinternational convention which prohibits the sale of the drug inthat country. If sufficient publicity is cast upon the distributors,Japanese, English and American, public sentiment may in time takecognizance of the source of all this mischief, namely, theproducer. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-49IA086-000619-B007-42http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034204 text/html 8241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:02 GMTContent-length: 8024 The Opium Monopoly - Singapore Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE IV -- SINGAPORE In January, 1917, we found ourselves at Singapore, a Britishdependency, situated at the end of the Malay Peninsula, and oneof the greatest seaports of the Orient. We were stopping at theHotel de l' Europe, a large and first class hotel. The firstmorning at breakfast, the waiter stood beside us, waiting for ourorder. He was a handsome young Malay, dressed in white linenclothes, and wearing a green jade bracelet on one wrist. We gavehim our order and he did not move off. He continued to standquietly beside our chairs, as in a trance. We repeated theorder-one tea, one coffee, two papayas. He continued to standstill beside us, stupidly. Finally he went away. We waited for along time and nothing happened. At last, after a long wait, hereturned and set before us a teapot filled with hot water.Nothing else. We repeated again-tea, coffee, papayas. We said ittwo or three times. Then he went away and came back with sometea. We repeated again, coffee and fruit. Eventually he broughtus some coffee. Finally, after many endeavors, we got the fruit.It all took a long time. We then began to realize that somethingwas the matter with him. He could understand English well enoughto know what orders we were giving him, but he seemed to forgetas soon as he left our sight. We then realized that he wasprobably drugged. It was the same thing every day. In the morninghe was stupid and dull, and could not remember what we told him.By evening his brain was clearer, and at dinner he could rememberwell enough. The effects of whatever he had been taking hadapparently worn off during the day. We learned that the opium trade was freely indulged in, atSingapore, fostered by the Government. Singapore is a large cityof about 300,000 inhabitants, a great number of which areChinese. It has wide, beautiful streets, fine governmentbuildings, magnificent quays and docks-a splendid European cityat the outposts of the Orient. We found that a large part of itsrevenue is derived from the opium traffic-from the sale of opium,and from license fees derived from shops where opium may bepurchased, or from divans where it may be smoked. The customersare mainly Chinese. I wanted to visit these Government-licensed opium shops andopium dens. A friend lent me two servants, as guides. We threegot into rickshaws and went down to the Chinese quarter, wherethere are several hundred of these places, all doing aflourishing business. It was early in the afternoon, but eventhen, trade was brisk. The divans were rooms with wide woodenbenches running round the sides, on which benches, in pairs,sharing a lamp between them, lay the smokers. They purchasedtheir opium on entering, and then lay down to smoke it. Thepackages are little, triangular packets, each containing enoughfor about six smokes. Each packet bears a label, red letters on awhite ground, "Monopoly opium." In one den there was an old man-but you can't tell whether adrug addict is old or not, he looked as they all do, gray andemaciated-but as he caught my eye, he laid down the needle onwhich he was about to cook his pill, and glanced away. I stoodbefore him, waiting for him to continue the process, but he didnot move. "Why doesn't he go on?" I asked my guide. "Heis ashamed to have you see him," came the reply. "But why should he be ashamed?" I asked, "TheBritish Government is not ashamed to sell to him, to encouragehim to drug himself, to ruin himself. Why should he beashamed?" "Nevertheless, he is," replied the guide. "Yousee what he looks like-what he has become. He is not quite so fargone as the others-he is a more recent victim. He still feelsthat he has become degraded. Most of them do not feel that wayafter a while." So we went on and on, down the long street. There was adreadful monotony about it all. House after house of feeble, emaciated, ill wrecks, allsmoking Monopoly Opium, all contributing, by their shame anddegradation, to the revenues of the mighty British Empire. That evening after dinner, I sat on the wide verandah of thehotel, looking over a copy of the "Straits Times." Oneparagraph, a dispatch from London, caught my eye. " Chinesein Liverpool. Reuter's Telegram. London, January 17, 1917Thirty-one Chinese were arrested during police raids last nighton opium dens in Liverpool. Much opium was seized. The police inone place were attacked by a big retriever and by a number ofChinese, who threw boots and other articles from thehouse-top." Coming fresh from a tour of the opium-dens of Singapore, Imust say that item caused some mental confusion. It must also beconfusing to the Chinese. It must be very perplexing to a Chinesesailor, who arrives in Liverpool on a ship from Singapore, tofind such a variation in customs. To come from a part of theBritish Empire where opium smoking is freely encouraged, to GreatBritain itself where such practices are not tolerated. He mustask himself, why it is that the white race is so sedulouslyprotected from such vices, while the subject races are so eagerlyencouraged. It may occur to him that the white race is valuableand must be preserved, and that subject races are not worthprotecting. This double standard of international justice he mustfind disturbing. It would seem, at first glance, as if subjectraces were fair game-if there is money in it. Subject races,dependents, who have no vote, no share in the government and whoare powerless to protect themselves-fair game for exploitation. Is this double-dealing what we mean when we speak of "ourresponsibility to backward nations, 1) or of "the sacredtrust of civilization" or still again when we refer to"the White Man's burden " ? Pondering over these things as I sat on the hotel verandah, Ifinally reached the conclusion that to print such a dispatch asthat in the " Straits Times" was, to say the least,most tactless. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-50IA086-000619-B007-67http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034215 text/html 5031HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:42:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:58 GMTContent-length: 4814 The Straits Settlement Opium Commission Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE V -- THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS OPIUM COMMISSION FROM time to time, certain people in England apparently havequalms as to Great Britain's opium traffic, and from time to timequestions are raised as to whether or not such traffic is morallydefensible. In February, 1909, apparently in answer to suchscruples and questionings on the part of a few, a veryinteresting report was published, "Proceedings of theCommission appointed to Enquire into Matters Relating to the Useof Opium in the Straits Settlements and the Federated MalayStates. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of HisMajesty." This document may be found in the New York PublicLibrary and is well worth careful perusal. This Commission consisted of about a dozen men, some English,some natives of the Straits Settlements. They apparently made anintensive and exhaustive study of the subject, carefullyexamining it from every angle. Countless witnesses appearedbefore them, giving testimony as to the effects of opium upon theindividual. This testimony is interesting, in that it is of acontradictory nature, some witnesses saying that moderate opiumindulgence is nothing worse than indulgence in alcoholicbeverages, and like alcohol, only pernicious if taken to excess.Other witnesses seemed to think that it was most harmful. TheCommission made careful reports as to the manner of licensinghouses for smoking, the system of licensing opium farms, etc.,and other technical details connected with this extensiveGovernment traffic. Finally, the question of revenue wasconsidered, and while the harmfulness of opium smoking was amatter of divided opinion, when it came to revenue there was nodivision of opinion at all. As a means of raising revenue, thetraffic was certainly justifiable. It was proven that about fiftyper cent of the revenues of the Straits Settlements and theFederated Malay States came from the opium trade, and, as wasnaively pointed out, to hazard the prosperity of the Colony bylopping off half its revenues, was an unthinkable proceeding. The figures given are as follows. 1898. Revenue derived from 0pium....45.9 percent 1899 44.8 1900 43.3 1901 53.2 1902 48.3 1903 47.1 1904 59.1 1905 46. 1906 53.3 There was one dissenting voice as to the conclusions reachedby this Opium Commission, that of a Bishop who presented aminority report. But what are moral scruples against cold factsthat there's money in the opium trade? This Commission made its report in 1909. But the opiumbusiness is apparently still flourishing in the StraitsSettlements. Thus we read in the official Blue Book for 1917,"Colony of the Straits Settlements " that of the totalrevenue for the year, $18,672,104, that $9,182,000 came fromopium. What per cent is that? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-51IA086-000619-B007-93http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034230 text/html 6267HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:42:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:54 GMTContent-length: 6050 Opium in Siam Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VI --OPIUM IN SIAM BANGKOK, Siam, January, 1917- Siam, an independent kingdom. Asa matter of fact, "protected" very sternly andthoroughly by Great Britain and France, so that its"independence" would about cover an oyster cracker.However, it is doubtless protected "benevolently" forwhat protectorate is anything but benevolent? The more rigorousthe protectorate, the more benevolent its character. The PeaceConference seems to have given us a new word in"mandatory." We do not know as yet what adjective willbe found to qualify mandatory, but it will doubtless be fittingand indicative of idealism-of sorts. Therefore, all will be well.Our suspicions will be lulled. It is high time that a substitutewas found for "benevolent protectorate." The particular form of benevolence noted in Siam was the totalinability of the Siamese to exclude British opium. They areallowed, by the benevolent powers, to impose an import duty onall commodities imported except opium. That is free. The treatybetween Siam and Great Britain in 1856 says so. We rather fancythat Great Britain had more to say about this in 1856 than Siambut maybe not. Anyway poor old Siam, an independent kingdom, isbound to receive as much opium as may be imported, and is quitepowerless, by the terms of this treaty, to enact laws to excludeit. In the last year or two, the Government of Siam has beenobliged to put the opium traffic under government control, inorder to minimize the worst evils in connection with it, althoughto restrict and regulate an evil is a poor substitute for theability to abolish it. All this, you will see, is rather tough on the Siamese, butgood business for the British Empire. However, opium is not bad for one. There are plenty of peopleto testify to that. We Americans have a curious notion to thecontrary, but then, we Americans are so hysterical and gullible.An Englishman whom we met in Bangkok told me that opium was notonly harmless, but actually beneficial. He said once that he wastraveling through the jungle, into the interior somewhere. He hadquite a train of coolies with him, carrying himself and hisbaggage through the dense forests. By nightfall, he found hiscoolies terribly exhausted with the long march. But he was in ahurry to press on, so, as he expressed it, he gave each of them a"shot" of morphia, whereupon all traces of fatiguevanished. They forgot the pain of their weary arms and legs andwere thus enabled to walk all night. He said that morphiacertainly knocked a lot of work out of men-you might say, doubledtheir capacity for endurance. The night we left Bangkok, we got aboard the boat at aboutnine in the evening. The hatch was open, and we looked into thehold upon a crowd of coolies who had been loading sacks of riceaboard the ship. There they lay upon the rice sacks, two or threedozen of them, all smoking opium. Two coolies to a lamp. I ratherwondered that a lamp did not upset and set the boat on fire, butthey are made of heavy glass, with wide bottoms, so that thechances of overturning them are slight. So we leaned over theopen hatch, looking down at these little fellows, resting andrecuperating themselves after their work, refreshing themselvesfor the labor of the morrow. Opium is wonderful, come to think of it. But why, since it isso beneficial and so profitable, confine it to the downtroddenraces of the world? Why limit it to the despised races, who havenot sense enough to govern themselves anyway? The following figures are taken from the Statistical YearBooks for the Kingdom of Siam: Foreign trade and navigation of the port of Bangkok, importsof opium: 1911-12 1,270 chests of opium 1912-13 1,775 1913-14 1,186 1 914-15 2,000 Imported from India and Singapore. 1915-16 2,000 1916-17 1,100 1917-18 1,850 Also, from the same source, we find the number of retail opiumshops: 1912-13 2,985 1913-14 3,075 1914-15 3,132 1915-16 3,104 1916-17 3,111 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-52IA086-000619-B007-119http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034241 text/html 7351HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:42:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:50 GMTContent-length: 7134 The Opium Monopoly - Hong Kong Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VII -- HONGKONG The Crown Colony of Hongkong was ceded by China to GreatBritain in January, 1841; the cession was confirmed by the treatyof Nanking in August, 1842; and the charter bears date April 5,1843. Hongkong is the great center for British commerce withChina and Japan, and a military and naval station of first-classimportance." Thus the Statesman's Year Book. This authority, however, omitsto mention just exactly how this important piece of Chineseterritory came to be ceded to Great Britain. It was the rewardthat Great Britain took unto herself as an "indemnity"following the successful prosecution of what is sometimes spokenof as the first opium war-a war of protest on the part of Chinaagainst Great Britain's insistence on her right to deluge Chinawith opium. China's resistance was in vain-her efforts to stemthe tide of opium were fruitless-the might, majesty, dominion andpower of the British Empire triumphed, and China was beaten. Theisland on which Hongkong is situated was at that time a blankpiece of land; but strategically well placed-ninety miles southof the great Chinese city of Canton, the market for Britishopium. The opposite peninsula of Kowloon, on the mainland, was cededto Great Britain by treaty in 1861, and now forms part ofHongkong. By a convention signed at Peking in June, 1898, therewas also leased to Great Britain for 99 years a portion ofChinese territory mainly agricultural, together with the watersof Mirs Bay and Deep Bay, and the island of Lan-tao. Its area is356 square miles, with about 81,000 inhabitants, exclusivelyChinese. Area of Old Kowloon is 3 square miles. Total area ofcolony, 391 square miles. The population of Hongkong, excluding the Military and Navalestablishments, and that portion of the new territory outside NewKowloon, was according to the 1911 census, 366,145 inhabitants.Of this number the Chinese numbered 354,187. This colony is, of course, governed by Great Britain, and isnot subject to Chinese control. Here is situated a Governmentopium factory, and the imports of Indian opium into Hongkong forthe past several years are as follows: 1903-4 3,576,431 pounds sterling 1904-5 4,036,436 1905-6 3,775,82.6 1906-7 3,771,409 1907-8 3,145,403 1908-9 2,230,755 1909-10 3,377,222 1910-11 3,963,264 pounds sterling 1911-12 3,018,858 1912-13 2,406,084 1913-14 1,084,093 1914--15 110,712 These figures are taken from "Statistical AbstractRelating to British India, 1905-6 to 1915," and "Statistical Abstract Relating to British India, 1903-4 to1912-13." The falling off in imports of opium noticed in1914-15 may be due to the war, lack of shipping, etc., or to thefact that the China market was due to close on April 1, 1917. Theclosing of the China market 400,000,000 of people destined nolonger to have opium supplied to them (except illegally, bysmuggling, etc.) is naturally a big blow to the British opiuminterests. That is where the menace to the rest of the worldcomes in. Opium has been proved such a profitable commodity, thatif one market is shut off, others must be found as substitutes.The idea of closing the trade altogether naturally does notappeal to those who profit by it. Therefore, what we should hailat first sight as a welcome indication of a changed moralsentiment, is in reality but the pause which proceeds the castingabout for new markets, for finding new peoples to drug. The Colonial Report No. 972, Hongkong Report for 1917, givesthe imports and exports of opium: Page 7- "The imports and exports of certified opium during theyear as follows: Imports......... 7 chests Export.......... 224 chests Of these, however, the imports all come from Shanghai, and ofthe total export Of 224 chests, 186 went to Shanghai." Opium received from other sources than Shanghai makes a bettershowing. " Seven hundred and forty chests of Persian opiumimported during the year, and seven hundred and forty-fiveexported to Formosa. Nine hundred and ten chests of uncertifiedIndian opium were imported: Four hundred and ten chests by theGovernment Monopoly, and the remaining five hundred for the Macaoopium farmer." Macao is a small island off the coast of China, near Canton-aPortuguese settlement, owned by Portugal for several centuries,where the opium trade is in full blast. But somehow, one does notexpect so much of Portugal. The most significant feature of theabove paragraph, however, lies in the reference to theimportation of Persian opium. " Seven hundred and fortychests of Persian opium imported." Query, who owns Persia? Nevertheless, in spite of this poor showing, in spite of thedecrease in opium importation as compared with the balmy days,all is not lost. The Crown Colony of Hongkong still continues todo an active trade. In the Colonial Office List for 1917, on page218, we read: "Hongkong. Revenue: About one-third of therevenue is derived from the Opium Monopoly." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-53IA086-000619-B007-143http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034306 text/html 4617HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:42:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:47 GMTContent-length: 4400 The Opium Monopoly - Sarawak Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE VIII -- SARAWAK NEAR British North Borneo. Area, 42,000 square miles, manyrivers navigable. The government of part of the present territorywas obtained in 1842 by Sir James Brooke from the Sultan ofBrunei. Various accessions were made between 1861, 1885, and188o. The Rajah, H. H. Sir Charles Johnson Brooke, G. C.M.G.,nephew to the late Rajah, born June 3, 1829, succeeded in 1868.Population estimated at 500,000, Malays, Dyaks, Kayans, Kenyahs,and Muruts, with Chinese and other settlers. Thus the Statesman's Year Book, to which we would add aparagraph from an article in the National Geographic Magazine forFebruary, 1919. Under the title: "Sarawak: The Land of theWhite Rajahs" we read: "With the recent death of SirCharles Brooke, G. C. M. G., the second of the white rajahs ofSarawak, there came to an end one of the most useful and unusualcareers among the many that have done credit to British rule inthe Far East. For nearly 49 years he governed, as absolutesovereign, a mixed population of Chinese, Malays, and numerouspagan tribes scattered through the villages and dense jungles ofan extensive territory on the northwest coast of Borneo. " Constant solicitude for the welfare of his people wonthe sympathy and devotion which enabled this white man, supportedby an insignificant army and police, to establish the peacefuloccupations of civilization in place of barbarous tyranny andoppression." How thoroughly this "civilizing" process wasaccomplished may be judged somewhat by turning to the ColonialOffice List for 19I7, where on page 436 we read: "Sarawak:The principal sources of revenue are the opium, gambling, pawnshops, and arrack, producing: 1908 $483,019 1909 460,416 1910 385,070 1911 420,151 1912 426,867 1913 492,455 In the Statesman's Year Book for 1916 we find the totalrevenue for this well-governed little colony as follows, givenhowever in pounds sterling, instead of dollars, as in the abovetable. Thus: Revenue-1910 221,284 pounds sterling 1911I 159,456 1912 175,967 1913 210,342 1914 208,823 It would seem as if forty-nine years of constant solicitudefor the welfare of a people, establishing the peacefuloccupations of civilization, might have resulted in somethingbetter than a revenue derived from opium, gambling, pawn shopsand arrack. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-54IA086-000619-B007-174http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034332 text/html 10494HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:43:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:43 GMTContent-length: 10276 The Opium Monopoly - Shanghai Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE IX -- SHANGHAI IN the New York Library there is an interesting little book,about a quarter of an inch thick, and easy reading. It isentitled: "Municipal Ethics: Some Facts and Figures from theMunicipal Gazette, 1907-1914. An Examination of the Opium Licensepolicy of the Shanghai Municipality. In an Open Letter to theChairman of the Council, by Arnold Foster, Wuchang. For 42 yearsMissionary to the Chinese." Shanghai, being a Treaty Port, is of two parts. The native orShanghai city, under the control and administration of theChinese. And the foreign concessions, that part of the city underthe control and administration of foreigners. This is generallyknown as the International Settlement (also called the modelsettlement), and the Shanghai Municipal Council is theadministrative body. Over this part the Chinese have no control.In 1907, when China began her latest fight against the opiumevil, she enacted and enforced drastic laws prohibiting opiumsmoking and opium selling on Chinese soil, but was powerless toenforce these laws on "foreign" soil. In the foreignconcessions, the Chinese were able to buy as much opium as theypleased, merely by stepping over an imaginary line, into aportion of the town where the rigid anti-opium laws of China didnot apply. Says Mr. Arnold, in his Open Letter: "It will be seenthat the title of the pamphlet, Municipal Ethics, describes asituation which is a complex one. It concerns first the actualattitude of the Shanghai Municipal Council towards the Chinesenational movement for the suppression of the use of opium. This,we are assured by successive Chairmen of the Council, has beenone of "sincere sympathy...... the greatest sympathy,"and more to the same effect. Certainly no one would have guessedthis from the facts and figures reproduced in this pamphlet fromthe columns of the " Municipal Gazette." "The second element in the ethical situation is theactual attitude of the Council not only towards the Chinesenational movement, but also towards its own official assurances,protestations and promises. "It is on this second branch of the subject before usthat I specially desire to focus attention, and for the factshere stated that I would bespeak the most searching examination.The protestations of the Council as to its own virtuous attitudein regard to opium reform in China are made the more emphatic,and also the more open to criticism, by being coupled with somevery severe insinuations made at the time, as to the insincerityand unreliability of the Chinese authorities in what they wereprofessing, and in what they were planning to do in the samematter of opium reform. It so happens, as the event proves, thatthese sneers and insinuations were not only quite uncalled for,but were absolutely and utterly unjust. When a comparison isinstituted between (a) 'official pronouncements' made two yearsago by the Chinese authorities as to what they then intended todo for the suppression of the opium habit, and (b) the 'actualadministrative results' that in the meanwhile have beenaccomplished, the Chinese have no cause to be ashamed of theverdict of impartial judges. What they have done may not alwayshave been wise, it may sometimes have been very stern, but theoutcome has been to awaken the astonishment and admiration of thewhole civilized world! When, on the other hand, a comparison isinstituted between (a) the fine professions and assurances of theShanghai Municipal Council made six or seven years ago as to itsown attitude towards the 'eradication of the opium evil' and (b)the 'actual administrative results' of the Council's ownproceedings, the feelings awakened are of very different order.Here, not to mention any other consideration, two hard factsstare one in the face: First, in October, 1907, there wereeighty-seven licensed opium shops in the InternationalSettlement. In May, 1914, there were six hundred and sixty-three.In 1907 the average monthly revenue from opium licenses, dens andshops combined, was Taels 5,450- In May, 1914, the revenue fromlicenses and opium shops alone was Taels 10,995. The Council willnot dispute these figures." At the beginning of the anti-opium campaign in 1907, therewere 700 dens (for smoking) in the Native City, and 1600 in theInternational Settlement. The Chinese closed their dens and shopsat once. In the Settlement, the dens were not all closed untiltwo years later, and the number of shops in the Settlementincreased by leaps and bounds. Table I shows an outline of theMunicipal opium-shop profits concurrent with the closing of theopium houses-and subsequently: Year Month Dens Shops Monthly revenue, shops only 1908 Jan. 1436 87 Taels, 338 Oct. 1005 131 623 1909 Jan. 599 166 1,887 Oct. 297 231 2,276 1910 Oct. Closed 306 5,071 1911 Oct. 348 5,415 1912 Nov. 402 5,881 1913 Dec. 560 8,953 1914 March 628 10,111 April 654 10,772 Mr. Arnold quotes part of a speech made by the Chairman of theMunicipal Council, in March, 1908. The Chairman says in part:"The advice which we have received from the BritishGovernment is, in brief, that we should do more than keep pacewith the native authorities, we should be in advance of them, andwhere possible, encourage them to follow us." It must havebeen most disheartening to the native authorities, suppressingthe opium traffic with the utmost rigor, to see their effortsdefied and nullified by the increased opportunities for obtainingopium in that part of Shanghai over which the Chinese have nocontrol. A letter from a Chinese to a London paper, gives theChinese point of view: "China . . . is obliged to submit tothe ruthless and heartless manner in which British merchants,under the protection of the Shanghai 'Model Settlement' areexploiting her to the fullest extent of their ability." There is lots of money in opium, however. The following tablescompiled by Mr. Arnold show the comparison between the amountderived from opium licenses as compared with the amount derivedfrom other sorts of licenses. 1913. Wheelbarrows Taels, 38,670 Carts 22,944 Motor cars 12,376 Cargo boats.... . . .. 5,471 Chinese boats 4,798 Steam launches.... . 2,221 Total, 86,480 Opium shops 86,386 Opium, 86,3 86 Another table shows the licensed institutions in Shanghairepresenting normal social life (chiefly of the Chinese) ascompared with revenue from opium shops: 1913. Tavern Taels, 16,573 Foreign liquor seller.. 19,483 Chinese wine shop.... 28,583 "" tea shop.... 9,484 "" theater. . . . . 8,74 "" club 3,146 Total.. 85,983 Opium shops 86,386 Treaty Ports are those cities in China, in which the foreignpowers have extra-territorial holdings, not subject to Chinesejurisdiction. Shanghai is one of them, the largest and mostimportant. The Statistical Abstract Relating to British India forI903-4 to I912-I3 shows the exports of British opium into theseTreaty Ports. 1903-4 1,610,296 pounds sterling 1904-5 1,504,604 1905-6 1,130,372 1906-7 1,031,065 1907-8 1,215,142 1908-9 2,703,871 1909-10 1,234,432 1910-11 2,203,670 1911-12 3,64,887 1912-13 3,242,902 It was in 1907 that China began her great fight against theopium evil, and enacted stringent laws for its prohibition onChinese soil. On page 15 of his little book, Mr. Arnold quotesfrom Commissioner Carl, of Canton: "The 1912 figure (for theimportation of foreign opium) is the largest on record since1895. The great influx of Chinese into the foreign concessions,where the antiopium smoking regulations cannot be enforced by theChinese authorities, and where smoking can be indulged in withoutfear of punishment, no doubt accounts for the unusual increaseunder foreign opium." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-55IA086-000619-B007-210http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034351 text/html 11978HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:43:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:41 GMTContent-length: 11760 The Opium Monopoly - India Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE X -- INDIA INDIA is the source and fount of the British opium trade, andit is from Indian opium that the drug is chiefly supplied to theworld. As we have said before, it is a government monopoly.Cultivators, who wish to plant poppies, may borrow money from theGovernment free of interest, the sole condition being that thecrop be sold back to the Government again. It is manufacturedinto opium at the Government factory at Ghazipur, and once amonth, the Government holds auctions at Calcutta, by means ofwhich the drug finds its way into the trade channels of theworld-illicit and otherwise.* *This description of the Opium Department is to be found inStatistics of British India, Financial Statistics, Vol. 11, 8thIssue, page 159: OPIUM. The region in which the poppy was cultivated in 1916-17for the manufacture of "Bengal opium" comprises 32districts of the United Provinces of Agra and Ouhd. The wholeDepartment has, with effect from the 29th September, 1910, beenunder the control of one Opium Agent, with headquarters atGhazipur. At Ghazipur there is a Government factory where thecrude opium is manufactured into the form in which it passes intoconsumption. The cultivation of the poppy and the manufacture ofopium are regulated by Act XIII of 1857, as amended by Act I of1911, and are under the general control of the LieutenantGovernor and the Board of Revenue of the United Provinces, andthe immediate supervision of the Opium Agent at Ghazipur. Thepossession, transport, import and export of opium are regulatedby rules framed under the Indian Opium Act. Cultivation ispermitted only under licenses granted under the authority of theOpium Agent. The area to be cultivated is fixed by the license,and the cultivator is bound to sell the whole of his productionto the Opium Department at the rate fixed by Government..........Advances, on which no interest is charged, are given to licensedcultivators at the time of executing the agreement and from timeto time (though ordinarily no more than two advances are given)until final delivery. In March, April and May the opium is madeover to the officers of the Department, and weighed and tested,and as soon as possible afterwards each cultivator's accounts areadjusted, and the balance due is paid him. After weighment theopium is forwarded to the Government factory at Ghazipur, whereit is manufactured in 3 forms-(a) opium intended for export toforeign countries, departmentally known as "provisionopium"(b) opium intended for consumption in India and Burma,departmentally known as "excise opium" and (c) medicalopium for export to London. Provision opium is made up in theform of balls or cakes, each weighing 3.5 lbs., and is packed inchests, each chest containing forty cakes, weighing 140 1/7 lbs.It is generally of 71' efficiency. Excise opium is made up incubical packets, each weighing one seer, 60 of which are packedin a case. It is of higher consistency than the "provisionopium." Medical opium is made up into cakes weighing 2 lbs.Provision opium is sold by public auction in Calcutta. Anotification is published annually, generally about the month ofJune, stating the number of chests which will be put up for salein each month of the next calendar year, and the quantities sonotified are not altered without three months notice. Sales areconducted month by month by the Bengal Government; 7,000 chestswere notified for sale in 1917 for shipment to non-China markets.The number of chests actually sold was 4,615. In addition tothis, 4,500 chests were sold to the Government of the StraitsSettlements, 2,200 to the Government of Netherland Indies, and 00to the Government of Hongkong. The duty levied by Government oneach chest may be taken to be the difference between the averageprice realized and the average cost. The following facts are taken from " Statistics ofBritish India. Financial Statistics, Volume II,EighthIssue," to be found at the New York Public Library: AREA UNDER POPPY CULTIVATION Acreage: 1910-11 362,868 1911-12 200,672 1912-13 178,263 1913-14 144,561 1914-15 164,911 1915-16 167,155 1916-17 204,186 In the hey-day of the China trade, 613,996 acres were undercultivation in the years 1905-6, consequently this is a drop inthe extent of acreage. But, as we have said before, the closingof the China market simply means that other outlets must befound, and apparently they are being found, since from I914onwards, the acreage devoted to poppy planting is slowlyincreasing again. The opium manufactured in the Government factory is of threekinds-provision opium for export; excise opium, for consumptionin India, and medical opium, for export to London. It is thislatter form of opium which, according to Mr. MacDonald, in his"Trade Politics and Christianity in Africa and theEast" is being manufactured into morphia by three Britishfirms, two in Edinburgh and one in London, which morphia theJapanese are buying and smuggling into North China. The "Statistics of British India" shows thecountries into which Indian opium has been exported: we will takethe figures for the last five years, which show the number ofchests sent out. In some countries we see a falling off, as in China.Cochin-China, the French colony, shows a considerableincrease--the little Annarnites, Tonquinese, Cambodgians andother inhabitants of this colony of the French Republic beingshown what's what. Mauretius, a British Colony five hundred milesoff the coast of Madagascar, in the Indian ocean, seems to becoming on. The falling off in shipments to the United Kingdom maypossibly have been due to the war and the scarcity of ships."Other countries" seem to be holding their own. Withthe end of the war, the increase in ships, and general traderevival, we may yet see compensation for the loss of China. Withthe increase of drug addicts in the United States, it may be thatin time America will no longer be classed under "othercountries" but will have a column all to itself. In another table we find a comparison as to the number ofchests of provision or export opium and of excise opium, or thatintended for consumption in India. Thus: Each chest contains roughly about one hundred and fortypounds. REVENUE The revenue of India is derived from various sources, and isclassified under eight heads. Thus: for 1916-17- Out of these eight classifications, opium comes fourth on thelist. But in addition to the direct opium revenue, we must addanother item, Excise, which is found under the third heading,taxation. In the "India Office List for i9i8" we find"Excise" explained as follows: Page 383: "Exciseand Customs: Excise duties in India are levied with the two foldobject of raising revenue and restricting the use of intoxicantsand narcotics." In the same book, on page 385, we also read:"Excise and Customs Revenues: The total of the excise andcustoms revenues on liquors and drugs in i 9 i 5-i 6 was in roundfigures ten million pounds. This total gives an average of rathermore than ninepence a head on the whole population of BritishIndia as the revenue charge on drink and drugs during theyear." These excise duties are collected on spirits, beer, opium andintoxicating drugs, such as ganja, charas, and bhang, all formsor preparations of Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica), known in somecountries as hashish. In 1917-18 there were 17,369 drug shopsthroughout India. The excise duties collected from these sourceswas pretty evenly distributed. Excise revenue for a period ofyears is as follows: The "Statistics of British India for 1918" has thisto say on the subject of Excise (page 218): "Revenue: Duringthe ten years ending with 1916-17 the net receipts from Exciseduties increased . . . at the rate of 47 per cent. The receiptsfrom opium (consumed in India, not exported) being at the rate of44 per cent. The net receipts from liquors and from drugs otherthan opium . . . the increase at the rate Of 48 per cent. Thislarge increase is due not merely to the expansion of consumption,but also to the imposition of progressively higher rates of dutyand the increasingly extensive control of the exciseadministration. The revenue from drugs, (excluding opium) hasrisen in ten years . . . the increase being at the rate of 67 percent." A national psychology that can review these figures withcomplacency, satisfaction and pride is not akin to Americanpsychology. A nation that can subjugate 300,000,000 helplesspeople, and then turn them into drug addicts-for the sake ofrevenue is a nation which commits a cold blooded atrocityunparalleled by any atrocities committed in the rage and heat ofwar. The Blue Book shows no horror at these figures. Complacentapproval greets the increase of 44 per cent of opium consumption,and the increase of 67 per cent in the use of other habit-formingdrugs. Approval, and a shrewd appreciation of the possibilitiesfor more revenue from "progressively higher rates ofduty," knowing well that drug addicts will sell soul andbody in order to procure their daily supply. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-56IA086-000619-B007-233http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034402 text/html 3944HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:43:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:37 GMTContent-length: 3727 The Opium Monopoly -- Turkey and Persia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XI -- TURKEY AND PERSIA NEXT to India, the greatest two opium-producing countries inthe world are Turkey and Persia. The Statesman's Year Book for1918 has this to say about it. On page 1334: "The principalexports from Turkey into the United Kingdom..... in two yearswere: These are the only articles mentioned in this list of chiefexports. There are others, doubtless, but the Statesman's YearBook is a condensed and compact little volume, dealing only withthe principal things exported. In i9i5 we therefore notice thatthe opium export was second on the list, being exceeded by butone other, dried fruit. In i9i6, the third year of the war, theopium export is decidedly less, as are all the other articlesexported, except dried fruit and wool-which were articlesprobably more vital to the United Kingdom at that time even thanopium. PERSIA THE same authority, the Statesman's Year Book for 1918, givesa table on page 1162, showing the value of the chief exports fromPersia. The values are given in thousands of kran, sixty kranequaling one pound sterling. Since the war, both Turkey and Persia are more or less undercontrol of the British Empire, which gives Great Britain virtualcontrol of the world's output of opium. With this monopoly of theopium-producing countries, and with a million or so square milesadded to her immense colonial Empire, one wonders what use GreatBritain will make of the mandatory powers she has assumed overthe lives and welfare of all these subject peoples! Will she findthese helpless millions ready for her opium trade? Will sheestablish opium shops, and opium divans, and reap half the costsof upkeep of these newly acquired states by means of thisshameful traffic? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-57IA086-000619-B007-256http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034413 text/html 3761HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:33 GMTContent-length: 3544 The Opium Monopoly - Mauretius Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XII - MAURETIUS ANOTHER British colony is Mauretius, acquired by conquest in1810, and formally ceded to Great Britain by the Treaty of Parisin 1814. This island is in the Indian Ocean, 500 miles east ofMadagascar, with an area of about 720 square miles. Thepopulation is about 377,000, of which number 258,000 are Indian,and 3,000 Chinese. Opium appears to be sold in the colony, sincethe Blue Book mentions that licenses are required for opiumsellers. As far as we can discover, by perusal of theseGovernment Reports, the sale of opium is not conducted by theGovernment itself, as in India, the Straits Settlements,Hongkong, etc., but is carried on by private dealers who obtainlicenses before they can open opium shops. A part of the revenue,however, is derived from opium; thus, according to the Blue Bookfor the Colony of Mauretius for 1915, page V 73, we read that theimports of opium for the year amounted to 1,353 kilos, with aduty collected of 54,126 rupees. The Blue Book for 1916 shows agratifying increase. Thus, the import of crude opium from Indiaamounted to 5,690 kilos, with a duty collected of 227,628 rupees.(See page V 64-) Statistics for British India, Eighth Issue, gives thesefigures: OPIUM EXPORTED TO MAURETIUS 1912-13 -- 10 chests 1913-14 -- 19 1914-15 -- 23 1915-16 -- 65 1916-17. -- 120 This is a poor little colony, but has its possibilities. Theconsumption of opium appears to be increasing steadily in a mostsatisfactory manner. Congratulations all round. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-58IA086-000619-B007-279http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034421 text/html 6493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:30 GMTContent-length: 6276 The Opium Monopoly - British North Borneo Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XIII - BRITISH NORTH BORNEO BRITISH North Borneo occupies the northern part of the islandof Borneo. Area, about 31,000 square miles, with a coast line ofover 800 miles. Population (1911 census), 208,000, consistingmainly of Mohammedan settlers on the coast and aboriginal tribesinland. The Europeans numbered 355; Chinese 26,000; Malays,1,612; East Indians about 5,000 and Filipinos 5,700. The numberof natives cannot be more than approximately estimated, but isplaced at about 170,000. The territory is under the jurisdictionof the British North Borneo Company, being held under grants fromthe Sultans of Brunei and Sulu (Royal Charter in 1881). Like many other British colonies, opium is depended upon forpart of the revenue. The Statesman's Year Book for 1916 observeson page 107: "Sources of revenue: Opium, birds' nests, courtfees, stamp duty, licenses, import and export duties, royalties,land sales, etc. No public debt." In this frank manner, our attention is called to opium, whichappears first on the list of sources o revenue. Going over the files of the Government reports, we will beginwith the "Supplement to the Official Gazette for BritishNorth Borneo. Administration Report for the Year 1910."Published June 1, 1911. On page 3 we read: Customs and Trade: Theimport and export trade of the state shows a healthy expansion. .. . It is interesting to note that imports show an increase atevery station. Out of the 47 headings of Tariff, there are only 7which show decreases. . . . The largest increases appear undercloth, $147,106; opium, $132,692, and iron ware, $218,620. . . .The general all round increases . . . are of course due to thedemand for supplies of all kinds in connection with the openingof rubber estates." The Supplement to the Official Gazette, Report for 1912(published in December, 1913) is also a report of generalprosperity. Page 4: "Trade: The volume of trade for the year1912 was $11,139,122, giving an increase over 1911 of 18 percent. . . . Imports: As in 1911, all stations show an increase ofimports. Out Of 47 headings, 33 show increases, 12 showdecreases, and 2 remain stationary. Increases: There was anincrease under rice, flour and grain . . . the increase underother headings include sundries, opium, machinery, etc." The next Government Report is not so happy. Opium imports showno "healthy expansion." Thus, the Supplement to theOfficial Gazette, Report for 1913 (published 1 February, 1915)says on page 4: "Other decreases in imports were opium,$108,18o. The decrease in opium was due to the abolition of theOpium Farm, which also held the Labuan Farm, and opium wastherefore no longer imported from Labuan for use in the WestCoast and the Interior." Still more bad news as to opium, in the report for 1914,(published 1 February, 1916). All imports drop. Page 4 records"Decrease in imports. . . . Railway and telegraph material,rice, flour, grain and opium." In this year the opiumimports only amount to $58,464. This general falling off in allimports may have been due to the war. But the opium situation wasapparently growing serious. On page 17 of this same report weread that "Thirty-two ordinances were passed by the Counciland became laws during the year. Among them the Opium andChandu." The brevity and meagerness of these official reports oftenleave one puzzled as to their meaning. The Supplement to theOfficial Gazette for 1915 (published October, 1916), shows stillmore discouraging news as to opium. Imports that year amounted toonly $31,299. But, in spite of this discouragement, hope stillremains. The same report shows optimism under the head of Excise."Excise: $627,225, against $467,078, an increase in the netrevenue of $160,147, due to Government taking over the solecontrol of the sale of chandu (smoking opium) and the collectionof other Excise duties, formerly farmed." This explains the Ordinance passed by the Council thepreceding year, regarding Opium and Chandu. Since the Governmenthas taken over 44 sole control of the sale of chandu " andwill collect the excise duties systematically and thoroughly, wemay still hope for some future report which will show once more a"healthy expansion" in the opium revenue. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-59IA086-000619-B007-297http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034428 text/html 4798HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:26 GMTContent-length: 4581 The Opium Monopoly - British Guiana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XIV - BRITISH GUIANA SITUATED in South America. Area, 89,480 square miles.Population at census of 1911, excluding aborigines in theunfrequented parts of the colony, 296,000. The Statesman's YearBook, which gives us these brief facts, has very little to sayabout this British colony in our Western Hemisphere, and gives nodates or information as to how and when it was acquired. TheGovernment reports are also meager and unsatisfactory, and thereis no wealth of detail as to exports and imports. The country,however, is rich in gold, mining having commenced in i886.Diamonds have also been discovered. The chief sources of revenue, however, are customs, excise andlicenses. With the word "excise" we have come to haveunpleasant associations. From "The Statistical Abstract forBritish Self-Governing Dominions, Colonies, Possessions andProtectorates" we find a table showing the imports of opiuminto the various countries under British rule. The opium importsinto British Guiana are as follows: 1910 1,251 pounds sterling 1911 1,270 1912 2,474 1913 4,452 1914 5,455 1915 4,481 These figures would seem to indicate that even on the WesternHemisphere the taste for opium may be cultivated. It need notnecessarily be confined to the Oriental peoples. The populationof much of South America is a mixed lot, the result of mixedbreeding between Spanish settlers, Indians, native tribes of allsorts. All this jumble, including the aborigines referred to,might, with a little teaching become profitable customers of theOpium Monopoly. Time and a little effort, given this fertilefield, ought to produce a "healthy expansion" in theopium trade. And that this insidious habit is indeed taking hold, in atleast one more country in South America, one may infer from thefollowing paragraph which appeared in the New York Times, 4October, 1919: DRUG EVIL IN ARGENTINA Buenos Aires Opens Fight on Use of Narcotics The city government of Buenos Aires, Argentina, has begun adetermined fight to wipe out the drug evil by the enactment ofstringent laws governing the sale of narcotics. This step wastaken after an investigation by the authorities had disclosedthat not only was the narcotic habit strong among the poor, butthat it was spreading throughout virtually every class in thecity. Until the passage of the laws druggists were permitted to sellcocaine, morphine and opium to any purchaser. The new laws forbidthe sale of these drugs except in filling prescriptions preparedby registered physicians. The city also has establisheddispensaries for the treatment of drug addicts. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-60IA086-000619-B007-319http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om15.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034441 text/html 13157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:22 GMTContent-length: 12939 History of the Opium Trade in China Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XV -- HISTORY OF THE OPIUM TRADE IN CHINA IN a vague way, we are familiar with the "opiumevil" in China, and some of us have hazy ideas as to how itcame about. The China Year Book for 1916 has this to say on thesubject: "The poppy has been known in China for 12centuries, and its medicinal use for 9 centuries. . . . It wasnot until the middle of the 17th century that the practice ofmixing opium with tobacco for smoking purposes was introducedinto China. This habit was indulged in by the Dutch in Java, andby them taken to Formosa, whence it spread to Amoy and themainland generally. There is no record to show when opium wasfirst smoked by itself, but it is thought to have originatedabout the end of the 18th century. Foreign opium was firstintroduced by the Portuguese from Goa at the beginning of the18th century. In 1729, when the foreign import was 200 chests,the Emperor Yung Ching issued the first anti-opium edict,enacting severe penalties on the sale of opium and the opening ofopium-smoking divans. The importation, however, continued toincrease, and by 1790 it amounted to over 4,000 chests annually.In 1796 opium smoking was again prohibited, and in 1800 theimportation of foreign opium was again declared illegal. Opiumwas now contraband, but the fact had no effect on the quantityintroduced into the country, which rose to 5,000 chests in 1820;16,000 chests in 1830; 20,000 chests in 1838, and 70,000 chestsin 1858." The China Year Book makes no mention of the traders whocarried these chests of opium into China. The opium came fromIndia, however, and the increase in importation corresponds withthe British occupation of India, and the golden days of the EastIndia Company. "Opium was now contraband, but that fact hadno effect on the quantity introduced into the country,"smuggled in wholesale by the enterprising British traders. China was powerless to protect herself from this menace,either by protests or prohibition. And as more and more of thedrug was smuggled in, and more and more of the people becamevictims of the habit, the Chinese finally had a tea-party, verymuch like our Boston Tea Party, but less successful in outcome.In 1839, in spite of the fact that opium smoking is an easy habitto acquire and had been extensively encouraged, the Britishtraders found themselves with 20,000 chests of unsold opium ontheir store-ships, just below Canton. The Chinese had repeatedlyappealed to the British Government to stop these imports, but theBritish Government had turned a persistently deaf ear. Thereforethe Emperor determined to deal with the matter on his ownaccount. He sent a powerful official named Lin to attend to it,and Lin had a sort of Boston Tea Party, as we have said, anddestroyed some twenty thousand chests of opium in a very drasticway. Mr. H. Wells Williams describes it thus: "The opium wasdestroyed in the most thorough manner, by mixing it in parcels Of200 chests, in trenches, with lime and salt water, and thendrawing off the contents into an adjacent creek at lowtide." After this atrocity, followed the first Opium War, whenBritish ships sailed up the river, seized port after port, andbombarded and took Canton. Her ships sailed up the Yangtsze, andcaptured the tribute junks going up the Grand Canal with revenueto Peking, thus stopping a great part of China's income. Peacewas concluded in 1843, and Great Britain came out well. Sherecompensed herself by taking the island of Hongkong; anindemnity Of 21 million dollars, and Canton, Amoy, Foochow,Ningpo and Shanghai were opened up as "treatyports"-for the importation of opium and the"open-door" in general. Mr. Wells, in his "Middle Kingdom" describes theorigin of this first war with England: "This war wasextraordinary in its origin as growing chiefly out of acommercial misunderstanding; remarkable in its course as beingwaged between strength and weakness, conscious superiority andignorant pride; melancholy in its end as forcing the weaker topay for opium within its borders against all its laws, thusparalyzing the little moral power its feeble government couldexert to protect its subjects. . . . It was a turning point inthe national life of the Chinese race, but the compulsory paymentof six million dollars for the opium destroyed has left a stigmaupon the English name." He also says, "The conflict was now fairly begun; itsissue between the parties so unequally matched --one havingalmost nothing but the right on its side, the other assisted byevery material and physical advantage-could easily beforeseen" and again, after speaking of it as being unjustand immoral, he concludes "Great Britain, the firstChristian power, really waged this war against the pagan monarchwho had only endeavored to put down a vice harmful to his people.The war was looked upon in this light by the Chinese; it willalways be so looked upon by the candid historian, and known asthe Opium War." Within fifteen years after this first war, there was anotherone, and again Great Britain came off victorious. China had topay another indemnity, three million dollars, and five moretreaty ports were opened up. By the terms of the Treaty ofTientsin, the sale of opium in China was legalized in 1858. From a small pamphlet, "Opium: England's Coercive Policyand Its Disastrous Results in China and India" by the Rev.John Liggins, we find the following: "As a specimen of howboth wars were carried on, we quote the following from an Englishwriter on the bombardment of Canton: 'Field pieces loaded withgrape were planted at the end of long, narrow streets crowdedwith innocent men, women and children, to mow them down likegrass till the gutters flowed with their blood.' In one scene ofcarnage, the Times correspondent recorded that half an army of10,ooo men were in ten minutes destroyed by the sword, or forcedinto the broad river. " The Morning Herald " assertedthat "a more horrible or revolting crime than thisbombardment of Canton has never been committed in the worst agesof barbaric darkness." Naturally, therefore, after the termination of these two wars,China gave up the struggle. She had fought valiantly to protecther people from opium, but the resources of a Christian nationwere too much for her. Seeing therefore that the opium trade wasto be forced upon her, and that her people were doomed todegradation, she decided to plant poppies herself. There shouldbe competition at least, and the money should not all be drainedout of the country. Thus it came about that after 1858 extensivetracts of land were given over to poppy production. Wholeprovinces or parts of provinces, ceased to grow grain and othernecessities, and diverted their rich river bottoms to the raisingof opium. Chinese opium, however, never supplanted Indian opium,being inferior to that raised in the rich valley of the Ganges.The country merely had double quantities of the drug, usedstraight or blended, to suit the purse or taste of the consumer. Then, in 1906, the incredible happened. After over a hundredyears of steady demoralization, with half her population opiumaddicts, or worse still, making enormous profits out of thetrade, China determined to give up opium. In all history, nonation has ever set itself such a gigantic task, with such agigantic handicap. China, a country of immense distances, withscant means of communication; with no common language, a landwhere only the scholars can read and write, suddenly decided tofree herself from this vice. The Emperor issued an edict sayingthat in ten years' time all opium traffic must cease, and anarrangement was made with Great Britain whereby this might beaccomplished. To the honor of America be it said that we assistedChina in this resolution. We agreed to see her through. A bargain was then made between China and Great Britain, in1907, China agreeing to diminish poppy cultivation year by yearfor a period of ten years, and Great Britain agreeing to aproportional decrease in the imports of Indian opium. A threeyears' test was first agreed to, a trial of China's sincerity andability, for Great Britain feared that this was but a ruse to cutoff Indian opium, while leaving China's opium alone in the field.At the end of three years, however, China had proved her abilityto cope with the situation. Thus, for a period of ten years, bothcountries have lived up to their bargain, the amount of nativeand foreign opium declining steadily in a decreasing scale. April1, 1917, saw the end of the accomplishment. China's part was most difficult. In the remote, interiorprovinces, poppies were grown surreptitiously, connived at bycorrupt officials who made money from the crops. However, drasticlaws were enacted and severe penalties imposed upon those whobroke them. If poppy cultivation could not be stopped, Englandwould not hold to her end of the bargain. Not only was there anation of addicts to deal with, but these could obtain copioussupplies of opium from the foreign concessions, over which theChinese had no control. We shall show, in another article, towhat extent this was carried on. Yet somehow, in some manner, theimpossible happened. Year by year, little by little, one provinceafter another was freed from poppy cultivation, until in 1917,China was practically free from the native-grown drug, andforeign importation had practically ended. In this manner, first by large smuggling, then by two opiumwars, was China drugged with opium. And in this manner, and tothis extent, has she succeeded in freeing herself from the curse.But in one way, she is not free. She has no control over theextra-territorial holdings of European powers, for in each treatyport are the foreign concessions already mentioned-German,Austrian, British, French, Russian. And in these concessions,opium may be procured. Simply by crossing an imaginary line, insuch cities as Shanghai and Hongkong, can the Chinese buy as muchopium as they choose. China will never be rid of this menace tillshe is rid of these extraterritorial holdings. Opium shops,licensed by foreign governments, are always ready to supply herpeople with the forbidden drug. We say that the China market is closed. So it is, in one way.But the British Opium Monopoly is not ended. The year 1917 saw atremendous blow dealt to the British opium dealers, but othermarkets will be found. There are other countries than China whoseinhabitants can be taught this vice. The object of thisdiscussion is to consider these other countries, and to see towhat extent the world is menaced by this possibility. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical ResearchWT01-B33-61IA086-000619-B007-359http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om16.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034455 text/html 18020HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:17 GMTContent-length: 17802 The Opium Monopoly - Conclusion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research THE OPIUM MONOPOLY BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE XVI -- CONCLUSION THERE are many people who advocate the use of opium, and whodefend the policy of the Opium Monopoly. They argue that it isnot harmful-if taken in moderation. They even assert that it isno more objectionable than alcohol or tobacco. Leaving out ofaccount, therefore, the consensus of opinion of the medicalprofession as to the evils of habit-forming drugs, and acceptingthe theory that opium is harmless, we should then like to ask whythe use of opium is so carefully restricted to the peoples ofsubject states, who have no voice in their own affairs? Whyshould the benefits of opium be confined to Oriental races, andwhy should not the white race be given the same opportunities forindulgence? Is there any reason for this discrimination? As asource of revenue, it certainly has advantages. Yet curiouslyenough, those European countries which derive much profit throughthe sale of opium to their subject races, seem to have anaversion to introducing it to their people at home. And there isa further coincidence in the fact that none of the self-governingcolonies of European countries-Australia, New Zealand andCanada-permit this traffic. It appears to be only the subjectpeoples, whose well-being has become the White Man's Burden, whoreceive the blessings of this peculiar form of altruism. Is itbecause the white race is worth preserving, worth protecting, andbecause subject nations are fair game for exploitation of anykind? Another argument advanced by advocates of Government opium isthat the Oriental peoples are "different"-that opiumdoes them no harm. Every writer on the subject of opium in China,produces evidence to show the shocking results upon that country,during the hey-dey of the deluge. The complete moral degradation,and economic ruin of thousands of helpless individuals. Nor do wethink the medical profession would agree with this assumptionthat opium is harmless to Orientals, because they are"different." Their only real difference lies in theirhelplessness to protect themselves from foreign aggression. Another argument advanced by the upholders of the Monopoly isthat the Orientals have always been users of opium, that theylike it, it suits them, it would be unfair to deprive them of it.We have seen to what extent the Chinese liked it, and how it wasforced upon them by two wars. Not until they were completelycrushed, and had to accept the terms of the conquerer, did theysubmit. It can hardly, therefore, be called a vice indigenous tothe Chinese. Japan is another Oriental nation that disproves thisargument. As we have said before, there are no opium shops inJapan, and the sale of opium is not conducted by the JapaneseGovernment. On the contrary, the Japanese have the same fear ofthis drug that a European nation has, and exercises the sameprecautions to protect its people. But, as we have said before,Japan is the only Oriental nation that has not been subjugated bya European nation, and therefore has never had opium thrust uponher. She is the only country in the Far East that has managed topreserve her sovereignty, and has never been subject to certainblighting influences of European culture. Another exception to this assumption that the Orientals cannotdo without opium lies in the Philippines. When America acquiredthose islands some twenty years ago, our first act was toeliminate the opium traffic, which had been established there byour predecessors. It had been in existence for decades, but weimmediately set about to abolish it. Root and branch we did awaywith it, and shed no crocodile tears as to the " hardship" this would be to the people who had come under ourprotection. We wished no revenue coming from such a source asthis. Yet we might have cut in half the cost of our Philippinebudget had we followed the example set by other nations. We haveseen that certain British colonies, Hongkong and the StraitsSettlements, for example, derive from one-third to one-half oftheir upkeep expenses from this traffic. But we refrained fromtreating our Filipinos in this manner. We are calledsentimentalists out in the East-at such times as we are notcalled money-getters. To-day, the Philippines are very nearlyready for self government. Would they have been so nearly readyhad we continued to drug them as they had been drugged before wetook possession? Drugged peoples are usually docile andsubmissive-perhaps that is the secret of much of the successfulcolonizing, about which we hear so much. But let us leave aside the question of the Orientals, andwhether or no opium is good for them. We recognize quite clearlythat it is not good for ourselves, for Americans. We recognizethat fact quite as clearly as England realizes that it is notgood for the inhabitants of the British Isles. Quite as clearlyas France, while setting up opium shops in her colony ofIndo-China, refuses to establish them in Paris or Marseilles.America is unique in the fact that although we have colonialpossessions, we do not have a double standard of morality. Weattempt to throw around our colonies the same safeguards that wethrow around ourselves at home. But the question arises, howsuccessful are we in protecting ourselves at home? Notparticularly so, according to the daily press. How great the danger to ourselves was recognized somethirty-seven years ago by an Episcopal missionary to China, theRev. John Liggins. In 1882 he published a small book, alreadyreferred to, entitled: "England's Coercive Opium Policy andIts Disastrous Results in China and India." The preface tothis unheeded warning runs thus. "Our aim in this sketch isto present, as briefly as possible, the most important facts andtestimonies concerning a traffic which is as disgraceful toEngland as it is ruinous to China and hurtful to India. . . . Itis also of the highest importance that the people throughout ourwide domain should be aroused concerning the new, fascinating anddeadly foe which has entered our country through the Golden Gate,and which already numbers its victims by the thousands, and willsoon do so by the tens of thousands." The Rev. Mr. Liggins saw it coming-that danger which is almostready to overwhelm us to-day. He recognized clearly that theOpium Monopoly of that great nation which rules nearly one-thirdof the world-the British Empire would in time reach further andfurther afield for new victims. It is too lucrative a trade to beconfined to only a few countries. Markets must not only becreated and legalized in subject states, but new ones added inoutside countries, through smuggling. All too fatally easy ofaccomplishment, and so profitable, financially, as to be worthany risk and effort. The prediction as to our own danger, made ini882, seems to be abundantly realized. The number of drug addicts in America to-day are fairlystartling. The number is variously estimated in New York Cityalone as from ten thousand to one hundred thousand. It is saidthat there may be a million in the country. Yet these figures arethe merest guesswork, by no means substantiated. Certain it isthat the campaign of the New York Health Department has uncoveredthousands of them, and any other city that chose to do so, couldproduce facts equally startling. The laws on our statute books concerning the prescription ofnarcotic drugs are powerless to deal with the situation. It isshooting into the air to try to "regulate" thiscondition. It is as thoroughly well "regulated" as itcan ever be by the Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act, a Federal Lawwhose enforcement is in the hands of the Internal RevenueDepartment. By the provisions of this Act, every pound of opiumor its derivatives that comes into this country, legitimately, isaccounted for, and its distribution, both wholesale and retail,made a matter of record. Thus, the Board of Trade returns showthe amount imported by the big wholesale drug houses. These mustaccount for their sales to the retail drug stores, and theamounts must tally. The drug stores can only sell narcotic drugson a physician's prescription, and the prescriptions are kept onfile, and the quantity sold must correspond to the quantitycalled for by these prescriptions, as well as to the amountobtained from the wholesale drug house. In prescribing narcotics,the physician is obliged to write his prescription intriplicate--one copy for his own protection, one copy for thelocal druggist, and one copy to be filed with the healthdepartment. Nor is he allowed to prescribe narcotics for anaddict without decreasing the dosage. His prescription cannotcall for thirty grains of morphia day after day, it must show, ina chronic case of this kind, a daily diminution of the amountprescribed, thus indicating a desire to get the patient off thedrug, eventually. All these records are kept on file, open toinspection whenever an accounting is demanded, consequently anyleak can be instantly accounted for. This Harrison Act is ascomprehensive and as nearly perfect as possible, yet it does notcover the situation. By this means, violations can be detected,whether on the part of an unscrupulous physician or druggist, oreven the wholesale house, but these violations are onlyoccasional. The root of the evil remains untouched. At one time, it was believed that carelessness on the part ofthe physician was chiefly responsible for creating drug addicts,but the recent campaign against violators of the Harrison Actseems to have completely exonerated him of this charge. For onepatient who becomes a drug addict while under a doctor's care,through the accidental misuse of morphia, there are a hundred whoform the habit through other ways. It is not the occasional,accidental victim, given morphia for the relief of pain, which iscreating our thousands of drug users. It is not the occasionalunscrupulous physician who is responsible. If this was all, wecould easily cope with these unwitting abuses, or even deliberateinstances of misuse. But the question goes deeper than this. The Opium Monopoly was not established for any humane oraltruistic purpose. It was not established to provide the medicalprofession with a drug for the relief of pain, to ease the agonyof the injured and wounded, or to calm the last days of thosedying with an incurable disease. This, which may be called thelegitimate use of opium, is not the object of the Opium Monopoly.Used only in this manner, there would be no money in it. It isonly when opium is produced in quantities far in excess of thelegitimate needs of the world that it becomes worth while-to theOpium Monopoly. That Monopoly was established not to relieve painand suffering, but with the deliberate intention of creating painand suffering, by creating drug victims by the thousand. It isthese hundreds of thousands of customers that are profitable. Themenace to America lies in the large amounts of opium which aresmuggled into the country for this purpose. Boys and girls osixteen and seventeen first acquire this habit through curiosity,through association with what they call "bad company,"peddlers who first offer it free, as a gift, well knowing thatafter a few doses the fatal habit will be formed. Where do thesevendors obtain their supplies? The daily papers often contain suggestive paragraphs. Thus the" New York Times," under date of February 28, 1919:" Seize Opium in Schenectady. Opium, valued by Federalofficials at $10,000 was seized in Schenectady, and four Chinamenwere arrested in a raid on Chinese places of business on Centrestreet today. The Federal officials expressed the belief thatopium had been smuggled, and that Schenectady is the distributingpoint for this part of the State." An item in the "Seattle Union Record," of June 24,1919, gives us cause for further consideration. BRITISH DRUG SHIP HELD BY UNITED STATES FINE OF $49,265 ASSESSED FOR BRINGING "DOPE" TOAMERICA LINER ALLOWED TO MOVE UNDER BOND NO ARRESTS MADE, THOUGH BOOZE IS FOUND ABOARD No arrests were made up to Tuesday noon in connection with theenormous seizure of opium, cocaine and liquor on the Blue Funnelliner Cyclops, although the investigation is being continued byfederal officials. The ship has been seized and a fine of $49,265 has beenassessed against her for having drugs not listed in the ship'smanifest. United States District Attorney Robert C. Saunders filed alibel Monday night against the Cyclops, the boat being seizedlater by the customs service. Bond was fixed at $100,00, or twicethe fine. The Fidelity Surety Company filed the bond Monday. Theship was released Tuesday morning. A civil libel suit may be filed against Capt. W. Duncan,holding him responsible for the liquor found on the ship. CaptainDuncan, questioned Monday by customs officials, claimed to knownothing about the contraband. The result of Monday's checking of the opium and cocaineshowed that the seizure amounted to 778 tins of opium, 670 ouncesof cocaine and 16 ounces of morphine. A small paragraph in a New York paper, dated June 12, 1919,reads thus: "Two New Yorkers jailed for smuggling opium.Pleas of guilty to charges of opium smuggling were entered in theFederal Court today by Albertus Schneitzer and Maxwell Auerbach,of New York. They were fined $500 each, and sent to Atlantapenitentiary, the former for two years, and the latter for oneyear. The men were arrested in connection with the seizure ofopium on the Canadian border." We cannot grapple with our problem unless we face the facts;if we ignore the source of supply and distribution, and thereasons for this immense overproduction of opium on the part ofthe British Opium Monopoly. The anti-narcotic laws on our statutebooks are powerless to protect us. With Canada, a Britishprovince, to the north, and all Mexico on the south, what chancehave we against such exposure? Of what use to send two smugglersto the penitentiary, when at the Calcutta opium sales, once amonth opium is auctioned off under the auspices of the BritishGovernment, to be disposed of as the buyers may see fit? Much ofit, as we have seen, goes to those helpless states and colonieswhich have no control over their own affairs, where the opiumtraffic is conducted under the administration of the aliengovernment. Much of the rest of it goes out for smugglingpurposes, to be distributed in devious, roundabout, underhandchannels throughout the world. We are coming in for our share inthis distribution. We feel that our country is in grave peril. Our politiciansand our diplomats have been too careful all these years, to speakof this business, through fear of offending a powerful nation.But we feel that the time has now come to speak. England has beenrelying upon our silence to "get away with it." Uponour ignorance, and upon that silence which gives consent. But inthis new, changed world, reborn out of the blood and agony of thegreat war, is it not time to practice some of the decencies whichwe have proclaimed so loudly? As we have said before, no stronger opponents of this policyare to be found than among a section of the people of Englanditself. We look to them to join us, in this great issue, and wefeel that we shall not look in vain. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B33-62IA086-000619-B009-347http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/booklist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035229 text/html 95767HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:51:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:46 GMTContent-length: 95549 Recent Comments on the War on Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Recent Comments on the War on Drugs Extracts from a variety of recent books and publicationsregarding the war on drugs. Abram, K. M. & Teplin, L. A. (1991 October). Co-occurringdisorders among mentally ill jail detainees: Implications forpublic policy. American Psychologist, 46 1036-1045. "...jails contain disproportionate numbers of severely mentally ill persons with codisorders" (Abram & Teplin, 1991, p. 1036). "Jails, unlike many treatment facilities, have no requirements or restrictions for entry" (Abram & Teplin, 1991, p. 1042). "Despite the criminal justice system's legal mandate to provide mental health treatment (Bowring v. Godwin, 1977; Estelle v. Gamble, 1976; Jones v. Wittenberg, 1971), few mentally ill detainees are detected or diverted to mental health or substance abuse facilities" (Abram & Teplin, 1991, p. 1043). SAGE Criminal Justice System Annuals."...focus on and develop topics and themes that areimportant to the study of criminal justice. Each edited volumecombines multiple perspectives to provide an interdisciplinaryapproach that is useful to students, researchers, andpolicymakers." DRUG TREATMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE- (Sage criminal justice system annuals; v.27) - James A.Inciardi, Editor - Sage Publications (1993); Newbury Park,California. Inciardi, J. A. (1993). Introduction: A response to the war ondrugs. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), Drug treatment and criminaljustice (pp. 1-4). Newbury Park: Sage Publications, Inc. "The American crack experience is fairly well known, having been reported, and perhaps overreported, in the media since early 1986" (Inciardi, 1993, p. 1). "As asset forfeiture provisions, RICO [Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations] and CCE [Continuing Criminal Enterprise statute] mandate forfeiture of the fruits of criminal activities" (Inciardi, 1993, p. 1). "At state and local levels, zero tolerance gave birth to the many 'user accountability' statutes. User accountability was based on the notion that if there were no drug users there would be no drug problems and that casual users of drugs, like addicts, were responsible for creating the demand that made trafficking in drugs a lucrative criminal enterprise. As such, the new laws called for mandatory penalties for those found in possession of small quantities of drugs (Inciardi, 1993, p. 2). Wellisch, J., Anglin, M. D., & Prendergast, M. L. (1993).Treatment strategies for drug-abusing women offenders. In J. A.Inciardi (Ed.), Drug treatment and criminal justice (pp.5-29). Newbury Park: Sage Publications, Inc. "The Federal Corrections Institute in Lexington, Atwood Hall Drug Abuse Program [AHDAP] is a traditional 12-step program in which drug abuse is viewed as a disease that leads to physical deterioration, emotional instability, and spiritual bankruptcy" (Wellisch, Anglin, & Prendergast, 1993, p. 11). Some of the requirements for admission to this program (AHDAP) are "...no serious medical, psychiatric, or psychological problems; and no violent institutional infractions within the last 12 months" (Wellisch, Anglin, & Prendergast, 1993, p. 11). Re: enrollment in treatment programs while incarcerated--"Most authorities agree that too early enrollment may erode the gains made in treatment because the prisoners will remain in an environment--the prison--that is conductive to relapse" (Wellisch, Anglin, & Prendergast, 1993, p. 21). "Drug abuse treatment requires individuation and a degree of flexibility that is not consonant with most prison operations" (Wellisch, Anglin, & Prendergast, 1993, p. 21). "Because dependence on drugs is a chronically relapsing condition, in most cases several cycles of treatment, aftercare, and relapse will occur" (Wellisch, Anglin, & Prendergast, 1993, p. 22). "...since a large percentage of incarcerated women have been subjected to physical and sexual abuse, they require counseling and psychological support in addition to general health care" (Wellisch, Anglin, & Prendergast, 1993, p. 24). Pan, H., Scarpitti, F. R., Inciardi, J. A., & Lockwood, D.(1993). Some considerations on therapeutic communities incorrections. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), Drug treatment andcriminal justice (pp. 30-43). Newbury Park: SagePublications, Inc. "There are many phenomena in the prison environment that make rehabilitation difficult" (Pan, Scarpitti, Inciardi, & Lockwood, 1993, p. 34). "Finally, there is the prison subculture--a system of norms and values that tend to militate against rehabilitation" (Pan et al., 1993, p. 34). Peters, R. H. (1993). Drug treatment in jails and detentionsettings. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), Drug treatment and criminaljustice (pp. 44-80). Newbury Park: Sage Publications, Inc. "Federal, state, and local responses to the drug epidemic have focused on reducing the supply of drugs through enhanced law enforcement efforts, minimum mandatory sentences for drug offenses, and unprecedented construction of new jails and prisons. Efforts aimed at drug suppliers and users have not succeeded in reducing the availability of drugs in most communities (Peters, 1993, p. 45). "The role of jails has expanded in the past 20 years to address the needs of special inmate populations, including substance abusers, the mentally ill, and individuals with educational and vocational deficits. These changes have been affected in part by the recognition that jails frequently serve as the repository for socially disadvantaged populations (e.g., mentally ill, substance abusers, the homeless) that move somewhat fluidly from one community institution to another" (Peters, 1993, p. 46). "Survey findings indicate that a small fraction of jail inmates in need of substance abuse treatment were receiving services (Peters, 1993, p.49). "The CD [Chemical Dependency] approach views the development of addictive disorders as a product of physiological, psychological, and social factors. Inmates are taught that drug dependence is a lifetime disorder. During periods of abstinence, the 'disease' is in remission, but the individual must always be concerned with reoccurrence of symptoms" (Peters, 1993, p. 50). "...narcotic agonists such as methadone, which replace the physiological need for opiates,...have been found to be useful in the treatment of offenders who are addicted to opiates" (Peters, 1993, p. 52). "Methadone treatments have been researched extensively and have been shown to be effective in reducing withdrawal symptoms and drug cravings" (Peters, 1993, p. 52). "Use of this approach [methadone] is usually reserved for individuals who have not been able to achieve abstinence in drug-free programs. Use of methadone is governed by federal regulations that require narcotic dependency for at least 1 year prior to the onset of treatment and previous involvement in treatment. Other federal guidelines require drug testing, counseling, and development of individualized treatment plans (Office of Technology Assessment, 1990). Several states have also adopted regulations governing dosage levels and quality assurance monitoring" (Peters, 1993, (p. 52). "Methadone has been used infrequently in jail settings, because, in part, of a reluctance by administrators to provide narcotics to inmates and related issues of medical supervision and concerns of compromising institutional security" (Peters, 1993, p. 52). Martin, S. S. & Inciardi, J. A. (1993). Case managementapproaches for criminal justice clients. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.),Drug treatment and criminal justice (pp. 81-96). NewburyPark: Sage Publications, Inc. "As case studies have repeatedly pointed out, such stressful life events as divorce or loss of employment can play a critical role in precipitating a relapse to drug use" (Martin & Inciardi, 1993, p. 82). Dembo, R., Williams, L., & Schmeidler, J. (1993).Addressing the problems of substance abuse in juvenilecorrections. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), Drug treatment andcriminal justice (pp. 97-126). Newbury Park: SagePublications, Inc. "Research has repeatedly found that criminal behavior increases following addiction, and that arrests for drug offenses and property offenses decline with decreasing frequency of drug use" (Dembo, Williams, & Schmeidler, 1993, p. 113). "Methadone maintained clients have better outcomes in terms of illicit drug use and other criminal behavior than when not treated or detoxified and released or when methadone is tapered down and terminated. Clients who stay in treatment longer have better outcomes than clients with shorter treatment courses" (Dembo, Williams, & Schmeidler, 1993, p. 116). "It is counterproductive to treat youths in residential settings, only to return them unassisted to environments that supported their problem behavior in the past" (Dembo, Williams, & Schmeidler, 1993, p. 119). "In treating a person for dysfunctional drug use, it is important to appreciate that altering a drug-dependent existence is often a prolonged process involving periodic relapses to drug use" (Dembo, Williams, & Schmeidler, 1993, p. 121). Swartz, J. (1993). TASC--The next 20 years: Extending,refining, and assessing the model. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), Drugtreatment and criminal justice (pp. 127-148). Newbury Park:Sage Publications, Inc. "Addicts who are fortunate enough to have been well educated, have steady incomes, and good social support and thus do not need to turn to crime to support their addictions, often experience...problems with relapse. The fact that many [Treatment Alternative to Street Crimes] TASC clients more often than not have additional burdens and problems to overcome makes relapse even more understandable in their circumstances" (Swartz, 1993, p. 135). THE WAR ON DRUGS: HEROIN, COCAINE, CRIME, AND PUBLICPOLICY Inciardi, J. A. (1986). The war on drugs: Heroin, cocaine,crime, and public policy. Palo Alto: Mayfield PublishingCompany. The Atlanta Georgian, 27 February 1935, ran a poem named 'The Jaws of Death' by George E. Phair: "A slinking thing with hellish sting, The reptile known as Dope. Its poison breath is living death Beyond the pale of hope, And in the blight of endless night Its countless victimsgrope. In stricken homes the reptile roams On hearthstones bare andbleak. Ambition dies in youthful eyes, Slain by the noxious reek. For Dope is strong and prospers long Because the laws areweak" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 20). "...Anslinger's crusade appears to have been the ravings of a madman. Using the mass media as his forum, Anslinger described marijuana as a Frankenstein drug that was stalking American youth" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 22). In a magazine, he wrote: "The sprawled body of a young girl lay crushed on the sidewalk the other day after a plunge from the fifth story of a Chicago apartment house. Everyone called it suicide, but actually it was murder. The killer was a narcotic known to America as marijuana, and to history as hashish. It is a narcotic used in the form of cigarettes, comparatively new to the United States and as dangerous as a coiled rattlesnake...(Inciardi, 1986, p. 22). The same magazine, American Magazine, ran this from Anslinger: "An entire family was murdered by a youthful addict in Florida. When officers arrived at the home, they found the youth staggering about in a human slaughterhouse. With an ax he had killed his father, mother, two brothers, and a sister. He seemed to be in a daze....He had no recollection of having committed the multiple crime. The officers knew him ordinarily as a sane, rather quiet young man; now he was pitifully crazed. They sought the reason. The boy said that he had been in the habit of smoking something which youthful friends called "muggles," a childish name for marihuana [sic]" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 22). "Colored students at the Univ. of Minn. partying with female students (white), smoking (marijuana) and getting their sympathy with stories of racial persecution. Result pregnancy. Two Negroes took a girl fourteen years old and kept her for two days under the influence of marihuana [sic]. Upon recovery she was found to be suffering from syphilis" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 22). "During the early decades of the twentieth century, commentaries about cocaine took on racial overtones, precipitated by white fears of the blacks' sexual and criminal impulses. In 1910, for example, testimony before a committee of the House of Representatives referenced these fears and also included almost every white stereotype of blacks: The colored people seem to have a weakness for it [cocaine]. It is a very seductive drug, and it produces extreme exhilaration. Persons under the influences on it believe they are millionaires. They have an exaggerated ego. They imagine they can lift this building, if they want to, or can do anything they want to. They have no regard for right or wrong. It produces a kind of temporary insanity. They would just as leave rape a woman as anything else and a great many of the southern rape cases have been traced to cocaine" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 72). "Indeed, heroin is a powerful narcotic. Several times more potent than morphine, it suppresses both respiratory and cardiovascular activity, has strong analgesic effects and a high-addiction potential. At overdose levels, heroin can produce coma, shock, and ultimately, respiratory arrest and death" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 52). "As the result of Anslinger's crusade, on August 2, 1937, the Marijuana Tax Act was signed into law, classifying the scraggly tramp of the vegetable world as a narcotic and placing it under essentially the same controls as the Harrison Act had done with opium and coca products" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 23). Inciardi (1986, p. 204) criticizes psychiatrist Thomas Szasz's point that "...the drug problem in America was created in great part by the very policies designed to control it" by saying that in Szasz's book there were "numerous errors of fact combined with his caustic abuse of the English language." Likewise, Inciardi (1986, p. 204) does not agree with Washington attorney Rufus King who takes a similar view and has described American drug-control policies as "a 50-year folly, a misguided and ineffective endeavor." make footnote: 50-year folly--Rufus King, The Drug Hang-Up: America's Fifty-Year Folly (New York: W. W. Norton, 1972). Again disagreeing, Inciardi (1986, p.204) quotes Alfred R. Lindesmith from an article in The Nation: For 40 years the United States has tried in vain to controlthe problem of drug addiction by prohibition and policesuppression. The disastrous consequences of turning over to thepolice what is an essentially medical problem are steadilybecoming more apparent as narcotic arrests rise each year to newrecords and the habit continues to spread, especially among youngpersons. Control by prohibition has failed; but the proposedremedies for this failure consist mainly of more of the samemeasures which have already proved futile. Inciardi (1986, pp.204-206) lumps these social scientiststogether and dismisses them as "armchair crusaders who hadlittle direct contact with life in the street worlds of heroin,cocaine, and crime [who]....suggest that federal drug policiesare simply an outgrowth of the government's practiced benignstupidity." In contrast with those views, Inciardi (1986, pp.204-205) defines and disagrees with the Marxist perspective of Criminologists D. Stanley Eitzen and Doug A. Timmer "that the American approach is deliberately structured to fail because the political economy of the United States needs the private accumulation of capital and profit that drug trafficking provides. For that reason, they state, the drug trades are not only tolerated, but condoned as well." Criminologists Eitzen and Timmer are dismissed by Inciardi (1986, p. 205) because he believes they "read far too much into an erroneously documented statement" by William J. Chambliss in On the Take: ...the heroin traffic from Southeast Asia, especially from theGolden Triangle of northern Thailand, Burma, and Laos, expandedproduction as a new source of heroin for the incredibly lucrativeAmerican market....It is not known whether this new heroin sourcewas linked to Republican politicians, but the fact that the CIAand the South Vietnamese governments under general Ky and Thieuactively aided the development of this heroin source suggeststhat such a link is not beyond the realm of possibility. Inciardi (1986, p. 205) scoffs at the translation of"this into the 'private accumulation of capital andprofit'" argument but does accept the conclusion of AlfredW. McCoy in The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia"that the heroin trade in Southeast Asia grew to some extentwith the complicity of the U.S. government representatives inthat part of the world...[due to] American anticommunistzeal." Ask Dr. Brown about the Iran-Contra coverup movie we saw about Oliver North, Reagan, etc. Doesn't that give more credence to the Marxist perspective of Eitzen and Timmer? It is absolutely amazing to me how many of our rights we are willing to give up in the off chance that we can put a dent in the drug problem. "Ignorant men don't know what good they hold in their hands until they've flung it away" (Sophocles). "Dr. William Pollin, former director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse:...If there were no law enforcement, then the number of cocaine users would be up there in the same numbers with smokers and drinkers" (Inciardi, 1986, p. 211). Pray tell, how does he know? It is inconceivable that those who demand scientific studies and well-documented evidence insist on using these off-the-wall quotes regarding something that no one knows for certain is going to happen. DRUGS AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM:Volume II. Sage Criminal Justice System Annuals. J. A. Inciardi& C. D. Chambers (Eds.). 1974. King, R. (1974). "The American system": Legalsanctions to repress drug abuse. In J. A. Inciardi & C. D.Chambers (Eds.), Drugs and the criminal justice system(pp. 17-38). Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. "...ambitious lawmakers and empire-building policemen appear to have created social attitudes instead of, as the system is supposed to work, merely reflecting and responding to them" (King, 1974, p.18). "During the Civil War opium and morphine were in such demand to control dysentery and ease the suffering of wounded soldiers that addiction among veterans was tolerantly known as 'the Army disease" (King, 1974, p.18). In the early 1900s, the approximately 200,000 "victims [of addiction] were believed to be preponderantly female, middle-aged, white, Southern, rural, and from privileged or middle classes. No one then dreamed of associating drug abuse with criminality" (King, 1974, pp. 18-19). The Food and Drug Act of 1906 "...required drug manufacturers who made use of interstate commerce to disclose the ingredients in their products by appropriate labeling" (King, 1974, p. 19). In the meantime, China lost the Opium Wars and "...according to one estimate, 27 percent of the adult male population of the country was addicted in some degree" (King, 1974, p. 19). "On the other side of the world in Washington, Yankee lawmakers were being swept away by missionary and moralistic zeal...[and in 1908] President Theodore Roosevelt proposed that all powers concerned with the international opium traffic should meet to consider cooperative measures to put an end to it" (King, 1974, p. 20.) "Out of this came the Shanghai Conference (1909) and the Hague Opium Convention, signed in 1912 by delegates from thirteen governments. Under this Convention...each High Contracting Party proposed to bind itself to restrain its nationals from trafficking in opium and coca products, and to impose domestic controls on its citizens to curb non-medicinal uses" (King, 1974, p. 20). "The first federal control enactment, the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914...relied upon a then extraordinary extension of the federal tax power to require manufacturers, distributors, and dispensers of opiates and coca products to register with the Treasury Department and to keep records of transactions involving these substances" (King, 1974, p. 19). This is how Congress intended to fulfill their obligation to the Hague Opium Convention. "And it bears stressing again that in that day federal intervention into matters of local choice and personal concern was virtually unprecedented" (King, 1974, p. 21). "...it was even possible for addicted persons of sufficient prominence and good connections to be 'treated' with tacit Bureau protection. The payoff for this was what Commissioner Anslinger wanted in the way of appropriations for his forces, and new federal legislation he usually got virtually for the asking" (King, 1974, p. 24). Re: Marijuana Tax Act of 1937--"So the result was merely another nationwide enforcement empire and new categories of federal crime" (King, 1974, p. 25). "By 1937, when the Marijuana Tax Act was pushed through Congress, the T-men had begun to sound another note that would become their major theme for the ensuing decade: the charge that American drug problems were caused by too-light penalties for second and subsequent drug offenses" (King, 1974, p. 25). At the same time the Senate Judiciary Committee held its hearing, the American Medical Association (AMA) and American Bar Association (ABA) made a study of the drug problem. The five recommendations which came out of this included "a comparative study of federal and state laws" and"an evaluation of the effectiveness of current enforcementpolicies". The Bureau of Narcotics threw a fit and attackedwith 'comments' on the recommendations and interference with theproject's funding (King, 1974, 28). Glaser, D. (1974). Interlocking dualities in drug use, drugcontrol, and crime. In J. A. Inciardi & C. D. Chambers(Eds.), Drugs and the criminal justice system (pp. 39-56).Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. Daniel Glaser (1974, p.39) described two types of drug use. The first is "instrumental", and that means a drug is used "for a specific physiological effect." An example of instrumental drug use would be to take an aspirin for a headache, a cold preparation to relieve symptoms of sneezing and runny nose, or the addict taking opiates to relieve withdrawal symptoms. "Appreciative" use of drugs is "done to conform to socio-cultural expectations in particular situations where shared norms and values encourage it"; it is expected that a person have a drink containing alcohol at a cocktail party. "Continued heavy use of opiates will almost always acquire an instrumental aspect when physiological dependence occurs and the users discover that opiates relieve withdrawal symptoms; this instrumental aspect is superimposed on any appreciative basis for its use" (Glaser, 1974, p. 41). In other words, no matter how a person starts using opiates--appreciatively, socializing with friends, or instrumentally, coping with pain, ultimately use always becomes instrumental in relieving withdrawal symptoms. "The newer pattern of opiate use predominant in the United States since World War II is initially more appreciative than instrumental. It occurs mainly among youth in urban areas who have a background of delinquency, of other drug taking, and of failure or dissatisfaction in conventional educational and occupational pursuits. Minority group youth from poor families are over-represented in this newer pattern of opiate use" (Glaser, 1974, p. 41). Government agencies use prohibition and regulation to control drug use. "Prohibition is directed at suppressing all use of a drug, while regulation is concerned only with restricting the circumstances, procedures, and subjects of drug use" (Glaser, 1974, p. 41-42). "The 1914 Harrison Act of the United States and the 1920 Dangerous Drug Act of Great Britain are very similar, both being based on a 1912 International Conference at the Hague to promote opiate regulation ....[but] the American system gradually became one of prohibition,...while the British system remained more limited to regulation. Since the post-World War II legislation, opiate use has become a far costlier problem for American society than it was prior to World War II" (Glaser, 1974, p. 42). "Regulation rather than prohibition prevails in most of Europe and many other parts of the world. A salient advantage of regulation is that it permits files of police and health authorities to be much more complete and current on the number and characteristics of drug users than files where prohibition prevails and drug users are motivated to keep their drug use hidden from authorities. Further consequences of a prohibition rather than a regulation approach to drug control become evident when one examines how problems of policing depend upon the behavior to be policed" (Glaser, 1974, p. 43). "Prohibition of drugs in great demand is feasible only in a tightly regulated society or in an isolated community; it has never closed more than a minute percentage of the actual or potential channels of supply for any profitable illegal drug market in America" (Glaser, 1974, p. 44). "An acute shortage of opiates for addicts developed in the United States during World War II because shipments from opium-producing countries were cut off or impaired by enemy military actions....Since money was plentiful and addicts were desperate, the price they would pay for illegal opiates increased, and the tremendous profits in narcotics selling attracted professional criminals (Glaser, 1974, p. 46). "The entrance of organized crime into large-scale narcotic trafficking after World War II more than met the demand of the older instrumental addict; these organizations also developed a new and greater market of appreciative users in the drug peddlers' home neighborhoods, the slums" (Glaser, 1974, p. 46). Two direct relationships between drugs and crime are mentioned in Daniel Glaser's (1974, pp. 47-48). Interlocking Dualities: The first is "the fact that prohibition laws make drug use or possession a crime in itself [and] that the chemical action of a drug on the human body causes a person to commit crimes. This is the 'dope fiend' mythology widely promulgated by proponents of prohibition laws, notably those against alcohol, opiate, and marijuana. They allege that many assaults, robberies, and rapes result from users being 'crazed' by these drugs." "...three indirect relationships of drug use to crime are all, in fact, effects of prohibition policies much more than of drug use itself: ...persons who are addicted but cannot afford the price of drugs will commit crimes to get money to pay for drugs [so] the first of the distinctly prohibition-engendered types of crime is addiction-supporting professional property crime" (Glaser, 1974, p. 49). The involvement of large-scale criminal organizations in the sale of illegal drugs is a second effect of prohibition....Because these criminal entrepreneurs operate outside the law in their drug transactions, they are not bound by business etiquette in their competition with each other, in their collection of debts, or in their non-drug investments. Terror, violence, extortion, bribery, or any other expedient strategy is relied upon by these criminals not only in the sale of illegal goods or services, but also in their investments in legitimate businesses of all types, from taverns to savings and loan associations. The most serious impact of prohibition of drug use on crime probably is that which is most indirect--its consequences for the total administration of justice in a society" (Glaser, 1974, pp. 49-50) vis-a-vis erosion of the Bill of Rights, disrespect for the law in general, and shady enforcement policies. "Social movements to enact prohibition laws have been promoted by 'moral entrepreneurs' when they regarded a drug as dangerous and promulgated an interpretation of its use as morally reprehensible (Becker, 1963). When that which is to be prohibited is used only by small or low-status segments of the population...passage of the legislation reflects a combination of the prohibitionists' exaggerated accounts of the harmful effects of these substances and the ignorance or indifference on this matter of the rest of the population. Under these circumstances legislators have a highly vocal group against them if they oppose prohibition, but there is little objection if they support it, so they vote for drug prohibition as though they were voting for Motherhood, even when they have no direct awareness [of it] as a problem" (Glaser, 1974, p.51). THIS GOES DIRECTLY TO THE POLICY OF DISCRIMINATION OF POOR AND MINORITIES, THOSE WHO THE LAWS DEFILE. A PERSON WITH CLOUT IS ABLE TO DETOUR THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM AND OBTAIN HIS/HER medicine THROUGH PROPER CHANNELS. E.G. MCCARTHY. Glaser (1974, p. 50) predicted that "the ultimate form of control for all non-medical drugs in the United States will greatly resemble the present controls for alcohol." UNFORTUNATELY, IN SPITE OF THE OVERWHELMING ARGUMENTS FOR DECRIMINALIZATION, WE CONTINUE TO PLUNGE HEADLONG INTO MORE REPRESSIVE LAWS, FURTHER BASTARDIZATION OF THE BILL OF RIGHTS, AND THE FURTHERANCE OF THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE &QUOT;DRUG FIEND&QUOT;. "Probably in the future drugs will be available to those who crave them sufficiently, with no risk of criminal prosecution if they use authorized procurement procedures and only fines or other lesser penalties for illegal use....[and] the dispensation of more dangerous drugs will doubtless be under medical supervision" (Glaser, 1974, p. 51). Gould, L. C. (1974). Crime and the addict: Beyond commonsense. In J. A. Inciardi & C. D. Chambers (Eds.), Drugsand the criminal justice system (pp. 57-76). Beverly Hills:Sage Publications, Inc. "Drug addiction is a major contributor to our nation's crime problem....Since possessing illegal drugs is itself a crime, and since addicts have to possess drugs in order to be addicts, addiction increases the total amount of crime" (Gould, 1974, p. 57). "Of the seven 'serious' crimes included in the FBI Index of Crimes (manslaughter, rape, assault, robbery, burglary, larceny, and auto theft) Americans are most fearful of the first four, crimes against the person (President's Crime Commission, 1967a: 87-89). But with the exception of robbery, these are not the crimes that drug addicts are most likely to commit" (Gould, 1974, pp. 58-59). "To explain the epidemic qualities of drug use, one could turn to the works of Erikson (1966) and Durkheim (1958) who argue that crime becomes epidemic in form during periods of extreme social stress. Indeed, according to these sociologists, it is through the resolution of these epidemics that societies realign their normative boundaries and reaffirm the validity of their normative order" (Gould, 1974, p. 72). The call for stiffer punishment is the 'classical-utilitarian' theory which was "the prevailing theory at the time our nation was founded" (Glaser, 1974, p. 71) but has "little currency among modern criminologists." "Positivist criminological theory is the hypothesis that people commit crime because of psychological, biological, or social factors in their present makeup or personal backgrounds....When crime has been on the increase, all positivist criminologists have been able to do is recommend treatment and rehabilitation" (Gould, 1974, p. 71). McGlothlin, W. H. & Tabbush, V. C. (1974). Costs,benefits, and potential for alternative approaches to opiateaddiction control. In J. A. Inciardi & C. D. Chambers (Eds.),Drugs and the criminal justice system (pp. 77-124).Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. "Methadone maintenance-1 (MM-1) is the type of program currently being offered in a number of clinics imposing strict control. Urines are closely monitored and patients are confronted with evidence of illicit drug use. Take-home methadone is only permitted when there is continuing evidence of abstinence from heroin and other drugs, plus social stability. Patients are strongly urged to seek employment and are dismissed from the program for repeated drug use, alcoholism, irregular participation, and illegal behavior" (McGlothlin & Tabbush, 1974, p. 87). "A review of current methadone programs indicates that some 25 to 50 percent of the patients are indeed motivated by this aspect. They do want out of the addiction routine and are attracted by the normal rewards afforded by working, family, etc. They make minimum demands on the program staff, do not attempt to circumvent the treatment via substitution of other drugs, and often demonstrate a dramatic change in life style" (McGlothlin & Tabbush, 1974, pp. 89-90). "It is useful to point out the logical fallacies resulting from society's ambivalence in dealing with...[addiction]. It is perhaps best reflected in the Supreme Court's decision to invalidate the crime of being an addict, but continue the felony penalty for possessing the necessary material for addiction (Robinson decision)" (McGlothlin & Tabbush, 1974, p. 117). Meiselas, H. & Brill, L. (1974). The role of civilcommitment in multimodality programming. In J. A. Inciardi &C. D. Chambers (Eds.), Drugs and the criminal justice system(pp. 171-182). Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. "It is increasingly recognized today that criteria other than abstinence--such as improvement in interpersonal relationships, changes in self-image, employment, better use of leisure time, reduction in drug use and criminality, and general movement towards conventional behavior must be applied to assess treatment success" (Meiselas & Brill, 1974, p. 173). "What must be stressed...is that there are all kinds of drug abusers, involved in varying degrees with drugs. Some may be 'deviant' only in the area of involvement with drugs and conventional in all other respects; while others are totally submerged in all aspects of living as subsumed under the term 'street addict'" (Meiselas & Brill, 1974, p.175). "The question of civil rights and liberties has figured prominently in discussions about civil commitment as a device for compelling treatment. Psychiatrists and doctors such as Szasz (1963, 1970) and Well (1970) and sociologists like Schur (1965) hold that society has no right to define and control private behavior and see drug use as a personal affair. The natural corollary of this position is that treatment may not be indicated at all; or, if it is, it must be voluntary and not imposed since it then becomes punitive and valueless" (Meiselas & Brill, 1974, p. 179). Greenberg, S. M. (1974). Compounding a felony: Drug abuse andthe American legal system. In J. A. Inciardi & C. D. Chambers(Eds.), Drugs and the criminal justice system (pp.183-202). Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. "Imagine, if you will, that the drug abuse crisis in our country was the result of a conspiracy. A conspiracy so vast in its scope as to boggle the mind of a James Bond. The purpose of this conspiracy would be, of course, to so confound and confuse the United States of America that she consistently and mindlessly would pursue a course of absolute idiocy. That she would steadfastly perform acts that were antagonistic to her best interests--that would alienate her people, destroy her health, ruin her morale. Imagine the minds of her legislators befuddled, the souls of her judges and policemen hardened and twisted in hatred, the intellects of her educators confused, and her citizenry reduced to the level of a frenzied mob. Conjure up the picture of evil alien rules rubbing together their hands in glee over the sight of the most powerful nation in the world destroying itself from within, like a scorpion dispatching itself with its own stinger. And then ask yourself--if the truth is not toopainful--whether any evil aliens or sinister plots could havesucceeded in impairing our national welfare as totally as we havedone through our frenzied efforts to react to a phenomenon thatwe never really attempted to understand. Try and recall theperiod in our history when people first began to realize thatdrugs were going to be a white middle-class problem in the UnitedStates, and consequently decided to do something about it. Lookback on all the legislation, all the drug education programs, allthe legal and illegal police activities, and yes, even all theNational Football League public service announcements on drugabuse. Are we any closer now to what we wanted to accomplish backin 1964 in terms of keeping drug abuse within 'acceptable'limits? If we could be magically transported back to thosefateful years of the 1960s and be given a chance to do the wholething over again, and then if we deliberately attempted to createthe drug problem, could we, even with the benefit of hindsight,be more successful at throwing our country into crisis? It is time to face the fact that after several frantic,heartbreaking years of reaction and overreaction to drug usage,we have accomplished virtually nothing--nothing except theexposure of our legal system as an inept, sometimes oppressiveand corrupt instrument for the enforcement of public and privatemorality. We have not curbed drug abuse...we haven't even slowedit. What we have done is to further alienate an entire generationof our children, already alienated by the reality they perceivearound them. ...Had the Vietnam war ended in 1965 or 1966, would the'passive' 1950s have erupted into the massive disruptions andviolence of the 1960s? If the nation had reacted to the shame ofwatching an overtly racist social system enforce its values byutilizing firehoses, clubs, guns, bayonets, and vicious dogs tosubdue non-violent school children, and committed itself on along-term basis to establishing real equality for blacks, wouldour children have turned away from their television sets in fearand disgust and taken to the streets? An finally, if we hadreacted with acceptance, or even paternalistic amusement to longhair, bare feet, unorthodox dress, and the conception of a newtype of brotherhood for our country, instead of with disgust,envy, hatred, fear and violence--if we had taken the flower thatwas offered instead of slapping the bearers' hands away--could wenot have kept our children, instead of driving them away?"(Greenberg, 1974, pp. 183-184). "Americans are a peculiar people. More than any other country in modern times they have avowed their dedication to the highest principles of freedom. They have written and enforced a constitution emulated the world over for its protection of the major freedoms of the common man from the government which he has set above him. On the other hand, Americans have tolerated almost without qualms, restrictions on their rights of personal privacy..." (Greenberg, 1974, p. 189). "Virtually all laws which attempt to influence private morality suffer from the same defect--[they]...are generally passed to protect everyone else but the people who write them. Just as prohibition was initiated largely by non-drinkers, laws against the use of drugs were passed by those who hadn't the least idea of what drug usage was like" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 189). "Many of the persons responsible for setting the moral and legal tone for our nation do not want to know the truth! The truth is irrelevant to their reality. What is relevant to their reality is that, for political considerations, they do not want to be on record as being a political leader who presided over the legalization of drug usage--not in this era of the ascendancy of the silent majority. And if we have to throw a few thousand of our children into jail to preserve the purity of our politicians' voting records...so be it." (Greenberg, 1974, pp. 189-190). "It is clear...that the majority of the drug abuse efforts in the middle and late 1960s was politically inspired. By this I mean that the rationale behind the legislation was not the control of drug abuse, but the deliberate harassment and suppression of an emerging minority group felt to be politically dangerous and morally disruptive. No other rationale can explain the severity of the sentences mandated for crimes which were basically passive in nature and consensual on the part of the 'victims'. Nothing else can explain the failure on the part of lawmakers to distinguish between users and pushers, between addicts and those who could control their usage. An finally, no theory other than political suppression can account for the concentration of emphasis on the small-time user and pusher and the massive disinterest in pursuing the major illegal suppliers of narcotics and other dangerous substances" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 190). "Tragically, legislators actually believe, in many instances, that stiffer penalties deter the commission of crimes [as noted in] the study made by the California State Assembly Committee on Criminal Procedure, 'Crime and Penalties in California', which found no evidence that severe penalties effectively deter crime" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 191). "Ironically, many observers have come to the conclusion that the vigorous enforcement of laws relating to drug abuse have actually led to an increase in drug-related crimes. This is because an increase in the harassment of pushers drives the price of drugs up. Consequently, the addict, who must steal from five to ten dollars of merchandise for every one dollar of drugs he needs, is forced to turn a greater number of tricks in order to acquire an ample supply" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 191). "The rules of the game in relation to the passing of legislation relating to the imposition of penalties for drug abuse...have been relatively simple...and simplistic: First, act quickly, before there is time to study the situation. Second, don't let scientific evidence corrupt your point of view...rely on your gut reaction and the inflamed passions of your constituency. Third, don't hesitate to sacrifice someone else's child for the cause (you can always use your influence to get your own child off). And finally, start from the bottom--you offend less important people by doing so" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 191). "There is a great disparity of opinion as to whether a narc should be classified as a law officer or as a criminal....Perhaps the most charitable thing I can say about narcotics agents is that they are a necessary part of a failing system. They are a reflection of the depths to which we will sink in our efforts to control men's lives and morals" (Greenberg, 1974, pp. 194-195). "Society and the policeman share an almost classic sado-masochistic relationship. Often, however, it is difficult to determine which party is the sadist, and which the masochist" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 198). "A significant minority of police officers consistently, deliberately, and ruthlessly violate the rights of the citizens with which they deal, and violate the Constitution and laws they are sworn to uphold. Police, acting in the line of duty, may be responsible for more violations of the law per capita than any other group. Probably in no other area is the police officer as abusive of his authority as in the area of drug arrests. Because of the nature of society's response to the drug abuse crisis, the controls that would ordinarily be placed upon the policeman has been removed or ignored by his superiors and by the general public" (Greenberg, 1974, p. 198). THE DRUGS CRIME CONNECTION: Volume 5.Sage Annual Reviews of Drug and Alcohol Abuse - James A.Inciardi, Editor. 1981. Inciardi, J. A. (1981). Drug use and criminal behavior: Majorresearch issues. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), The drugs-crimeconnection (pp. 7-16). Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. A study by Drs. Ball, Rosen, Flueck, and Nurco revealed that "there was a six-fold increase in...[opiate addicts'] frequency of crime when addicted" (Inciardi, 1981, p. 11). Clayton, R. R. (1981). Federal drugs-crime research: Settingthe agenda. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), The drugs-crimeconnection (pp.17-38). Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. The "heroin epidemic was particularly bothersome to the Nixon administration for at least two reasons: (1) there was concern that an increasing level of heroin use at home was linked directly to Vietnam, and (2) an increasing number of heroin addicts, with their presumed reliance on crime to support their habits, was antithetical to the administration's stated goal of reducing crime in the streets" (Clayton, 1981, p.20). "In an election year it was wise from a political standpoint to be fighting heroin addicts and their criminality while implementing a rehabilitative treatment system to help those who might have become addicted in Vietnam" (Clayton, 1981, p. 20). "American drug control policy is based on the assumptions that a two-pronged simultaneous attack on drug abuse via supply-reduction and demand-reduction strategies will affect drug use, crime, and the drug-crime connection. The policy makers at NIDA [National Institute on Drug Abuse] were upset that the efficacy of this policy was not affirmed in the Report. Therefore, they, the policy makers, decided not to publish the PANEL Report as a NIDA document (Clayton, 1981, p. 23). Weissman explained why "...NIDA chose not to publish the PANEL Report...[because] it questioned the basic assumptions on which American drug-control policies are based. The policies to which he refers are those of supply reduction and demand reduction that are articulated in the Federal Strategy Report" (Clayton, 1981, p.24). Ball, J. C., Rosen, L, Flueck, J. A., & Nurco, D. N.(1981). The criminality of heroin addicts: When addicted and whenoff opiates. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), The drugs-crimeconnection (pp.39-66). Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. "Most of the early investigators found little criminality before the onset of opiate addiction (Kolb, 1925; Terry and Pellens, 1928; Pescor, 1943). Later studies, however, have shown a high probability of criminality preceding heroin addiction (Robins and Murphy, 1967; Jacoby et al., 1973; Chamber, 1974). Thus, Jacoby reports that 71 percent of heroin users in Philadelphia had a delinquency record prior to onset of their opiate use, compared to 35 percent of all boys in the same citywide age cohort who also had such records" (Ball, Rosen, Flueck, Nurco, 1981, p. 40). OF COURSE, THE VERY ACT OF POSSESSING IS ILLEGAL. IS THIS CONSIDERED WHEN FIGURING THE LABEL OF DELINQUENCY? WE CREATED THE BLACK MARKET IN DRUGS WHICH PUTS THOSE WHO WERE ADDICTED MEDICALLY INTO THE POSITION OF HAVING TO DEAL WITH 'CRIMINALS', AND THOSE WHO HAVE COMMITTED SOME DEVIANT ACT ARE MORE LIKELY TO MEET UP WITH THOSE INVOLVED IN DRUGS SIMPLY BECAUSE OF THE DRUG-CRIMINALITY CONNECTION. WE HAVE CREATED MOST OF OUR OWN PROBLEMS RE: DRUGS, AND THE ONES WE DID NOT CREATE, WE COMPLICATED. Goldstein, P. J. (1981). Getting over: Economic alternativesto predatory crime among street drug users. In J. A. Inciardi(Ed.), The drugs-crime connection (pp.67-84). BeverlyHills: Sage Publications, Inc. "For street opiate users, economic goal attainment focuses on meeting the demands of daily existence rather than on any long-term career development. Survival presents a daily challenge that is dealt with in whatever fashion appears most appropriate under variable and often difficult circumstances" (Goldstein, 1981, p. 67) "The economic successes achieved by street opiate users tend to be discrete and transitory. Subjects in this study perceived and recounted these successes using the processual term, getting over....The notion of 'getting over' is similar to that of 'getting by'. Both phrases are most often used to describe an economic state of affairs. However, while 'getting by' implies a static state, a mere holding of one's own, 'getting over' implies a dynamic process in which some sort of success is achieved. For example, an addict who sells a less experienced user a $5 bag of heroin for $10 say, 'I got over on him'....Getting over usually involves a degree of scheming or conning" (Goldstein, 1981, p. 68). Goldstein (1981, p. 71) states, "Most subjects in methadone maintenance treatment programs sold some of their dosage at least once during the month they were under study. Ten individuals out of 13 MMTP clients who were observed sold treatment dosages..." HOWEVER, THIS SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN TO MEAN THAT MOST METHADONE MAINTENANCE PATIENTS SELL THEIR DOSAGES. ADDICTS IN GOLDSTEIN'S (1981) STUDY WERE REPORTING TO A STOREFRONT IN EAST HARLEM WHICH WAS &QUOT;KNOWN TO BE A CENTER OF OPIATE ACTIVITY&QUOT;, AND THOSE ATTRACTED TO THE STOREFRONT WHICH WAS USED AS A &QUOT;HANGOUT&QUOT; BY MANY SUBJECTS MAY HAVE BEEN THOSE NOT ACTIVELY SEEKING &QUOT;TREATMENT&QUOT; AND COUNSELING. THEY WERE MOSTLY MALE (92%). FOR EXAMPLE, THE PROGRAM I AM IN UTILIZES RANDOM URINES TO DETERMINE EXTRACURRICULAR DRUG USE, AND SANCTIONS ARE IMPOSED FOR THIS--LOSS OF TAKEHOMES IS A MAJOR &QUOT;PUNISHMENT&QUOT; OR SANCTION FOR &QUOT;IMPROPER&QUOT; DRUG USE. THOSE OF US WHO ARE WORKING AND/OR GOING TO SCHOOL DON'T HAVE TIME TO GO INTO THE CLINIC EVERY DAY TO DOSE, AND WE ARE NOT INVOLVED WITH THE &QUOT;CRIMINAL&QUOT; ELEMENT. "Cop men may simply pocket all the money and never return with the drugs" (Goldstein, 1981, p. 73). THIS IS COMMONLY KNOWN AS &QUOT;BACKDOORING&QUOT;, AND COMES FROM THE FACT THAT A CUSTOMER WILL GIVE A &QUOT;COP&QUOT; MAN MONEY TO BUY DRUGS, AND THE &QUOT;COP&QUOT; GOES IN ONE DOOR WHERE THE CUSTOMER HAS DROPPED HIM OFF. THE &QUOT;COP&QUOT; GOES OUT A DIFFERENT DOOR WHERE SOMEONE IS WAITING TO PICK HIM/HER UP AND LEAVES THE CUSTOMER SITTING MINUS MONEY AND DRUGS. THIS HAPPENS FREQUENTLY WHEN A CUSTOMER GOES TO HIS REGULAR &QUOT;COPPER&QUOT;, BUT THE COPPER'S CONNECTIONS ARE OUT OF DRUGS, AND THE ADDICT IS DESPERATE FOR A &QUOT;FIX&QUOT;. THE ADDICT WILL THEN USE ALL HIS POWERS OF RATIONALIZATION TO &QUOT;TRUST&QUOT; THIS NEW COPPER BECAUSE S/HE IS SO DESPERATE FOR THAT FIX. "Vinny once rented his works [hypodermic needle] to seventeen people in a single day" (Goldstein, 1981, p. 74). Datesman, S. K. (1981). Women, crime, and drugs. In J. A.Inciardi (Ed.), The drugs/crime connection (pp. 85-104).Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, Inc. "Beginning with the Harrison Act in 1914, however, a series of events occurred that linked addiction with crime. As the addict population became typified by lower-class black males, moral hostility increased and 'the image of the addict changed from a sick to a contemptible deviant' (Conrad and Schneider, 1980:128). Addiction had become a social problem" (Datesman, 1981, p. 85). McBride, D. C. (1981). Drugs and violence. In J. A. Inciardi(Ed.), The drugs-crime connection (pp.105-124). BeverlyHills: Sage Publications, Inc. The film Reefer Madness shows a marijuana smoker "turning into a werewolf-like creature after inhaling marijuana smoke" (McBride, 1981, p. 106). "Whenever a drug user engages in violence, the media are apt to describe the incident in such a manner as to imply the continued existence and danger of drug fiends" (McBride, 1981, p. 106). In the early 1900s, "the Federal Bureau of Narcotics was very active in describing the drug addict as behaving in a bizarre, unpredictable, often violent manner. The pre-World War II popular media influenced by the Bureau of Narcotics portrayed drug users quite literally as monsters and fiends" (McBride, 1981, p. 105). "It is suggested that any attempt to understand the relationship between drugs and crime must include a focus on the daily life and interaction of the user--particularly within the context of the drug deal--not just on the activities undertaken to obtain the money for drugs" (McBride, 1981, p. 120). Goldman, F. (1981). Drug abuse, crime, and economics: Thedismal limits of social choice. In J. A. Inciardi (Ed.), Thedrugs-crime connection (pp.155-181). Beverly Hills: SagePublications, Inc. "The grams and purity are locked up in the bag and remain as much a mystery to the user as they do to the researchers" (Goldman, 1981, p. 165). "The Canadian Commission...reports that 'of all drugs used medically or non-medically, alcohol has the strongest and most consistent relationship to crime'" (Goldman, 1981, p. 167). ALTHOUGH WE TRIED PROHIBITION, MAKING IT ILLEGAL TO USE ALCOHOL, IT IS NO LONGER ILLEGAL TO USE OR POSSESS IT. WE DO, HOWEVER, DELEGATE RESPONSIBLITY TO THE USER FOR ANY CRIMES S/HE MAY COMMIT UNDER ITS INFLUENCE. NOT SO WITH CERTAIN DRUGS; WE DON'T WAIT TO SEE WHAT THE USER WILL DO, BUT THE VERY ACT OF POSSESSION OR USE IS A CRIME IN ITSELF. THAT'S LIKE SAYING, &QUOT;YOU ARE A CRIMINAL JUST BY VIRTUE OF OWNING OR SHOOTING A GUN. YOU MAY NOT HAVE HURT ANYONE, BUT YOU ARE GUILTY--OF SOMETHING. THERE IS NO PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE. THE DETROIT NEWS - Sowell, T.,1989, October 2. Sowell, T. (1989, October 2). Bush's war ondrugs another Vietnam? The Detroit News. Thomas Sowell (1989, October 2) stated "...there is nothing so bad that politics cannot make it worse. Drug gang violence is not due to the chemical nature of drugs but to the illegality of drugs, which is what makes them costly and profitable. Ending Prohibition did not stop alcoholics from destroying their lives, but it did put...bootleggers out of business." "Hard core cocaine addicts are increasing but they are still less than one-half of one percent of the American population. Are the other 99 percent of the people to see their country and its institutions and civil liberties jeopardized to try to keep one small group from destroying itself?" (Sowell, 1989, October 2). "Like Vietnam, the war on drugs has been escalated with a contrived incident--the purchase of cocaine n Lafayette Park, across the street form (sic) the White House. Now it has come out that Lafayette Park is not a center for drug dealing after all, but that a drug dealer elsewhere was lured there for this transaction just so the president could go public with the cocaine purchased across the street" (Sowell, 1989, October 2). THE MYTHOLOGY OF CRIME AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE Kappeler, V. E., Blumberg, M., & Potter, G. W. (1993). Themythology of crime and criminal justice. Prospect Heights:Waveland Press, Inc. POLICING AMERICAN SOCIETY LaGrange, R. L. (1993). Policing American Society.Chicago: Nelson-Hall Inc. History and Highlights: Kefauver Commission--connection between organized crime and police payoffs in "many U. S. cities....[including] Miami, Detroit, and New Orleans" (LaGrange, 1993, p. 217). HUMAN RIGHTS READER Bentham, J. (1990). Principles of legislation. In W. Laqueur& B. Rubin (Eds.) The Human Rights Reader (Rev. ed.,pp. 85-86). New York: Meridian, Penguin Books USA Inc. In Principles of Legislation (1802), by Jeremy Bentham (1990, p. 85), he deals with the law and his interpretation of political good and evil on the following basis: It is with government, as with medicine. They have both but achoice of evils. Every law is an evil, for every law is aninfraction of liberty: And I repeat that government has but achoice of evils: In making this choice, what ought to be theobject of the legislator? He ought to assure himself of twothings; 1st, that in every case, the incidents which he tries toprevent are really evils; and 2ndly, that if evils, they aregreater than those which he employs to prevent them. There arethen two things to be regarded; the evil of the offense and theevil of the law; the evil of the malady and the evil of theremedy. Eg: The operation was a success but the patient died. General Rule: Leave to individuals the greatest possible latitude in every case where they can only injure themselves, for they are the best judges of their own interests. If they deceive themselves, the moment they perceive their error, it is to be presumed they will not persist. Do not suffer the power of the law to interfere, unless to prevent their injuring each other (emphasis mine). It is there that law is necessary; it is there that the application of punishment is truly useful, since the rigor shown toward one may ensure the safety of all..." (Bentham, 1990, p.86). Kenworthy, T. (1988, September 19). House's tough antidrugbill called war on bill of rights: Measure would transform thelegal system. Washington Post, pp. A1+. Tom Kenworthy wrote in the Washington Post (1988, September, pp. A1+), "During a meeting of House Democratic floor leaders, Rep. Steny H. Hoyer (D-Md.) suggested to one of his colleagues that before the final vote at week's end on the $2 billion omnibus drug bill, the House ought to vote to suspend the Constitution." Musial, R. (1989, September 20). First traffic check lanes setup. The Detroit Free Press, pp. 3A, 19A). Classic hegemony--Check lanes were set up for drug control. No drugs were found, but 44 traffic tickets were issued. One of those issued a ticket said, "I got a ticket because I left my license at home, but I think it's great if they're doing it to fight drugs" (Musial, 1989, September 20, pp. 3A, 19A). Brain's addiction mechanism found. (1994, September 13). USAToday, p. 7D). The nucleus accumbiens is the part of the brain that is responsible for the pleasurable effects of a drug and the effects addicts feel when they try to quit the drug. "Blocking brain chemical receptors in addicted animals triggers symptoms that mimic those of withdrawal" (USA Today, p. 7D). Wisotsky, S. (1990). Beyond the war on drugs: Overcoming afailed public policy. Buffalo: Prometheus Books. "If our society ever becomes interested in actually managing 'the drug problem' instead of throwing an ideological temper tantrum, it will concentrate its efforts on the long-term process of designating community-based regulatory mechanisms, in the public and private sectors, to influence and moderate drug-taking behavior. It will fund research into these alternatives" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 213). "The Reagan Administration sliced the prevention and treatment budget in half in order to funnel the money into law enforcement" (Wisotsky, 1990, p.214). This is exactly the opposite of what should have been done. As Wisotsky states (1990, p. 214), The War on Drugs is so wrong, so ineffective, and so destructive that almost any alternative should be preferred by thinking people. It would be hard to do worse than the status quo." "Experience in Oregon, California, and Maine following decriminalization of marijuana in the 1970's showed no significant percentage of new users or an increase in frequency of use" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 215). "The premises of the War on Drugs, in addition to being objectionable in principle, fail to offer any practical solution to the problem of drug abuse, which grows worse every year. The War on Drugs has no creative or constructive power whatever" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 216). Wisotsky (1990, p. 216), concludes that "the War on Drugs is beginning to collapse of its own weight." This would be wonderful if true; and if so, it better hurry. "As the hegemonic, senior generation over age 45 or 50 dies off, it will be replaced by one for whom the War on Drugs makes no cultural sense, quite apart from its operational failures and black market pathologies" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 218). AND WITH ALL THE SOCIAL PROBLEMS WE HAVE WAITING TO BE SOLVED, IT'S TOO BAD MONEY FROM TAXABLE, REGULATED DRUGS IS NOT BEING MADE AVAILABLE. IN FACT, ALL THE MONEY BEING PUMPED INTO LAW ENFORCEMENT IS TAKING AWAY FROM AND CAUSING MORE SOCIAL PROBLEMS. "Many studies report that the more (accurate) information a person has about drugs, the less likely he is to regard them as dangerous" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 219). "The adoption of cocaine by the middle classes was evidently considered hot copy by the media, which reported on it incessantly and often sensationally" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 11). "Viewing the entire cocaine industry as one corporation, it would rank seventh in sales among the Fortune 500" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 17). "Another way of describing the rationalistic bias of this [objective] research method is to see it as anti-holistic, i.e., a captive of the Cartesian division between mind and body, analyzing the sum of the parts to learn about the whole without considering the interaction of the parts and possible synergistic effects. The bias against 'experiential' models of drug effects reflects a conceptual reductionism of human beings to mere components or parts (body or mind) reacting like machines to drug stimuli in standardized fashion" (Wisotsky, 1990, pp.19-20). "The law thus neatly serves as prescription both for ignorance and for maintenance of the status quo" (Wisotsky, 1990, p. 20). Szasz, T. (1990). Foreword. In S. Wisotsky Beyond the waron drugs: Overcoming a failed public policy. Buffalo:Prometheus Books. "Perhaps because of our diversity as a people, it is difficult for us to find a stable basis for 'congregating' as a nation, a circumstance that amplifies our collective craving for moral crusades against scapegoats bearing heavy loads of imaginary dangers" (Szasz, 1990, Foreword xvi). "The sacrificial principle of victimage (the 'scapegoat') ...explains why it is such a sad truism that....'it is indeed probable that more harm and misery have been caused by men determined to use coercion to stamp out a moral evil than by men intent on doing evil.' In my opinion, this is not just probable, it is quite certain" (Szasz, 1990, Foreword xvi). Adler, P. A. (1993). Wheeling and dealing: An ethnographyof an upper-level drug dealing and smuggling community. (2nded.) New York: Columbia University Press. "Quite frankly, it would have been impossible for a nonuser to have gained access to this group to gather the data presented here" (Adler, 1993, p. 24). Many factors are involved in the pricing of illegal drugs: cost of the drug from the source; prevailing market price; location (logically, border towns provide a less expensive product since drugs are more plentiful there); risk of arrest associated with the number of borders crossed; how long the drugs have to be held before sale; distance of travel before sale; mode of transportation "(especially if they have to transfer the drugs from one mode of transportation and/or storage to another)"; credit considerations; quality (however, the quality of cocaine was "fairly consistent [so] they thus let the dealers to whom they sold worry about testing and cutting the product"; and situational conditions including "need of money" or personal relationships (Adler, 1993, pp. 45-48). "There were two basic forms of drug dealing: straight dealing and middling. Straight dealing involved purchasing drugs in one quantity and dividing them into smaller units to sell....[One type of midling involved selling the] drugs they purchased intact, without separating them into smaller units....The second type of midling was customer initiated. Dealers were often approached by people looking to buy a specific amount of drugs....[The dealer then] matched a source of supply with a cash purchaser,...boosted the price[,] and made money on the transfer" Adler, 1993, pp. 49-53). "In contrast to straight dealing, dealers who middled rarely adulterated the drug....'cause God forbid you have to give it back....A small quantity, however, was often removed for the middler's own personal consumption" (Adler, 1993, p. 53). "It's not really dealing--[midling] it's just putting together two connections, but the trick is to keep them apart so they don't know who each other are and they need you to complete the link" (Adler, 1993, p. 54). "Money meant nothing to me. Like, if some guy gave me a $100 bill I'd go out and burn it or cut it in half for all I cared" (Adler, 1993, p.86). MONEY MEANT NOTHING TO ME EITHER EXCEPT THAT I HAD TO HAVE IT TO GET MY DRUGS. I ONLY THOUGHT OF MONEY IN TERMS OF HOW MANY DILAUDIDS I COULD PURCHASE--OTHER THAN THAT, I DIDN'T CARE ONE WAY OR THE OTHER. Describing the lows of freebasing, a user states, "Lows? It's like when you can't get up to go to the bathroom and your mind goes by itself. When you're up pacing the floor--your mind, but your body's not. When you're so wired and exhausted and you just want to sleep but you can't . You lie there staring at the ceiling for about 14 hours straight. You're so fucked up you're embarrassed to go out of the house. Falling asleep in public bars" (Adler, 1993, pp. 88-89). UNLIKE OPIATE ADDICTION, THERE IS DEBATE AS TO WHETHER COCAINE IS PHYSICALLY ADDICTING. THE LOWS FROM OPIATE ADDICTION INCLUDE DEFINITE PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES WHICH INCLUDE... Some "children of the dealing crowd eventually...graduated to become 'tinydealers.' Moving into junior high and high school, 13- and 14-year-old dealers were capable of making large sums of money by selling ounces of marijuana and grams or half-grams of cocaine to their peers" (Adler, 1993, p. 93). "To make it in the drug world, dealers and smugglers had to generate trust and likability. The most important character trait in this regard was integrity. According to others, quality dealers were honest and fair in their business transactions, gave exact "counts" (full weight values), and made fairly accurate estimations of the quality of their product." (Adler, 1993, p. 100). Scullum, J. (1991). Secondary Smoke is not harmful tononsmokers. In D. L. Bender & B. Leone (Series Eds.) & C.P. Cozic & K. Swisher (Book Eds.), Chemical dependency:Opposing viewpoints, (pp. 72-78). San Diego: GreenhavenPress, Inc. "As James M. Buchanan has noted, using the state's power to control your neighbor's annoying habits is a risky business. 'Let those who would use the political process to impose their preferences on the behavior of others be wary of the threat to their own liberties,' he writes. 'The liberties of some cannot readily be restricted without limiting the liberties of all" (Scullum, 1991, p. 78). D'Amato, B. (1992). The doctor, the murder, the mystery:The true story of the Dr. John Branion murder case. Chicago:The Noble Press, Inc. "In the 1930s, if a person accused of a crime could not afford to hire an attorney, he went to trial with no defense except his own efforts. It was not until 1942 that the Supreme Court forced the states to appoint an attorney for an accused person, and then it was only for capital offenses. Twenty-one years later, in the famous case of Gideon v. Wainwright, the Supreme Court required the state to appoint an attorney to defend any indigent person accused of a felony" (D'Amato, 1992, p. 49). "By spring of 1968, "resistance to the Vietnam War was so intense, so broad, and so angry that it had driven President Lyndon Johnson to announce that he would not run for reelection" (D'Amato, 1992, p. 91). On April 4, 1968, Martin Luther King, Jr. was assasinated (D'Amato, 1992, p. 92). "In Chicago [Martin Luther King, Jr.] recruited young men who were members of street gangs and converted their anger into energy for change. One of his early strategies was to appoint them marshals of the marches. It was their job to keep the peace. When glass bottles and bricks and rocks rained down from the rooftops at the marchers, the gang-members-turned-marshals caught them as a ballplayer would catch a pop fly, and then laid them gently on the ground" (D'Amato, p. 73). Bender, D. L. (1991). Why consider opposing viewpoints? In D.L. Bender & B. Leone (Series Eds.) & C. P. Cozic & K.Swisher (Book Eds.), Chemical dependency: Opposing viewpoints,(pp. 9-11). San Diego: Greenhaven Press, Inc. "It is better to debate a question without settling it than to settle a question without debating it - Joseph Joubert (1754-1824)" (Bender, 1991, p. 9). Nakken, C. (1991). An addictive personality may cause chemicaldependency. In D. L. Bender & B. Leone (Series Eds.) & C.P. Cozic & K. Swisher (Book Eds.), Chemical dependency:Opposing viewpoints, (pp. 30-37). San Diego: GreenhavenPress, Inc. "We are starting to see how the gradual loss of the Self occurs in addiction, and how the addictive personality slowly gains more and more control. The decrease in the Self causes an increase in the addictive personality. In addition, there is an almost constant internal conflictbetween the Self and the Addict. In this struggle, the Addictwins. This is what is meant by "loss of control." Thelonger the struggle, the more control the addictive personalitygains and establishes. Each time the Self struggles against theaddiction, the Addict becomes stronger. To fight and struggleagainst something that has more power than you drains yourenergy. For each defeat there is some loss of self-esteem... ...In addiction, the Addict becomes the dominant personality. People and family members often desperately ask themselves andothers, 'Why does he act like this? Doesn't he care about usanymore?' The truth is that the Addict within doesn't care aboutthem. What it cares about is acting out, getting the mood change.The Addict doesn't care about the Self either. A statement suchas, 'At least if you won't stop for me, stop for yourself!' fallson deaf ears. The person who suffers from an addiction often asksthe same question long before anyone else: 'Why do I act thisway? Don't I care?' It's often a great relief for people suffering from anaddiction to realize that they are not 'bad people', as theybelieved, that their addictive personality is not all of them,but only a part of them, having grown as a result of theillness" (Nakken, 1991, pp. 36-37). Peele, S. (1991). Personal choice causes cocaine addiction. InD. L. Bender & B. Leone (Series Eds.) & C. P. Cozic &K. Swisher (Book Eds.), Chemical dependency: Opposingviewpoints, (pp. 38-44). San Diego: Greenhaven Press, Inc. "Cocaine came to be addictive among some inner-city users and among a very small percentage of middle-class users who tried the drug. Why didn't most of these people become cocaine addicts? Theanswer is so simple that we are left wondering why scientistscan't figure it out: Most people have better things to do than tobecome addicted to cocaine" (Peele, 1991, p. 42). "A study of middle-class users of cocaine by the Addiction Research Foundation of Toronto found not only that most regular users do not become addicted, but also that most of those who develop a steady craving for cocaine eventually cut back or quit the drug on their own" (Peele, 1991, p. 42). "...we have reached a strange impasse in our civilization when we rely for information and moral guidance about habits on the most debilitated segments of our population--groups who attribute to addiction and drugs what are actually their personal problems. What, really, are we to learn from people who stand up and testify that they couldn't control their shopping spress, that they spent all their money and went bankrupt to get material possessions we were smart enough to resist, and that they now want us to forgive them and their debts?" Who should we listen to regarding addiction--the moralists or the addict? (Peele, 1991, pp. 42, 43). Oakley, R., Ph. D., & Ksir, C., Ph. D. (1987). Drugs,Society and Human Behavior. St. Louis, Missouri: TimesMirror/Mosby College Publishing. Toward the middle of the century, Harry Anslinger, the first Commissioner of the Bureau of Narcotics arranged for Senator McCarthy to have his narcotics supplied to him by a Washington pharmacy without the interference of narcotic officers (Oakley & Ksir, 1987, p. 42). However, he was opposed to any treatment which supplied narcotics to addicts on the street and rigorously enforced laws against them. In the 1800's, drug use was thought of as "laissez-faire". If a person wanted to use a substance and another wanted to sell it, what difference did it make? (Oakley, & Ksir, 1987, p. 22). Cantor, G. (1989, October 2). Smoking crack differs fromdrinking a beer. The Detroit News, p. B3. When one sees an article such as the one George Cantor (1989, October 2, p. 3B) wrote, one has to wonder who made him judge, jury, and moral superior. He states that most of those who drink are not doing it for the purpose of getting drunk, but those who take drugs are essentially moral degenerates because they take drugs to get high. He states, "I know of no one who would argue that illegal drugs are harmless at any level of use". Monson, M. C. (1980, November). The dirty little secret behindour drug laws. Reason. Reprinted in Drugs, Volume3. (Boca Raton, Fla: Social Issues Resources Series, Inc., 1980),Article No. 19. However, in actuality "...taking of narcotics results in no measurable organic damage", (Monson, 1980, p. 51). "The first two laws prohibiting opium smoking were passed in...1875 and 1876 in response to discrimination of the Chinese" (Monson, 1980, p. 48) who were thought of as an inferior race. In 1910, legislation was requested regarding cocaine since it was "...authoritatively stated that cocaine is often the direct incentive to the crime of rape by the Negroes of the South and other sections of the country" (Monson, 1980, p. 48). In the 1920's, heroin was linked to "promiscuous urban gangs [and] alcohol was associated with immigrants..." (Monson, 1980, p. 48) who were not to be trusted. "One hundred years ago the concept that the State could tell Americans what they could and could not ingest would have been ridiculed" (Monson, 1980, p. 51). Hyde, M. O. (1990). Drug wars. New York: Walker andCompany. Dr. Sydney Cohen, whose voice has been considered the most rational in an irrational world of drugs, writes in Cocaine: The Bottom Line that scare tactics are counterproductive and should be avoided..." (Hyde, 1990, p. 19). "Officials in drug-producing and -processing countries are quick to point out that the tremendous demand for drugs in the United States drives the drug business" (Hyde, 1990, pp. 90-91). "Many of the dealers are shot, some by the police when they resist orders, some by drug dealers who are trying to protect their turf or intimidate competitors" (Hyde, 1990, p. 26). "Valerie...lives in a neighborhood where abandoned buildings house crack dealers, where vacant lots have become dumping grounds for trash, and where gun battles are common. When shooting is heard, she hides under her bed. More than a hundred people were killed in her neighborhood last year and most of the deaths were drug related. ....Valerie wishes the police would arrest the dealers on the corner, but if they do, other dealers will take their places" (Hyde, 1990, p. 26). "Some experts in the field of drug abuse note that the first laws aimed at controlling opiate use in the United States were aimed at controlling a racial minority that the public feared....Many news reporters blamed the 'yellow devils,' the relatively small group of Chinese laborers, for the spreading addiction problem in America and especially for corrupting American youth. Emotionalism was rampant, and moral reform movements were common. Alcohol, opium, and other drugs were the targets of crusades that fought against the use of drugs that affect the mind" (Hyde, 1990, p. 33). "At first, heroin was considered benign and was used as a substitute for liquor. It was backed by the Bayer Company for a short time, before it was recognized as producing the same kind of addiction as morphine" (Hyde, 1990, p. 33). "Until more is learned, many doctors are willing to accept methadone as the best treatment in the war against heroin" (Hyde, 1990, p. 40). Berger, G. (1989). Violence and drugs. New York:Franklin Watts. "In rapidly growing numbers, unskilled, poorly educated people in inner-city areas are finding drug dealing the most lucrative career option available to them. Many children enticed into the drug culture at an early age drop out of school and by their mid-teens enter the violent world of drug dealing and distribution" (Berger, 1989, p. 34). "Being a lookout is the entry-level position for nine- and ten-year-olds in the drug trade. It is the job of a lookout to warn dealers when police are in the area. For this, they can make ;up to $100 a day and be rewarded with a pair of fashionable sneakers, a bomber jacket, or a bicycle" (Berger, 1989, p. 35). "Being a runner is the next step up the ladder for ambitious young teenagers who want to succeed in the drug trade. The job can pay up to $300 a day. The runner transports the drugs to the dealers on the street. In the case of crack, the youngster takes the drug from the makeshift factories, where cocaine powder is cooked into rock-hard crack, to the dealers" (Berger, 1989, p. 36). "Youngsters in the drug culture are often completely on their own. Family members may be living apart or may be dead....Seventy-two percent of the boys and girls in a correctional institute study said they had grown up without one or both parents" (Berger, 1989, p. 37). "As a source of income, dealing is especially attractive to low-income, disadvantaged youth. With few other possibilities for employment and troubling family situations, many embark on a career of drug dealing" (Berger, 1989, p. 45). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-63IA087-000625-B006-25http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/abby.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035317 text/html 2631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:52:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:49 GMTContent-length: 2414 Letter from Dear Abby Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy May 16, 1994 Clifford A. Schaffer P.O. Box 1430 Canyon Country, CA 91386-1430 Dear Clifford: Of course I remember you... I deeply regret that your mother is still in such excruciatingpain, and I can only hope you have a friendly doctor who will dowhatever is possible to control that pain. I received much criticism (and some applause, however) for mystand on legalizing drugs. You may add my name to the list of those who are with you allthe way on H.R. 3100, the National-Drug Control Policy Act of1993. Please keep me informed, Clifford... and convey my very bestto your mother. Sincerely, ABBY Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-64IA087-000625-B006-51http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/dole.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035332 text/html 3035HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:53:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:53 GMTContent-length: 2818 Letter from Bob Dole regarding drugs and drug legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy B0B DOLE KANSAS United States Senate OFFICE OF THE REPUBLICAN LEADER WASHINGTON, DC 20510-7020 November 30, 1994 Mr. Clifford A. Schaffer P.O. Box 1430 Canyon Country, California 91386-1430 Dear Mr. Schaffer, My apologies for the very long delay in responding to yourletter to my wife Elizabeth. Let me assure you, she passed alongyour comments to me some time ago, so the tardiness is entirelythe fault of my office. Having reviewed the text of your resolution, I can assure youthat I am not opposed to a legitimate review of our nation's drugpolicies. There is no doubt that there are both medical andsocial problems that must be addressed when discussing drugabuse. I believe there is also a role for the criminal justicesystem, but it should not overshadow the need to assist manyindividuals. As you suggest, we need to find the truth to findthe right balance. Sincerely, BOB DOLE Republican Leader Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-65IA031-000651-B022-155http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/issue1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123547 text/html 6533HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:51 GMTContent-length: 6316 The Drug Legalization Debate: What's the Real Issue? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate The Drug Legalization Debate: What's the Real Issue? By Clifford A. Schaffer This document attempts to define the real areas of agreementand disagreement between those who support the war on drugs, andthose who do not. The statements I make below about the beliefsof the respective sides are based on my personal experience withtalking and debating with literally thousands of people over thelast several years. While the opinions I give below will varyfrom person to person, they hold true for the vast majority ofpeople I have encountered on each side. Why I wrote this. Debates about drug policy can get to be pretty complicatedpretty quickly. Some of the reasons for this are obvious - drugabuse is a problem with many causes and effects throughoutsociety. It would be perfectly easy to get involved in discussingthe details of one aspect of the drug problem and to lose sightof the problem as a whole. Also, I have noticed a consistent tendency among supporters ofthe drug war to be confused about the real issues. For example,they often tend to assume that anyone who supports drug policyreform must be a drug user, or someone who favors or wants topromote the use of drugs. This, of course, is not the case atall. Many of the supporters of reform are people who have neverused illegal drugs and have no intention of using them. Or theytend to ask things like "Why do you want to make more crackbabies?" The truth is that no one in their right mind wantsto see more crack babies and those who support reform do sobecause they believe that better policies could reduce the numberof crack babies. In this document I will attempt to summarize the variousfacets of our approach to drug policy and define where thereseems to be agreement or disagreement between those who supportreform, and those who support the drug war. Is drug use immoral? Opinion varies on both sides, although drug war supporters areclearly more likely to feel that drug use is intrinsicallyimmoral. But there are also people on the side of reform who haveessentially the same feelings about drug use. That is, many supporters of reform ("legalization")do not approve of drug use or abuse in any way and even feel thatit is "immoral". Are drugs dangerous? Both sides agree that drugs can be dangerous to some people.Supporters of reform will point out that the legal drugs are moredangerous than the illegal drugs, so the laws don't relate tothis argument anyway. Supporters of the drug war seem to make the illogical leapthat because drugs are dangerous or immoral, therefore the bestapproach to the problem is to throw people in prison. This, ofcourse, is illogical. There are lots of problems in society whichare either dangerous and/or immoral, but that doesn't mean thatprison is the best solution to all of them. Should we have more treatment? Both sides seem to agree that there should be more and betterdrug treatment. Should we have more education? Both sides seem to agree that there should be more and bettereducation on drugs. Should we have better prevention efforts? Both sides seem to agree that we should have more and betterefforts to prevent people from becoming involved with drugs inthe first place. (As long as "prevention" does notinclude criminal punishment.) What about the medical uses? For recognized medicines, such as morphine, both sides agreethat doctors should be free to prescribe it where necessary. Thesupporters of the drug war generally don't seem to recognize orunderstand why it is not being prescribed where necessary. For marijuana, the supporters of the drug war are of mixedopinion. Some support the medical use of marijuana, or at leastsee the futility in persecuting people who are sick, even if itwasn't good for them. Others, the more extreme drug warriors,maintain that marijuana has no medical uses at all, or that otherdrugs would do better. Criminal Punishment This is the only area where there is clear and consistentdisagreement between the two sides. Supporters of the drug war tend to feel that some drugs oughtto be illegal (people ought to be put in jail), in order todiscourage use, or to express society's disapproval. Supporters of reform say that criminal penalties for privatedrug possession and use are senseless and destructive. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-66IA087-000625-B006-92http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/open_letter4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035350 text/html 7276HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:53:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:26 GMTContent-length: 7059 Dispatch from the Drug War by Peter H. King Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate From: Los Angeles Times, Main Section, Page 3 September 25, 1996 Dispatch From the Drug War by Peter H. King Here's how it works in the never-ending War on Drugs: InAugust a federal agency reports that 32 of 4,500 teenagers surveyed respond thatthey took heroin in 1995. The year before, the same survey had found 14teenagers who copped to heroin usage. Other categories show upticks aswell, but the increase in teen heroin usage is what grabs the headlines. Now put aside, as the surveyors must, whether the teenagers weretelling the truth. Also disregard the warning from polling experts thatthe size of the sample is statistically insignificant, that-as one toldthe Wall Street Journal-"we should be careful not to overinterpretthe findings or jump to policy conclusions." This is the War on Drugs, and patriotic Americans must follow theexample of their political leaders. They must suspend reality. Let thenumbers speak for themselves: Heroin use-no, the shorthand is better,drug use-has "doubled" among American teenagers. This cannot betolerated. This demands action. In this case, action translates into a new BobDole television commercial suggesting President Clinton is " softon drugs." Clinton counters by hurling more tough words and weapons into thewar. On Tuesday, to provide just the latest example, the White Houseannounced it would give $112 million in materiel to Colombia, Peru andother Latin American countries. For Mexico alone, the 18 additional teenheroin users will translate into 53 UH- 1H helicopters. All this equipment,states the White House, "will assist our allies in stopping the flow ofdrugs at the source, before they reach our shores." Can anyone out there spell "hallucinate?" We break now from this Drug War dispatch for a few words from thehome front. The speaker is James P. Gray, a conservative SuperiorCourt judge in conservative Orange County. For the past four years, Gray hasbeen engaged in a grass-roots effort to spark a national discussionover a provocative alternative to the War on Drugs. Yes, brace yourself,Gray is talking "decriminalization." From the bench, he has seen the war's downside, the steady steamof nickel-and-dime users and dealers who-to satisfy take-the-hillpolitical rhetoric-are treated as the worst of criminals rather than assick people. He has weighed the cost of the trials and incarceration ascompared to treatment. He has seen how hardened criminals must be released tomake cell space for the prisoners of the War on Drugs. He has seen the"utter hopelessness of what we are doing: spending hundreds of millionsof dollars in an effort that accomplishes virtually nothing." Gray speaks frequently on the issue,' and he always begins bytesting the audience: "The first question out of my mouth is, 'Who herefeels our country is in better shape today in regard to drug use and abuseand all the crime and misery that goes with it than it was five yearsago?' And nobody raises a hand. Ever. "And so my follow-up to that is this: 'OK. We all realize weare not in better shape. We also have no legitimate expectation of being inbetter shape next year than today-unless we change our approach.'"And that's when people start to listen." Simply getting people to listen is no small accomplishment foradvocates of decriminalization, so thoroughly has the politicians wartimepropaganda been pounded home. Gray must remind his audiences he is not fordrugs. Indeed, he, calls them "garbage." What he is for is arethinking of the War on Drugs mentality "We are willing to spend all this moneyto put people in prison, but not on things that would do some good, namelyeducation, drug treatment and holding people accountable for their actions. TheWar on Drugs increases street crime on the one, hand, and it takes awaysources for its prosecution on the other. Every dollar we spend onundercover drug operations is a dollar we take away from going after murder,rape, burglary, driving-under-the-influence and everything else." There also is collateral damage to consider. The war mode jacksup the street value of narcotics, creating a drug economy that, absentof alternatives, many people simply find too lucrative to resist. Ithas created a whole stable of Capones, a line of profiteers that runsfrom South Los Angeles to the Caribbean cocaine countries, whilecorrupting narcotics officers from Los Angeles County to New York City.Worse, has bloodied the streets of American cities-the trenches of the drugwar. It also has created a political environment where candidates darenot mention decriminalization, inhalation or anything that might betaken as backing away from the War on Drugs. In such a climate, the safestcourse is to toss money down the rat hole and hide behind catchyslogans. "Just Don't Do It," chants Candidate Dole. Now thatought to fix things, right? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-67IA087-000625-B006-115http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/roe1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035401 text/html 10412HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:53:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:08 GMTContent-length: 10194 Why we should legalize drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Why we should legalize drugs by Benson B. Roe, MD Benson Roe is Professor Emeritus and former Chair ofCardiothoracic Surgery at the University of California at SanFrancisco. And "poison" is also a misleading shibboleth. Thewidespread propaganda that illegal drugs are "deadlypoisons" is a hoax. There is little or no medical evidenceof long term ill effects from sustained, moderate consumption ofuncontaminated marijuana, cocaine or heroin. If these substances- most of them have been consumed in large quantities forcenturies - were responsible for any chronic, progressive ordisabling diseases, they certainly would have shown up inclinical practice and/or on the autopsy table. But they simplyhave not! More than 20 years ago when I was removing destroyed heartvalves from infected intravenous drug abusers I assumed thatthese seriously ill patients represented just the tip of theiceberg of narcotic abuse. In an effort to ascertain whatproportion of serious or fatal drug-related disease this grouprepresented, I sought information from the San Francisco Coroner.To my surprise he reported that infections from contaminatedintravenous injections were the only cause of drug-related deathshe saw except for occasional deaths from overdoses. He confirmedthe inference that clean, reasonable dosages of heroin, cocaineand marijuana are pathologically harmless. He asserted he hadnever seen a heroin user over the age of 50. My obviousconclusion was that they had died from their. habit but he wasconfident that they had simply tired of the drug and just quit.When asked if the same were basically true of marijuana andcocaine, he responded affirmatively. That caused me to wonder whythese substances had been made illegal. It is frequently stated that illicit drugs are "bad,dangerous, destructive" or "addictive," and thatsociety has an obligation to keep them from the public. Butnowhere can be found reliable, objective scientific evidence thatthey are any more harmful than other substances and activitiesthat are legal. In view of the enormous expense, the carnage andthe obvious futility of the "drug war," resulting inmassive criminalization of society, it is high time to examinethe supposed justification for keeping certain substancesillegal. Those who initiated those prohibitions and those who nowso vigorously seek to enforce them have not made their objectivesclear. Are they to protect us from evil, from addiction, or frompoison? The concept of evil is derived from subjective values and isdifficult to define. just why certain (illegal) substances aresingularly more evil than legal substances like alcohol has notbeen explained. This complex subject of "right" and"wrong" has never been successfully addressed bylegislation and is best left to the pulpit. Addiction is also a relative and ubiquitous phenomenon. Itcertainly cannot be applied only to a short arbitrary list ofaddictive substances while ignoring. a plethora of human cravings- from chocolate to coffee, from gum to gambling, from tea, totobacco, from snuggling to sex. Compulsive urges to fulfill aperceived need are ubiquitous. Some people are more susceptibleto addiction than others and some "needs" are moreaddictive than others. Probably the most addictive substance inour civilization is tobacco - yet no one has suggested making itillegal. As for prohibition, it has been clearly demonstrated that whenan addictive desire becomes inaccessible it provokesirresponsible behavior to fulfill that desire. Education andsupport at least have a chance of controlling addiction.Deprivation only sharpens the craving and never works. Even inprison addicts are able to get their `fix.' And "poison" is also a misleading shibboleth. Thewidespread propaganda that illegal drugs are "deadlypoisons" is a hoax. There is little or no medical evidenceof long term ill effects from sustained, moderate consumption ofuncontaminated marijuana, cocaine or heroin. If these substances- most of them have been consumed in large quantities forcenturies - were responsible for any chronic, progressive ordisabling diseases, they certainly would have shown up inclinical practice and/or on the autopsy table. But they simplyhave not! Media focus on the "junkie" has generated a mistakenimpression that all uses of illegal drugs are devastated by theirhabit. Simple arithmetic demonstrates that the small populationof visible addicts must constitute only a fraction of the $150billion per year illegal drug market. This industry is so hugethat it necessarily encompasses a very large portion of theordinary population who are typically employed, productive,responsible and not significantly impaired from leadingconventional lives. These drug users are not "addicts"just as the vast majority of alcohol users are not"alcoholics." Is it not a ridiculous paradox to have laws to protect us fromrelatively harmless substances and not from the devastatingeffects of other substances that happen to be legal? It is wellknown that tobacco causes nearly a million deaths annually (inthe US alone) from cancer, cardiovascular disease and emphysema;more than 350,000 die from alcohol-related cirrhosis and itscomplications and caffeine is the cause of cardiac and nervoussystem disturbances. These facts suggest that the rubric is beingfraudulently misled into fearing the wrong substances and intocomplacency about hazardous substances by allowing their sale andeven subsidization. Our environment contains a plethora of hazards, of whichrecreational substances are much less important than many others.Recognizing the reality of consumer demand and the perspective ofrelative harm should make a strong case for alternatives toprohibition. Should we not have teamed from the failure of theVolstead Act of the 1920s and the current ubiquitous availabilityof illegal drugs that prohibition is the height of futility? Is it not time to recognize that the " problem" isnot the drugs but the enormous amounts of untaxed money divertedfrom the economy to criminals? The economic incentive for drugdealers to merchandise their product aggressively is amulti-billion dollar return which has a far more powerful effectto increase substance abuse than any enforcement program canpossibly do to, constrain that usage. The hopeless challenge ofdrug crime is compounded by the parallel expansion of theft,crime, which is the principal economic resource to finance thedrug industry. How can this be anything but a lose-lose situationfor society? We should look at the fact that a relatively low budget publiceducation campaign has resulted in a significant decline in USconsumption of both alcohol and tobacco during a period when acostly and intensive campaign to curtail illegal drugs onlyresulted in their increased usage. Is there a lesson to beheeded? Of course there is. Scrap the nonsense of trying to obliteratedrugs and acknowledge their presence in our society as we havewith alcohol and tobacco. Legalization would result in: purity assurance under Food and Drug Administration regulation; labeled concentration of the product (to avoid overdose); obliteration of vigorous marketing ("pushers"); obliteration of drug crime and reduction of theft crime savings in expensive enforcement and significant tax revenues. Effort and funds can then be directed to educating the publicabout the hazards of all drugs. Can such a change of attitude happen? Probably not, becausethe huge illegal drug industry has mountains of money for a mediablitz and for buying politicians to sing the songs of"evil" and "danger" which is certain to killany legislative attempt at legalization. Perhaps it will takesome time before reality can prevail, but meanwhile we should atleast do more to expose deception and to disseminate the truth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-68IA087-000625-B006-140http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/buck1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035410 text/html 21735HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:09 GMTContent-length: 21517 The Effects of Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy The Effects of Drug Legalization The following is an excerpt form "Ain't Nobody's BusinessIf You Do", by Peter McWilliams. It is a discussion betweenWilliam F. Buckley, Jr. and Professor Gazzaniga (the Andrew W.Thompson Jr. Professor of Psychiatry [Neuroscience] at DartmouthMedical School) which was originally published in the February 5,1990, issue of the National Review. Buckley: It is said that the drug crack issubstantively different from its parent drug, cocaine, in that itis, to use the term of Professor van den Haag,"crimogenic." In other words a certain (unspecified)percentage of those who take crack are prompted to--well, to goout and commit mayhem of some kind. Is that correct? Gazzaniga: No, not in the way you put it. What you areasking is: Is there something about how crack acts on the brainthat makes people who take it likelier to commit crime? Let's begin by making it clear what crack is. It is simplycocaine that has been mixed with baking soda, water, and thenboiled. What this procedure does is to permit cocaine to besmoked. Now any drug ingested in that way-- i.e., absorbed by thelungs--goes more efficiently to the brain, and the result is aquicker, more intense experience. That is what crack gives theconsumer. But its impact on the brain is the same as with plaincocaine and, as a matter of fact, amphetamines. No one has evermaintained that these drugs are "crimogenic.' The only study I know about that inquires into the question ofcrack breeding crime reports that most homicides involving crackwere the result NOT of the use of crack, but of dealer disputes.Crack did not induce users to commit crimes. Do some crack userscommit crimes? Of course. After all, involvement in proscribeddrug traffic is dangerous. Moreover, people who commit crimestend to use drugs at a high rate, though which drug they prefervaries from one year to the next. Buckley: You are telling us that an increase in the useof crack would not mean an increase in crime? Gazzaniga: I am saying that what increase there wouldbe in crime would not be simply the result of the pharmacology ofthat drug. Look, let's say there are 200,000 users/abusers ofcrack in New York City--a number that reflects one of the currentestimates. If so, and if the drug produced violent tendencies inall crack users, the health-care system would have to come to ascreeching halt. It hasn't. In fact, in 1988 the hospitals in NewYork City (the crack capital of the world) averaged only sevencrack- related admissions, city-wide, a day. The perception ofcrack-based misbehavior is exaggerated because it is the casesthat show up in the emergency rooms that receive public notice,and the whole picture begins to look very bleak. All of this isto say: when considering any aspect of the drug problem, keep inmind the matter of selection of evidence. It is prudent to recall that, in the past, dangerous andcriminal behavior has been said to have been generated by otherdrugs, for instance marijuana (you remember "ReeferMadness"?). And bear it in mind that since cocaine isavailable everywhere, so is crack available everywhere, since themeans of converting the one into the other are easy, and easilylearned. It is important to note that only a small percentage ofcocaine users actually convert their stuff to crack. Roughly onein six. Buckley: Then would it follow that even if there werean increase in the use of crack, the legalization of it wouldactually result in a decrease in crime? Gazzaniga: That is correct. Buckley: Isn't crack a drug whose addictive powerexceeds that of many other drugs? If that is the case, oneassumes that people who opt to take crack do so because it yieldsthe faster and more exhilarating satisfactions to which you makereference. Gazzaniga: That is certainly the current understanding,but there are no solid data on the question. Current observationsare confounded by certain economic variables. Crack is cheap-- Buckley: Why? If cocaine is expensive, how can crack becheap? Gazzaniga: Cocaine costs $1,000 per ounce if bought inquantity. Once ounce can produce one thousand vials of crack,each of which sells for $5. The drug abuser is able to experiencemore drug episodes. Crack being cheap, the next high can come alot more quickly and since there is a down to every up, or high,the cycle can become intense. So yes, crack is addictive. So is cocaine. So areamphetamines. The special punch of crack, as the result of goingquickly via the lungs to the brain, may prompt some abusers towant more. By the way, it is the public knowledge that crack actsin this way that, as several studies document, causes mostregular cocaine users to be cautious about crack. The casual-to-moderate user very clearly wants to stay in that category. So,all you can say is that there is a *perception*, widely shared,that crack is more addictive. Whether it is, isn't really known.One thing we do know is that crack does not begin to approachtobacco as a nationwide health hazard. For every crack-relateddeath, there are three-hundred tobacco-related deaths. Anotherexample of hyperbole is the recent claim that there were 375,000"crack babies" born last year; how could that possiblybe, when the government (the National Institutes on Drug Abuse)informs us that there were only 500,000 crack "users"last year? Exaggeration and misinformation run rampant on thissubject. Buckley: Well, if crack were legally availablealongside cocaine and, say, marijuana, what would be the reasonfor a consumer to take crack? Gazzaniga: You need to keep your drug classificationsstraight. if your goal were, pure and simple, to get high, youmight try crack or cocaine, or some amphetamine. You wouldn't gofor marijuana, which is a mild hallucinogen and tranquilizer. So,if you wanted to be up and you didn't have much time, you mightgo to crack. But then if it were absolutely established thatthere was a higher addiction rate with crack, legalization could,paradoxically, diminish its use. This is so because if cocainewere reduced to the same price as crack, the abuser,acknowledging the higher rate of addiction, might forgo the moreintensive high of crack, opting for the slower high of cocaine.Crack was introduced years ago as offering an alluring newpsychoactive experience. But its special hold on the ghetto isthe result of its price. Remember that--on another front--we knowthat 120- proof alcohol doesn't sell as readily as 86 proof, notby a long shot, even though the higher the proof, the faster thepsychological effect that alcohol users are seeking. Buckley: Is there evidence that the current consumptionof drugs is restrained by their illegality? We have read thatninety million Americans have experimented, at one time oranother, with illegal drugs. Would more than ninety million haveexperimented with them if drugs had been legal? Gazzaniga: I think illegality has little if anything todo with drug consumption--and, incidentally, I am certain thatfar more than ninety million Americans have at some point orother experimented with an illegal drug. This gets to the issue of actual availability. Drugs areeverywhere, simply everywhere. In terms of availability, drugsmight just as well be legal as illegal. Now it has been arguedthat legalization will create a different social climate, a morepermissive, more indulgent climate. It is certainly conceivable,primarily for that reason, that there would be greater initialuse--the result of curiosity. But the central point is that humanbeings in all cultures tend to seek out means of altering theirmental state, and that although some will shop around and losethe powers of self-discipline, most will settle down to a baserate of use, and a much smaller rate of abuse, and those ratesare pretty much what we have in the U.S. right now. Buckley: Then the factor of illegality, in youropinion, does not weigh heavily? But, we come to the criticalquestion, if ninety million (or more) Americans have experimentedwith the use of drugs, why is drug abuse at such a (relatively)low level? Gazzaniga: If you exclude tobacco, in the whole nationless than 10 per cent of the adult population "abuses"drugs. That is, 9 to 12 million adult Americans abuse drugs. Thatfigure includes alcohol, by the way, and the figure remainsfairly constant. Consider alcohol. In our culture alone, 70 to 80 percent of ususe alcohol, and the abuse rate is now estimated at 5 to 6 percent. We see at work here a major feature of the human responseto drug availability, namely, the inclination to moderation. Mostpeople are adjusted and are intent on living productive lives.While most of us, pursuing that goal, enjoy the sensations ofeuphoria, or anxiety reduction, or (at times) social dis-inhibition or even anesthesia, we don't let the desire for thesesensations dominate our behavior. Alcohol fills these needs formany people and its use is managed intelligently. It is worth nothing that the largest proportion of this drugis sold to the social drinker, not the drunk, just as mostcocaine is sold to the casual user, not the addict. Now, earlyexposure to alcohol is common and inevitable, and youthfuldrinking can be extreme. Yet studies have shown that it isdifficult to determine which drunk at the college party willevolve into a serious alcoholic. What is shown is that the vastmajority of early drinkers stop excessive drinking all bythemselves. In fact, drug use of all types drops off radicallywith age. Buckley: Wait a minute. Are you telling us that thereis only a 10 per cent chance that any user will become addictedto a drug, having experimented with it? Gazzaniga: The 10 per cent figure includes all drugsexcept tobacco. The actual risk for abuse for some drugs is muchlower. Consider last year's national Household Survey (NHS) whichwas carried out by the National Institutes on Drug Abuse. Gazzaniga: It is estimated that some 21 million peopletried cocaine in 1988. But according to the NHS only threemillion defined themselves as having used the drug at least onceduring each month preceding their interview. Most of the threemillion were casual users. Now think about it. All the cocaineusers make up 2 per cent of the adult population, and the addictsmake up less than one quarter of 1 per cent of the total popu-lation. These are the government's own figures. Does that soundlike an epidemic to you? Buckley: But surely an epidemic has to do with the rateat which an undesirable occurrence is increasing. How many morecocaine users were there than the year before? Or the year beforethat? Gazzaniga: The real question is whether or not more andmore Americans are becoming addicted to something. Is the rate ofaddiction to psycho- active substances going up? The answer tothat is a flat no. Are fads during which one drug becomes morepopular than another as the drug of abuse? Sure. But, when onedrug goes up in consumption, others go down. Heroin use is down,and so is marijuana use. That is why the opiate and marijuanapushers are trying to prove their purity--so they can grab backsome of their market share, which apparently they have done forheroin in New York City. But having said that, you should know that the actual use ofcocaine and all other illicit drugs is on the decline, accordingto the NHS. The just- published National High School Surveycarried out by the University of Michigan reports that the sameis true among high-school students. Crack is used at such a lowrate throughout the country that its use can hardly be measuredin most areas. Buckley: Well, if low addiction rate is the rule, howdo we come to terms with the assertion, which has been made inreputable circles, that over 40 per cent of Americans fighting inVietnam were using heroin and 80 per cent marijuana? Gazzaniga: Stressful situations provoke a greater useof drugs. Vietnam was one of them. But what happens when thesoldiers come home? That point was examined in a large study byDr. Lee Robbins at Washington University. During the Vietnam War,President Nixon ordered a study on the returning vets who seemedto have a drug problem. (Nixon didn't know what he was lookingfor, but he was getting a lot of flak on the point that the wasproducing a generation of drug addicts.) Dr. Robbins chose tostudy those soldiers returning to the U.S. in 1971. Of the 13,760Army enlisted men who returned and were included in her sample,1,400 had a positive urine test for drugs (narcotics,amphetamines, or barbiturates). She was able to re- test 495 menfrom this sample a few months later. The results were crystalclear: Only 8 per cent of the men who had been drug positive intheir first urine test remained so. In short, over 90 per cent ofthem, now that they were back home, walked away from drug use.And all of them knew how to get hold of drugs, if they had wantedthem. Incidentally, Dr. Robbins did a follow-up study a couple ofyears later on the same soldiers. She reported that there had notbeen an increase in drug use. Buckley: Aha! You are saying that under specialcircumstances, the use of drugs increases. Well, granted therewas stress in Vietnam. Isn't there also stress in Americanghettos? Gazzaniga: If you live in poverty and frustration, andsee few rewards available to you, you are likelier than yourbetter-satisfied counterpart to seek the escape of drugs,although the higher rate of consumption does not result in ahigher rate of addiction. Virtually every study finds this to bethe case with one possibly interesting twist. A recent Departmentof Defense study showed that drug use in the military was lowerfor blacks than for whites, the reverse of civilian life. (It isgenerally agreed that the military is the only institution in ourcountry that is successfully integrated.) In short, environmentalfactors play an important role in the incidence of drug use. Buckley: So you are saying that there are socialcircumstances that will raise the rate of consumption, but thatraising the rate of consumption doesn't in fact raise the rate ofaddiction. In other words, if 50 per cent of the troops inVietnam had been using crack, this would not have affected therate at which, on returning to the U.S., they became addicted.They would have kicked the habit on reaching home. Gazzaniga: That's the idea. Drug consumption can go upin a particular population, fueled by stress, but the rate ofaddiction doesn't go up no matter what the degree of stress. Mostpeople can walk away from high drug use if their lives becomemore normal. Of course, the stress of the ghetto isn't the onlysituation that fuels high drug consumption. Plenty of affluentpeople who for some reason or another do not find their livesrewarding also escape into drugs. Buckley: If it is true, then, that only a smallpercentage of those who take crack will end up addicted, and thatthat is no different from the small percentage who, taking onebeer every Saturday night, will become alcoholics, what is thecorrect way in which to describe the relative intensity of theaddictive element in a particular drug? Gazzaniga: That is an interesting question and one thatcan't satisfactorily be answered until much more research isdone. There are conundrums. Again, it is estimated that 21million people tried cocaine in 1988. Yet, of those, only 3million currently use it, and only a small per- centage areaddicted. As for crack, it is estimated that 2.5 million haveused it, while only a half million say they still do, and thatfigure includes the addicted and the casual user. Some reportsclaim that as many as one half of crack users are addicted. As Ihave said, crack is cheap, and for that reason may be especiallyattractive to the poor. That is a non- pharmacological,non-biological factor, the weight of which we have not come toany conclusions about. We don't even have reliable data to tellus that crack creates a greater rate of addiction than, say,cocaine. My own guess is it doesn't. Remember that the drug actson the same brain systems that cocaine and amphetamines do. Buckley: To what extent is the addictive factoraffected by education? Here is what I mean by this: Taking adrug, say heroin or cocaine or crack- -or, for that matter,alcohol--is a form of Russian roulette, using a ten- cartridgerevolver. Now, presumably, an educated person, concerned for hislivelihood, wouldn't take a revolver with nine empty cartridgesand one full cartridge, aim it at his head, and pull the trigger.But granted, decisions of that kind are based on ratiocinativeskills. And we have to assume these skills don't exist even amongcollege students. If they did, there would be no drinking incollege, let alone drug taking. Comments? Gazzaniga: Most people perceive themselves as incontrol of their destiny. They do not think the initial exposurewill ruin their lives, because of their perceived self-control,and they are right. Take the most difficult case, tobacco--themost highly addictive substance around. In a now classic study,Stanley Schachter of Columbia University formally surveyed hishighly educated colleagues at Columbia. At the same time, hepolled the working residents of Amagansett, a community on LongIsland where he summered. He first determined who were ongoingsmokers, and who had been smokers. He took into account how longthey had smoked, what they had smoked, and all other variables hecould think of. It wasn't long before the picture began to crystallize. Informa normally intelligent group of people about the tangible hazardsof using a particular substance and the vast majority of themsimply stop. It wasn't easy for some, but in general theystopped, and they didn't need treatment programs, supportprograms, and all the rest. Dr. Schachter concluded, after thisstudy, that it is only the thorny cases that show up at thetreatment centers, people who have developed a true addiction.For those people, psychological prophylactics, includingeducation, are of little or no value. Yet it is these people thatare held up as examples of what happens when one uses drugs. Thisis misleading. It creates an unworkable framework for thinkingabout the problem. Most people can voluntarily stop using apsychoactive substance, and those people who do continue to useit can moderate their intake to reduce the possibility of healthhazards. This is true, as I say, for most substances, but Irepeat, less true for tobacco because of its distinctivelyaddictive nature. The people who unwisely continue to use tobaccotend to smoke themselves into major illness even though they areamply warned that this is likely to happen. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-69IA087-000625-B006-163http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/media2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035431 text/html 9617HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:16 GMTContent-length: 9400 How Drug Legalization Would Cut Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy PERSPECTIVE ON DRUGS How Legalization Would Cut Crime The no-win 'drug war' keeps driving up the price. Users commit crimes to cover the cost. The public is the loser. By STEVEN B. DUKE The following article appeared Dec. 21, 1993 in the Los AngelesTimes and is reprinted with the permission of the author. In her assertion that legalizing drugs would markedly reducecrime, Dr. Joycelyn Elders was clearly correct. Given theenormity of the nation's crime problem, her suggestion thatlegalization should be "studied" was also plainlyright. In asserting that the matter should not even be thoughtabout, the Administration behaved like religious rulers decryingheresy. What should be embarrassing to an Administration electedon a promise of "change" is not what its surgeongeneral said, but her White House colleagues' contemptuousdismissal of what she said. That drug prohibition is responsible for much of the crime inthis country is beyond dispute. In terms of crime rates, the mostserious mistake America ever made was to limit its repeal ofProhibition to a single drug -- alcohol, the only drug thatcommonly triggers violent propensities in its users. Had wefullyrepealed drug prohibition in 1933, our crime rates today would beno more than half what they now are. Property crime rates have tripled and violent crime rates havedoubled since President Richard M. Nixon created the DrugEnforcement Agency in 1973 and declared an "all-out globalwar"to end the "drug menace." The connection isnot coincidental. The more effective are law-enforcement efforts against drugdistribution, the more costly the drugs become to theirconsumers. After a generation of escalating drug war efforts, thecosts of marijuana, cocaine and heroin are about 100 times whatthey would be in a free market. The inevitable effect of jackingup the cost of drugs is the commission of crime by drug users toobtain money to buy drugs. In a recent survey of persons in prison for robbery or burglary,one out of three said that they committed their crimes in orderto buy drugs. In a survey of adolescents, those who admittedusing cocaine, 1.3%, accounted for 49% of the admitted crimes. Inseveral studies of prisoners, 65% to 80% have admitted regular orlifetime illicit drug use. About 75% of our robberies, thefts,burglaries and related assaults are committed by drug abusers.Numerous studies show that drug users commit far fewer crimeswhen undergoing outpatient drug therapy or even when the price ofdrugs drops. Creating incentives to steal and rob to buy drugs is not the onlycrime-inducing effect of prohibition, perhaps not even the mainone. Murder and assault are employed to protect or acquiredrug-selling turf, to settle disputes among drug merchants andtheir customers, to steal drugs or drug money from dealers. Inmajor cities, at least one-fourth of the killings are systemic tothe drug trade. The victims of internecine drug warfare are ofteninnocent bystanders, even infants and school-children. Drug prohibition also accounts for much of the proliferation ofhandguns. Drug dealers must enforce their own contracts andprovide their own protection from predators, even"mules" who deliver drugs need weapons. Packing a gun, like fancy clothing orgold jewelry, has become a status symbol among many adolescents.In such an atmosphere, other youngsters carry guns for--theyhope--protection. A decade ago, only 15% of teenagers who gotinto serious trouble in New York City were carrying guns, now therate is 60%-65%. The drug trade and the crime and violence attached to it takeplace mainly in our cities, rendering whole neighborhoods unfitfor human habitation. As the rot spreads, even more crime isgenerated by the climate of disorder and ennui it produces. Drug prohibition also fosters crime by producingofficialcorruption. The news media are full of accounts of copscaught stealing money or drugs from dealers or simply takingmoney to look the other way. Even judges and prosecutors aresometimes implicated. Such pervasive corruption denigrates anddemoralizes all law enforcers and causes disrespect for law amongcitizens. The distractive effects of the drug war on law enforcementindirectly but profoundly encourage crime. In many cities, halfor more of arrests are for drugs or related crimes, expendingpolice resources and energy that might otherwise be available fordomestic violence, fraud and other serious offenses. As aconsequence, all criminals have a much better chance of escapingdetection and punishment than if drugs were legal. The drug war also deeply undercuts the role of incarceration indealing with people convicted of such serious crimes as childmolesting, rape, kidnaping and homicide. There is no room in ourprisons: 40 states are under court orders for overcrowding. Fundsare not available to build prisons fast enough to provide theneeded space. Violent criminals are being paroled early or arehaving their sentences chopped to make space for drug users anddealers. The drug war (excluding treatment and preventive educationexpenditures) costs about $9 billion at the federal level andabout twice that on the state and local levels. These estimatesdo not count the law-enforcement cost chargeable to crimes thatare prohibition-caused but not technically drug-related--probably another $15 billion at all levels of government. Thus,law-enforcement costs attributable to the drug war are at least$40 billion per year. The losses to crime victims in propertyalone (not counting lives lost or bodies maimed) are probablyanother $10 billion. In addition, the drug war imposes a premiumof at least $50 billion on the price of drugs and the cost todrug consumers. The total annual costs of the drug war,therefore, are about $100 billion. If drugs were legalized, mostof this money could be spent on long-term crime prevention. Legalizing drugs would not be cost free. We could expect somewhatmore use of presently illicit drugs and, all other thingsremaining the same, more drug abuse. But things would not remainthe same. Vast sums would be freed for prevention and treatmentof drug abuse and for reducing its root causes. Among the manyother benefits of legalization would be the reduction of AIDS andother diseases transmitted by drug abusers, less risk of drugoverdose or poisoning, better prenatal care for pregnant womenwith drug problems and restoration of our civil liberties, toname a few. How the law should treat the distribution and consumption ofpsychoactive drugs is an issue on which reasonable people candiffer. There is, however, no room to doubt that legalizing suchdrugs would greatly reduce our crime rates. Everyone familiarwith the crime problem knows that no bill pending in Congress andno other anti-crime measure proposed by anyone has the slightestchance of substantially reducing the ravages of crime. A society that regards crime as one of its greatest problems yetallows its leaders to refuse to consider the only known solution,deserves the leaders -- and crime -- it gets. Steven B. Duke is a Yale law professor and the co-author, withAlbert C. Cross, of "America's Longest War. Rethinking OurTragic Crusade Against Drugs" to be published by Jeremy P.Tarch/Putnam. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-70IA087-000625-B006-187http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/knapp1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035443 text/html 13147HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:22 GMTContent-length: 12929 Dethrone the Drug Czar by Judge Whitman Knapp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy DETHRONE THE DRUG CZAR by Whitman Knapp This is from the Sunday, May 9, New York Times OP-ED page. Whitman Knapp is a Senior United States District Judge forthe Southern District of New York. The nation was fortunate in President Clinton's selection ofLee Brown as Director of the Office of National Drug Control. Having been police commissioner in Atlanta, Houston and NewYork, Mr. Brown has been in key positions to observe that ahalf-century of the Federal war against drugs has had a simpleresult: Each year, the Government has spent more on enforcingdrug laws than it did the year before. Each year, more peoplehave gone to jail for drug offenses. Yet each year there have been more drugs on the streets. Surely, Mr. Brown can have no interest in simply spending moremoney and filling more prisons. Indeed, he might well concludethat his mission is to find out how to eliminate his new job. Milton Friedman, the Nobel laureate economist, has a simpleexplanation of the upward spiral with which Mr. Brown mustcontend. Law enforcement temporarily reduces the drug supply andthus causes prices to rise. Higher prices draw new sources ofsupply and even new drugs into the market, resulting in moredrugs on the street. The increased availability of drugs createsmore addicts. The Government reacts with more vigorousenforcement, and the cycle starts anew. Mr. Friedman and those who share his views propose astraightforward way out of this discouraging spiral:Decriminalize drugs, thus eliminating the pressure on supply thatcreates an ever-bigger market. This, they contend, will reduce demand and reverse the cycle,much as a similar approach has cut into alcohol addiction. I do not claim competence to evaluate this theory. But after20 years on the bench, I have concluded that Federal drug lawsare a disaster. It is time to get the Government out of drugenforcement. As long as we indulged the fantasy that the problemcould be solved by making America drug free, it was appropriatethat the Government assume the burden. But that ambition has beenshown to be absurd. Attorney General Janet Reno's statement on Friday that shehopes to refocus the drug war on treatment show's admirabledetermination that the drug problem is primarily a local issue,more properly the concern and responsibility of state and citygovernments. If the possession or distribution of drugs were no longer aFederal crime, other levels of government would face the choiceof enforcement or trying out Milton Friedman's theory anddecriminalizing. If they chose the second route, they would haveto decide whether to license drug retailers, distribute drugsthrough state agencies or perhaps allow drugs only to bepurchased with a physician's prescription. The variety, complexity and importance of these questions makeit exceedingly clear that the Federal Government has no businessbeing involved in any of them. What might be a hopeful solutionin New York could be a disaster in Idaho, and only statelegislatures and city governments, not Congress, can pass lawstailored to local needs. What did the nation do when it decided to rid itself of thecatastrophes spawned by Prohibition? It adopted the 21stAmendment, which excluded the Government from any role inregulation of alcoholic beverages and strengthened the powers ofthe states to deal with such matters. That is precisely what the Congress should do with respect todrugs. It should repeal all Federal laws that prohibit orregulate their distribution or use and devise methods for helpingthe states to exercise their respective powers in those areas. But having created the problem by decades of ill-consideredlegislation, congress can't just throw it back to the stateswithout helping finance the efforts. That raises a host ofcomplex problems, including apportionment of Federal monies amongthe states, restrictions on how the monies may be used, the ratioof Federal dollars for enforcement to those spent on treatmentand the role of nongovernmental organizations that treat addicts. Such problems will not lend themselves to easy resolution.After all, Prohibition was allowed to wreak havoc for a mere 14years, while the drug warriors have been at it for many decades.Under Lee Brown's leadership, we may hope for a return to sanity. --------------------------------------------------------------------- These three "Letters to the Editor" appeared in theMay 24 NYT. comments follow each one. DECRIMINALIZATION WOULD JUST BOOST DRUG USE To the Editor: "Dethrone the Drug Czar" (Op-Ed May 9), in whichWhitman Knapp calls for decriminalizing drugs, proved poignantfor me. I read it soon after coming off an emergency room shiftwhere I saw two cocaine-induced abortions and got to resuscitatea 15-year-old who suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage due tococaine use. "Resuscitate" may be too strong a word.What I actually did was hook up a brain-dead boy to life support,drill a hole in his head and try to comfort his hysterical momwhile I negotiated him into our last remaining intensive careunit bed. Judge Knapp doesn't seem to understand that the consumption ofillegal drugs, not the commerce surrounding them, causes most ofthe drug-related misery and death. This tragedy is visited notonly upon the drug users, but also upon those who get in the wayof their fists, knives, guns and cars. Justice Department studieshave shown that a majority of violent crimes are committed bypeople already intoxicated -- not by those seeking drugs. Those who learn their history from historians, rather thanfrom old re-runs of the "Untouchables"," know thatProhibition resulted in a major reduction in child abuse,domestic violence, murders, disease and absenteeism. Thesubsequent decriminalization of alcohol did not "cut intoalcohol addiction" -- it facilitated and encouraged it. For many people and for society as a whole, alcohol andillicit drugs are agents of disease. Decriminalizing illegaldrugs will remove yet another barrier to their consumption andend up increasing their use. This may put the drug czar out ofbusiness, but it's sure to keep me spending more of your healthcare dollars for years to come. Daniel Brookoff, M.D. Assistant Professor of Medicine University of Tennessee Memphis, May 10, 1993 --------------------------------------------------------------------- MANY GOOD RESULTS To the Editor: We can no longer ignore calls like Judge Whitman Knapp's in"Dethrone the Drug Czar" to decriminalize drugs. Whenmost of our jails are filled with drug-related convictedcriminals; when the criminal justice system is crippled bydrug-related cases; when drugs cost us billions of dollars inpolice, judges, prosecutors and lawyers; when our streets,schools, subways, parks, homes and we are not safe fromdrug-related shootings, burglaries and muggings, our politicianscan at least debate decriminalization honestly. What are we afraid of? That it would become too easy to obtaindrugs? How difficult is it now? Are we afraid that moreyoungsters will use drugs? Do we really believe that the fear ofcriminal punishment deters drug use? If so, where is the proof ofsuch deterrence? These questions should be debated. If drugs were decriminalized and made available without thefear of long-term jail terms for sellers and user,s it stands toreason that prices would be reduced drastically. The drug userwho now steals, mugs and burglarizes to support his habit may notcommit such crimes if he could obtain the drugs at a lower price.The billions of dollars now spent to enforce drug laws could bespent to educate youngsters against the use of drugs and to treatdrug users. Decriminalizing drugs does not mean encouragement oftheir use. On the positive side, decriminalizing drugs could reducecrime, unclog our judicial system and free billions of dollarsfor other purposes, including drug treatment facilities. What isthe negative side of decriminalizing drugs? Can we afford more ofthe same? Demetrios Coritsidis Long Island City, Queens, May 12, 1993 _The writer is a lawyer._ --------------------------------------------------------------------- Third letter: --------------------------------------------------------------------- CALI CARTEL'S THREAT To the Editor: Over the last few years we have lost our focus on illegaldrugs as a national security threat. Editorials increasinglydemand a United States counternarcotics policy that attempts tosolve the drug problem solely through domestic actions. Increasedresources for drug prevention and treatment can pay bigdividends, and should be pursued. But we also need a focused foreign policy. The news thatGilberto Rodriguez-Orjuela, the Cali cartel drug kingpin, orderedthe killing in New York City of Manuel de Dios Unanue to silencehis writings about the cartel (front page, May 11) should serveas a wake-up call to all Americans that an isolationistcounternarcotics strategy would be a tragic mistake. Although the Medellin cartel has been badly damaged, theColombian cocaine cartel headquartered in Cali is more powerfulthan ever. Through corruption, intimidation and murder, it exertsa powerful influence over Colombian Government institutions. Itsinfluence has spread. In Bolivia, trafficking networks of native Colombians havereplaced native Bolivians, while in Guatemala Cali traffickershave bought up ranches to use as staging locations for aerialsmuggling. Wherever they go, the curruption of democraticinstitutions follows. And now the first murder by the Cali cartelof an American journalist on American soil has been charged. So long as the Cali cartel is allowed to flourish unchecked,it will export death and violence to America. It has the mosteffective clandestine distribution system in America forcontraband and weapons. When American weans itself away fromwidespread cocaine addiction, the cartel will have shifted toheroin. The cartel is financing a massive opium cultivationprogram in Colombia that has in less than two years catapultedColumbia to the world's No. 3 heroin producer. A global drug cartel like Cali can only be weakened andincapacitated by global-law enforcement action. If we leave theseglobal mafias for our children to deal with, it may be too late. Robert C. Bonner Drug Enforcement Administrator Washington, May 14, 1993 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-71IA087-000625-B006-203http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/coughlin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035452 text/html 15575HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:07 GMTContent-length: 15357 Rockefeller Drug Laws -- 20 Years Later Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Testimony of New York State Corrections Commissioner Thomas A.Coughlin, III: "Rockefeller Drug Laws -- 20 Years Later" Before a hearing convened by the Assembly Committee on Codes Tuesday, June 8, 1993 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to appear before this panelto formalize . . . for the record . . . my position on what hasbecome known as the Rockefeller drug laws. Contrary to popular belief, I was not the prison commissionerwhen they were enacted. But this month, as I close in on 14 yearsas Corrections Commissioner, I believe that I offer a uniqueperspective on the subject before us today. Because . . . more than anyone else in State government today.. . I have seen the effects - both good and bad - of these laws.I've seen them used to lock up the right people for very, verylong periods of time. But I have also seen them lock up the wrongpeople. . . for the wrong reasons. Let me summarize the impact of the Rockefeller drug laws. . .upon the prison population . . . and why I think we desperatelyneed to modify our approach to the drug epidemic plaguing NewYork State. As of May 25, the prison house 64,000 inmates -- 2,000 of themliving in double bunks that were added as an emergency responseto a bed shortage. Because of fiscal constraints and policydifferences, no new prison construction has been authorized bythe Legislature for several years. Nevertheless, the prisonpopulation continues to grow . . . as does the backlog of 1,700offenders . . . waiting out in the counties, to be received intothe Department's custody. If each of the 64,000 people actually belonged in prison, Iwould have no problem in simply asking the legislature to pay$100,000 each for all the new cells that I need. But that is notthe case. And we are putting untold pressures on prison employeesby crowding our prisons. And, quite frankly, we unnecessarilyinvite trouble when crowding forces met to put more inmates outon the streets. . . in work release . . . than I feel comfortablewith. My position has long been that prison space is a finiteresource. We should be filling them with the people we built themfor -- the violent predator and repeat offenders. Not the guy whogot caught with a few bucks worth of crack. The time is longoverdue for the Legislature to recognize this distinction andenact some basic reforms to our sentencing structure. I firmly believe that drug addiction affecting the streetlevel addict can be far more successfully treated in communitysettings, instead of the prison environment. It used to be thatoffenders came to prison and got the high school diploma theynever earned on the outside. Now, street addicts are coming to$100,000 prison cells that cost $27,000 a year to operate . . .to get the same drug treatment that could be available at $5,000to $10,000 per person on the street. It would make far more sense -- logistically and economically-- to provide initial diversion from the prison system tocommunity-based treatment provideers in the first instance forthe street level addict. Treatment, not punishment, should be ourfirst line of defense for non-violent addicts . . . in ourso-called war against drugs. We can't do that. Meanwhile, the punitive effect of the Rockefeller drug laws,as well as the rigidity of the second felony offender laws, donot deter, they do not lessen, nor do they cure drug addiction.Instead, as far as prisons are being filled with low-level drugoffenders, more street level sellers and abusers appear to takethe place of those individuals who get caught up in the criminaljustice system. Thus, as a simple matter of common sense, if not pureeconomics, we are wasting valuable and limited prison space onlow-level, non-violent offenders. Space that could be moreappropriately utilized keeping violent felony offendersincarcerated for longer periods of time. There is no questionthat forcing drug offenders into the State prison system at thecurrent rate of incarceration detracts from our ability toincarcerate violent offenders, which, in turn, only weakens ouroverall ability to promote public protection. And the publicisn't fooled, just look ad the newspaper or watching the eveningnews. In the early eighties, drug offenders accounted for roughly 10percent of all new court commitments to the Department. Theprison population was, instaed, dominated by those committingviolent felony offenses. Since 1989, commitments for violent felonies and othercoercive crimes consistently totaled just under 40 percent of thetotal number of new court commitments. But drug offensesconsistently comprised 45 percent of commitments. If ought to be obvious, we are locking up people for theiraddiction, at higher rates than for those who commit violenceagainst us. Despite the obvious, there is a near insurmountable politicalparalysis in relation to sentencing reform. Some of our electedofficials are so obsessed with the possibility of being labeledsoft on crime, that the sweep away all rational discussion of thefutility of our present approach. The end result is that we allcome up big losers -- the public at large, the taxpayer, and theprison employees who labor all day in crowded prisons. I am well aware of the fact that the public response to theprevalence of crime is to treat all offenders with singularity ofpurpose, regardless of crime. In effect, "lock them up andthrow away the key." But that is the same public which voteddown the Prison Construction Bond Act in 1981. I believe thatcommon sense can prevail -- if we only take the time tocommunicate to the general public . . . calmly and clearly . . .what is really going on. For example, if you explain to the public that the lawcurrently has the identical 8 to 25 year maximum sentencingrange, for a person who commits a forcible rape and for a personwho sells a dollar's worth of cocaine. . . I believe it wouldtell you that our legal sense of priorities is totally out ofwhack. Yet, that is exactly what the current law provides. The identical treatment of these two offenses, which have sucha disproportionate impact upon their victims, borders on theridiculous. It is for this and other reasons that the Rockefellerdrug laws need to be reexamined and reevaluated in theirentirety. In 1974, the year after the Rockefeller drug laws wereenacted, there was a total of 713 new prison commitments for drugfelonies. IN 1992, there were more than 11,000 drug felonycommitments. Cumulatively through 1992, nearly 75,000 individualshave been committed under the Rockefeller drug laws. Yet, theextremely punitive aspects of the Rockefeller drug laws do notappear to have had any deterrent effect whatsoever on the drugproblem. Because of widespread availability, the prices for both heroinand cocaine have recently fallen, according to media reports.Crack is reportedly sold for as low as 75 cents a hit. Heroin isdown to $5 a bag, with levels of purity higher than five yearsago. It appears there are so many dealers that they are cuttingprices to stay in business at all. So the Rockefeller drug lawshave lost any deterrent effect they might once have had. But the impact of these laws upon the Department has beenstaggering. A snapshot of the May 22, under-custody populationreveals the following statistics: Out of a total under-custody population of nearly 64,000inmates, 22,000 of them are doing time for drug offenses. 1,600 were convicted of a Class C, D, or E felony . . . whichmeans they could have been sentenced to local time or probationinstead of state prison. 2,000 of these inmates were convicted of Class B sale orpossession, while another 2,100 were convicted of an A-II drugfelony and 800 of an A-I drug felony. But of 22,000 drug offenders, more that 15,000 are secondfelony offenders -- which means there was no judicial discretionto impose a sentence other than state prison. I could bore you with numbers, but I won't. Suffice it to sayI have them. . . and am more than willing to share them with yourstaffs at any time. But let me get to the heart of what thesenumbers mean: The totality of overall drug commitments has increased at anastronomical rate and now significantly surpasses commitments forviolent felonies and other coercive crimes; Convictions for the sale of drugs predominate, particularlylow-level predicate convictions, and A sizable number of first felony offenders who could havereceived alternative sentences instead received state prisonsentences. That's where we are today. But the Rockefeller drug laws werethe product of another era. They were a straight-forwardrepresentation of Legislative intent: Namely, that the severityof the punishments involved would serve as a monumental deterrentto drug trade participants and "wannabe's". Thesesanctions, it was thought, would keep the drug trade withinmanageable proportions, by imposing nightmarish penalties uponthe drug lords who controlled the trade. In their worst nightmares, the writers of that legislationnever envisioned cheap "crack cocaine", and they neverconceived of a society where drug trafficking would occur inprivate residences. . . with the family in the next room. Theycould never have foreseen the level of violence that would occurand the massive firepower that would be employed. In short, theynever imagined the drug trade as a cottage industry. . . wheretens of thousands of street addicts would finance their ownhabits by becoming low-level drug dealers themselves. Filling the state's prisons with those low-level drugoffenders has not diminished drug trafficking in the slightestdegree. In continuing to allow this scenario to play out, we aresquandering limited resources that could be more appropriatelyutilized for violent felony offenders. At the same time,resources for providing drug treatment services within thecommunity go under-funded . . . even while we know they could, insome cases, be more effective than incarceration. The Governor's Executive Budget for 1993-94 contained severalimportant proposals that would have amended either theRockefeller drug laws themselves, or their effect when combinedwith the second felony offender law. For example, the current A-1felony weights for possession and sale, which are set at four andtwo ounces respectively, would have been increased to eight andfour ounces respectively. Since an A-1 felony conviction ispunishable by a minimum term ranging between 15 and 25 years,such a change would have better aligned our drug laws with thecurrent nature of the drug trade. It would recognize thedifference between a dealer and an addict. Another proposed change would have amended the second felonyoffender law to grant discretion to the sentencing judge . . .discretion to impose probation, local jail, an alternativesentence. They could continue to impose the same incarceration,or a shorter minimum term State prison sentence in the case ofClass C, D, and E nonviolent predicate felony offenders whosepredicate crime was also a nonviolent offense. Regrettably, both houses of the Legislature agreed betweenthemselves to not even consider negotiating these changes. Andthey have offered nothing in their place. Besides have rejectedthe Governor's proposal, the Legislature is telling the publicthat it has no coordinated approach to criminal justice. It isn't enough to tell the public, "We can prove we'retough on crime because we won't enact alternatives." And itis equally insufficient to say, "We won't build any moreprisons." Instead of repeating and echoing the courses that you won'tfollow, the public is waiting to see in what direction you willlead. The Governor has made proposals that deserve more than thedeafening silence of the Legislature. This hearing today builds upon those Executive proposals, bytrying to focus public attention on the Rockefeller drug laws.They may have been the right statutes for the 1970's, but we areaddressing the realities of the 1990's. I believe those realities require as dramatic and intelligenta change in our sentencing structures, as the Rockefeller druglaws were in their era. For the public to have faith in thecriminal justice system, it must be seen as swift, as firm, andas equitable. When you have thousands of offenders waiting trail andhundreds backed up in country jails, justice is not swift. When the courts are so crowded with low-level cases that 95percent of all cases are pleaded, justice is not firm. And when the violent rapist gets the same sentence as theseller of a buck's worth of drugs, justice is not equitable. Reform of the Rockefeller drug laws is only one part of themedicine needed to cure our criminal justice system. I lookforward to working with each of you to restoring the public'sslipping faith and skepticism about our criminal justice system. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-72IA087-000625-B006-223http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/lp-rld.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035502 text/html 7005HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:33 GMTContent-length: 6788 Should we re-legalize drugs? A statement by theLibertarian Party Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate The Libertarian Party asks: SHOULD WE RE-LEGALIZE DRUGS? * Should We Re-Legalize Drugs? Libertarians, like most Americans, demand to be safe at homeand on the streets. Libertarians would like all Americans to behealthy and free of drug dependence. But drug laws don't help,they make things worse. The professional politicians scramble to make names forthemselves as tough anti-drug warriors, while the experts agreethat the "war on drugs" has been lost, and could neverbe won. The tragic victims of that war are your personal libertyand its companion, responsibility. It's time to consider the re-legalization of drugs. * The Lessons of Prohibition In the 1920's, alcohol was made illegal by Prohibition. Theresult: Organized Crime. Criminals jumped at the chance to supplythe demand for liquor. The streets became battlegrounds. Thecriminals bought off law enforcement and judges. Adulteratedbooze blinded and killed people. Civil rights were trampled inthe hopeless attempt to keep people from drinking. When the American people saw what Prohibition was doing tothem, they supported its repeal. When they succeeded, most stateslegalized liquor and the criminal gangs were out of the liquorbusiness. Today's war on drugs is a re-run of Prohibition.Approximately 40 million Americans are occasional, peaceful usersof some illegal drug who are no threat to anyone. They are notgoing to stop. The laws don't, and can't, stop drug use. * Organized Crime Profits Whenever there is a great demand for a product and governmentmakes it illegal, a black market always appears to supply thedemand. The price of the product rises dramatically and theopportunity for huge profits is obvious. The criminal gangs lovethe situation, making millions. They kill other drug dealers,along with innocent people caught in the crossfire, to protecttheir territory. They corrupt police and courts. Pushers selladulterated dope and experimental drugs, causing injury anddeath. And because drugs are illegal, their victims have norecourse. * Crime Increases Half the cost of law enforcement and prisons is squandered ondrug related crime. Of all drug users, a relative few are addictswho commit crimes daily to supply artificially expensive habits.They are the robbers, car thieves and burglars who make our homesand streets unsafe. * An American Police State Civil liberties suffer. We are all "suspects",subject to random urine tests, highway check points and spyinginto our personal finances. Your property can be seized withouttrial, if the police merely claim you got it with drug profits.Doing business with cash makes you a suspect. America is becominga police state because of the war on drugs. * America Can Handle Legal Drugs Today's illegal drugs were legal before 1914. Cocaine was evenfound in the original Coca-Cola recipe. Americans had fewproblems with cocaine, opium, heroin or marijuana. Drugs wereinexpensive; crime was low. Most users handled their drug ofchoice and lived normal, productive lives. Addicts out of controlwere a tiny minority. The first laws prohibiting drugs were racist in origin -- toprevent Chinese laborers from using opium and to prevent blacksand Hispanics from using cocaine and marijuana. That was unjustand unfair, just as it is unjust and unfair to make criminals ofpeaceful drug users today. Some Americans will always use alcohol, tobacco, marijuana orother drugs. Most are not addicts, they are social drinkers oroccasional users. Legal drugs would be inexpensive, so evenaddicts could support their habits with honest work, rather thanby crime. Organized crime would be deprived of its profits. Thepolice could return to protecting us from real criminals; andthere would be room enough in existing prisons for them. * Try Personal Responsibility It's time to re-legalize drugs and let people takeresponsibility for themselves. Drug abuse is a tragedy and asickness. Criminal laws only drive the problem underground andput money in the pockets of the criminal class. With drugs legal,compassionate people could do more to educate and rehabilitatedrug users who seek help. Drugs should be legal. Individuals havethe right to decide for themselves what to put in their bodies,so long as they take responsibility for their actions. From the Mayor of Baltimore, Kurt Schmoke, to conservativewriter and TV personality, William F. Buckley, Jr., leadingAmericans are now calling for repeal of America's repressive andineffective drug laws. The Libertarian Party urges you to join inthis effort to make our streets safer and our liberties moresecure. 800-682-1776 Libertarian Party 202-543-1988 1528 Pennsylvania Avenue SE Washington, DC 20003 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-73IA087-000625-B006-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/major.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035513 text/html 7716HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:33 GMTContent-length: 7499 Why do we make major problems out of minor drugs of abuse?by Dr. Frederick H. Meyers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy WHY DO WE MAKE MAJOR PROBLEMS OUT OF MINOR DRUGS OF ABUSE? Frederick H. Meyers, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology School of Medicine University of California, San Francisco, CA94143 Presented at the 7th International Conference on MAKING CITIES LIVABLE Carmel, CA March 1, 1990 Note from Cliff Schaffer: Dr. Meyers was the head of the Research Advisory Panel for thestate of California. In essence, he was the man picked by thestate of California to head up their long-term evaluation of thedrug problem. As such, he probably knows as much about thesubject as anyone on earth. I always find his commentsinteresting and enlightening. What is your reaction to my appearance today? Possibly you arethinking, "Oh my God, here is another drug expert who hasimposed on his long association and, friendship with the Lennardsto get on the program at this prestigious meeting to intrude on ourinterests. He is going to tell us how terrible the drugproblem is, how it is the factor making all neighborhoodsunlivable and how impossible it will be for us to improve thelivability of our cities until we eliminate drug use. The stepsto be taken will involve inflating his personal status andproviding more money for damaging treatment, irrelevant research,dehumanizing enforcement or wherever else his entrenched interestlies. And he will get everything wrong including failing torecognize that the factors that depreciate the livability of ourcities also cause drug abuse and not the other way around. Now actually that is what I think that your reaction shouldbe. If you agree, I might be well advised to simply stop. However, you should, I believe, hear me further to protectyour plans for change. An hysterical, ineffectual "War onDrugs", which is what we are currently experiencing, willabsorb funds and energy, provide excuses for inaction anddeviousness and criminalize large groups within our society. Ourpresent ineffective course will not change until: I ) The public is taught the difference between drug effectsand societal reaction to the presence of those drugs; thedifference between drug effects and the associated criminalactivity of the marketplace for an expensive, illegal commodity. 2) We consider that the unlivability of some of ourneighborhoods and the factors that have led to that unlivabilitymay be causes of drug abuse. The use of a given drug by aspecific route of administration (e.g., smoking crack) is notuniformly distributed throughout our cities. We do not have a drug problem. Different agents areused and by different routes of administration. Different drugshave differing inherent dangers and elicit different emotionalreactions from the citizenry. Let's contrast two specific drugs, alcohol and heroin. Alcohol, like all sedatives, gives a pharmacologic reward. Itrelieves anxiety but also impairs judgment and psychomotorperformance and causes excitement. Alcohol as a direct drugeffect, that is because it is a disinhibitory agent, leadsdirectly to crime and antisocial behavior. Quantitatively, it isby far the most important drug of abuse, being involved in halfof the homicides, half of the fatal auto accidents, etc. Heroin, in contrast, is inherently not very dangerous. Thedirect effect is to quiet the individual. Henry and I have longenjoyed Baldwin's statement that for many years what kept thepeace in Harlem was Jesus and junk. You as citizens agree thatnarcotics are not very dangerous by providing people with a dailyhuge dose of methadone, a potent narcotic, as treatment for theiruse of a potent narcotic, heroin. However, the societal reaction to the two drugs is notconsistent with their danger. No one is ever more than a fewsteps from a drink or a bottle, The U.S. briefly tried the"noble experiment" of prohibition but abandoned itbecause the criminal activity associated with illegal booze wasjudged to be intolerable. Yet our reaction to heroin use is to assign heavy penaltiesfor its mere possession and to harass and isolate the user. Iunderstand punishing an overt criminal act but do not understandthe moralizing that underlies the terribly vindictive attitudetoward heroin. Injecting heroin is fairly described as chemicalmasturbation, not inherently a heinous act however distasteful. Ithink that the citizenry is deliberately misinformed by peoplewith an interest in maintaining the size of the drug problem andthe current hysterical reaction. Prohibition does not work; nothing we have done in the past 40years has worked. It is time for the political and intellectualleaders of this country to openly criticize our present efforts,resist the current panic reaction by citizens and electedofficials and help us redirect our efforts toward our youth, oureconomy and our cities. There are some individuals and groups who plan to suggestlegislation to decriminalize (not legalize) some areas of druguse. When you hear of the proposed legislation, I hope that youlisten to argument pro as well as con. If we can cease destroying each other over quantitativelyunimportant drugs, we can close some prisons and get on with theprimary problems -- humanizing the urban environment and workingon the important public health problems presented by alcohol,poverty and mental illness. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B33-74IA087-000625-B006-274http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/drugwars.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035534 text/html 13710HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:57 GMTContent-length: 13492 Drug wars: Menace to America Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Drug wars: Menace to America Tod Mikuriya, M.D. The escalating increasingly desperate authoritarian efforts tostem the rising tide of lawlessness caused by drug prohibitionare held in check only by the limitations of shrinking budgets.These measures have failed by any standards. Worse, the side effects harm the community through theoverloading of the enforcement/corrections, social, and healthservices resources. Individuals and society are victimized directly and indirectlyby this harmful social policy. At the core are ignorance and denial that afflict policymakers at all levels of government and society. Denial takes many forms... from the economic- the usual freemarket mercantilists who fail to include these commodities intheir spreadsheets and ignore these market forces... to thefundamentalist religious who shut out the facts with moralistichomilies. Authoritarian public officials facilitate thesepolicies. In this tricentennial of the Salem witch trials we are in thegrips of another attack of the "American disease":Prohibition. The War on Drugs. This collective moralistic delusion is seemingly unique inwestern civilization. Over a century ago America went through apainful civil war on drugs that culminated in prohibition ofalcohol from 1919 to 1933. The agitprop contemporary "War on Drugs" is evennastier and more intrusive than Prohibition. Added evils include: International piracy International kidnapping Mining of harbors Poisoning of forests with herbicides De stabilization of Columbia, Peru, Panama, and Nicaragua Funding anti-government terrorism Iran-Contra Scandal BCCI Scandal Punishment of the user Uropharmacomancy- divination of status and freedom by urine tests Confiscation of property- civil forfeiture criminal abuse of civil law Default vigilantism of neighbors forced into using small claims court Funding of police operations with proceeds from seized property Entrapment with police offering to buy drugs Entrapment with police offering to sell drugs Entrapment with police manufacturing drugs. Encouraging children to turn parents in to police for drug involvement Taking babies away from mothers who test positive for drugs No-knock entry and other civil rights attenuation Driver's license suspension for unrelated drug crimes Warrantless systematic searches on public transportation Mandatory minimum sentences derived from irrational formulae Overcrowding jails, prisons, and probation Surveillance of chemical and laboratory apparatus transactions Reporting of cash transactions over $9,999 Confiscation of growing lights Seizure of mailing lists from growing supplies stores Setting up growing supplies stores to solicit and entrap cannabis growers. Obtaining public utility records to target potential cannabis growers. Militarization at state and federal levels- "Posse Comitatus" Downgrading evidence requirements to "good faith" from probable cause. Depriving students of federal loans and grants. The corruption, violence, and divisive consequences appear tobe lessons that we have forgotten today as social policy mistakesare repeated.. The bribing of police, prosecutors, attorneys, and judges Capitalization of crime by a black marketplace: drugs forguns. Subversion of International Law Funding firearms for the young Murder and mayhem facilitated Materialism and alienation Destruction of families Abuse of children- robbed of childhood and trust At the local level there is little more that can be done thatcan be paid for by the public. Vigilante activities whilecommendable in their initiative have great potential for abuse.All pretext to due process and civil liberties are thenhopelessly abandoned to the mob. Structural emblematic efforts like school uniforms, anti drugrallies, and exhortations by public figures are feel goodexercises- Like inveighing against Satan. All the while we dobattle with the enemy- us. The exercises in group think are not unlike the two minutes ofhate rallies depicted in Orwell's 1984. Unlike the centrallycontrolled hermetic authoritarian state such efforts areineffectual. In the torrent of advertisements to self medicateanti-drug appeals are ineffectual or ironically humorous. The ignoring of the reasons and etiologies of the reasons forthe involvement in illicit drugs will delay the solving theproblems attached to a situation is bad and getting worse. Poisoning of the font of knowledge: "He who pays the piper calls thetune" A significant component is the special interest control ofinformation. Until this problem is acknowledged and solved therecan be no progress. A drug craving and drug dependent society is facilitated andexploited by the drug industries. Sales of over the counter and prescription drugs arestimulated by intensive advertising campaigns that"educate" the public starting at a young age. Spuds MacKenzie and Joe Camel don't make it into the Partnersfor a Drug Free America ads as scapegoats. Most drug prevention education is ineffectual propaganda. Send them a signal rather than tell the truth. Beer advertisements encourage dangerous behavior. Some wine advertisements do not depict wine as a foodstuff. Over the counter drugs promotions set up a drug-cravingpublic. No self-regulation skills are taught to children. Solutions Development of legalized drugs available through non-profitpharmacy-based drug users' cooperatives eliminates "crackhouses" or "shooting galleries". Drug dealerswould disappear from the streets. Criminal enterprise zones areobsolete. Restoration of the infrastructure of sports, arts, and musicneeds to be top priority. Jobs and educational opportunity are required to fulfilldreams instead of the need to distract from or suppressfrustrated, angry, and hopeless feelings. Drug abusers are unhappy. They suffer from waking perpetualnightmares of disempowerment. It is high irony that the illicit free market has broughtmoney into the minority communities where the federal programshave failed. It is blind stupidity to ignore the connectionbetween illicit drugs and guns. If drugs were legalized theirmeaning are redefined from expensive forbidden fruit toaffordable commodity. Coca derivatives are then like the otherstimulant, caffeine. There would undoubtedly be some abusive use,but of a more treatable nature. The side effects of the imposition of the moralistic model ofthe "War on Drugs have been far worse than the drugsthemselves. This illicit mercantile enterprise creates nightmaresthat primarily affects the poor. The failure of leaders at alllevels to address this economic reality must be blamed for thisgrowing social problem. Treatment for drug abuse would be available upon demand if itwere supported by transaction fees from the sale of drugs. Aharmfulness tax (Grinspoon) or pricing structure commensuratewith potential toxicity would provide additional income fortreatment and abuse prevention. Advertising of drugs rather than censored by government shouldbe from self-discipline by the industry. Removal of the exemptionfrom product liability laws for alcohol and tobacco would insureself discipline in advertising. Institutionalized or socialized use behavior will minimizeabusive use. The concept of the "designated driver" isexemplary of the kind of custom that facilitates alcohol riskmanagement. Foreign policy The economically irrational prohibitionist policy suborns theMonroe Doctrine with the inadvertent empowerment of authoritarianregimes that are hostile to the United States. Their hostility isbeyond economic control of the OAS or the World Bank since theyare now funded by the illicit drugs. Good-bye United Fruit. Hellounnamed successors to Medellin and Cali cartels. The Sendero Luminosa despite the capture of their leader andthe corrupt military in Peru has set back the emergence ofdemocracy. The Drug Enforcement Administration and their"advisors" continue to aggravate the situation.throughout Latin America. Columbia continues to suffer terrorism and destruction oftheir judiciary. the economy hammered by undercutting the coffeemarket. Panama escalates the money laundering and transshipment.Business as usual even though president George Bush capturedGeneral Manuel Noriega, former friend and CIA and DrugEnforcement Administration employee. Operation "JustCause" perpetrated urban undevelopment and"installation" (like a new motor in an old car) of a"new" government. The Iran-Contra guns for drugs scandal continues to attenuatethe legitimacy and efficacy in both foreign and domestic policy.Besides the embargo and mining of the tiny poor country ofNicaragua with illegal support of the guerrilla army, Lt. ColonelOliver North lied to Congress to support former president RonaldReagan and his vice president George Bush, commander designate ofthe War Against Drugs. Mexico continues to suffer U.S. raids and interference withtheir government by the DEA. Border traffic continues to sufferdisruption and human rights abuses from the drug law enforcement. American drug prohibition dims the future of democracy in thehemisphere. America exports criminal mercantile opportunity. Prohibitionism, the American Disease American recurrent Prohibitionism is a peculiar majoritarianauto immune social disease regarded with perplexity by the restof the world. With all the exemplary features of America, thisanachronistic problem sadly detracts from world leadership. American drug prohibition darkens the prospects for thecountry's future. Demagogues facilitated by profit-driven specialinterest groups create policy and laws that erodes evermorerights of their citizens. Gradually, and by small increments whatprotections were once taken for granted have disappeared. Lulled into a narcotism induced by television and materialism,the Trojan horse of authoritarianism has breached the gates ofthe city, its moralistic armed clergy busily snuffing out pocketsof critical thinking- ever striving to make the world safe forprofitable hypocrisy. Alexis de Toqueville's warning of an all pervasive tutelarypower ruling through the manipulation of a distractedmaterialistic populace becomes an approaching reality. THM 12-3-92 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-75IA087-000625-B006-301http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/vduc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035545 text/html 14121HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:03 GMTContent-length: 13903 Medicalization of Drug Abuse Control: Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Medicalization of Drug Abuse Control: Pharmacy Based Voluntary Drug Users Co-operatives A Proposal Tod H. Mikuriya. M.D. Reinvolve Medicine in Drug Policy To bring medicine back to involvement with issues of drugdependence, the laws need revision to make the treatment ofaddicts a medical matter. Redefine an addict as ill rather than criminal in substantiveterms. The doctrine of prohibiting physicians from maintaining opiateand cocaine addicts must be eliminated. Transfer control oftreatment protocols and standards from the Department of Justiceto the Department of Health Services. Mandate development ofmaintenance or drug hygiene standards with participation of theCalifornia Medical Association. A joint California Medical Association and California BarAssociation committee to draft legislation to revise laws tooptimize freedom to appropriately treat substance abuse,safeguard patient's rights, and protect the public health.Safeguards must be included to discourage excessive consumptionor abuse. Pharmacy Based Voluntary Drug Users' Co-operatives A new category of legal non-therapeutic users of controlledsubstances is created. Include all drugs listed in the ControlledSubstances Act of 1970 et seq. for actual controlled use. Userswould obtain these drugs at participating pharmacies utilizingspecial ID. Entry to the program at the age of majority would beby written test. No intervention by the program unless there is aproblem. Supported by transaction fees, community treatmentresources would be paid for by the program. Success of the program is based on the premise that the rateof morbidity will be acceptably low in an informed group ofusers. Chronic users learn to develop functional stable usepatterns that may continue for long periods without disruption.Dysfunctional behavior associated with use would result in beingdropped from the program. Reacting to some adversity a chronic user will increasehis/her dose in an effort to suppress adverse emotions throughdistracting analgesia. The consequent psychosocial dysfunction,health problems, or financial crisis motivates seeking oftreatment or results in external intervention. Upon entering a detoxification program the habitual usertypically forswears the habit, vowing to stay "clean"from now on. The rare dependent will truthfully admit to anauthentic treatment goal of reducing a habit to manageablelevels. Even with success in completing detoxification and maintaininga period of abstinence, drug dependence is a chronic relapsingillness. The mission of VDUC is to control, treat, and prevent drugabuse in a flexible and appropriate fashion. The dispensing ofcontrolled substances through participating pharmacies toregistered users is included. Price structure based upon abuse/use ratio of a substancewould encourage the use of less toxic or dangerous products. Aharmfulness tax is an idea that has been recently proposed byGrinspoon. The VDUC would be somewhat more controlled than differentialtoxicity tax rates because written and physical tests would berequired for entry into a pharmacy-based program using anidentification card. Another VDUC goal is to institutionalize connections betweencost/benefit or actuarial facts with social policy and themarketplace. These connections only dimly exist for alcohol andtobacco industries and their users. Unlike these hazardoussubstances, drugs sold through VDUC would not be grantedexemption from product liability laws. Transaction fees and all taxes would be earmarked to supportthe administration of the co-operative and contracting communitytreatment providers for users needing services. Different from the British "System" The contemporary British "system" derives from theirnational health service that is represented by local healthcouncils which manage medical resources. The availability ofphysicians who are addiction specialists and priorities of localcouncils determines whether the addict will obtain appropriatetreatment. The rapid increase of heroin addicts and small numbers ofaddiction specialists has overwhelmed that system. The illicitfree market filled the drug needs of the users the NationalHealth Service could not meet. Substance abuse treatment services in Great Britain are justas fragmented as that in the United States but with differencesin dynamics of control, economics, and influences of specialinterest groups. Both are ill-equipped and overwhelmed by theimpact of problems connected with substance abuse. But at least they don't turn the addicts into criminals as wedo in the United States. Unlike prescriptive medical clinic models the proposedVoluntary Drug Users Co-operative is not vulnerable tooversubscription with waiting lists. Users are dispersed to pharmacies and only come to a treatmentprogram if there is a problem. Since the scheme is transaction fee supported, the larger thenumber of users, the more money becomes available for treatment,prevention, and education. Since there would be no intervention unless there was evidenceof dysfunction, costs would be lower than a clinic or physicianvisit type of maintenance program. This lower level of controland services for problem-free users would support a spectrum ofservices for those suffering drug-related illness or dysfunction.Flexibility and range of response is based on the principle thatcontrol is exerted from within or imposed from without. More importantly, the program would provide an ongoing sourceof reliable data on which to refine policies and develop productsthat would optimize use/morbidity patterns. Eligibility The age of majority would permit the taking of a written teston drug effects, side effects as well as the conditions of theVDUC program including consequences of misuse or violation ofconditions. Passing of these tests would constitute informedconsent. An entry medical evaluation including physical examination andlaboratory tests would be required to screen for conditions thatwould preclude or restrict access such as mental illness,epilepsy, or substance abuse. These high risk individuals if allowed access would be moreclosely supervised by health providers. Non-profit community board A non-profit community board would be mandated to protect theusers from exploitation as well as the public from health andsafety risks. Users, pharmacists, public Health, legal and thegeneral community should be represented. Abusers referred to treatment or enforcement All transactions are reported to the executive office of theVDUC and any patterns of unusual or exceptional use areinvestigated in addition to any reports of medical, surgical, orantisocial incidents. Privileges are suspended and the abuser is referred to policeor district attorney if the drugs are furnished to a minor, usedto poison, incapacitate, or impair someone else. Driving whileintoxicated, endangering others, fighting, or being a danger toothers would be generally handled by enforcement. If the user exhibits dysfunctional behavior or impaired healththat does not directly harm someone else, then he/she is referredto an appropriate substance abuse program. Reports fromhospitals, emergency rooms, physicians offices, healthfacilities, workplace, family, dispensing pharmacy, or othersource would initiate intervention. The program identificationcard would be suspended and the abuser referred to the assessmentteam. Evaluation Experienced substance abuse specialists would be utilized for"triage" to determine the type of interventionappropriate to the individual problem. Intervention would be theleast intrusive or restrictive possible. Referral for specialized treatment A spectrum of outpatient and in-patient service would beavailable as contractors to the program for intervention in casesof drug abuse. Continuing research and education The continuing study at Framingham, Massachusetts provided uswith definitive information concerning the connection betweensmoking, lung cancer, heart, and other circulatory diseases.Unbiased and extensive morbidity information would be collectedfrom participating health resources for policy refinement. In order to restore a source of legitimate and undistortedmedical information as to the connections between drugs and theirhazards, treatments, and prevention, ongoing study is required ona large scale. Funding for Treatment and Prevention Treatment would be available if needed since the currentsalient problem is the lack of money for treatment. Nine out often substance abusers voluntarily asking for treatment are turnedaway for lack of a way to pay for treatment. The earmarking oftaxes combined with transaction fees would provide an ongoingsource for funding that has been heretofore lacking. THM 8-21-90 References 2 U.S. Studies Criticize Plan To Ease Access to MethadoneAssociated Press in the New York Times A11, August 4, 1989 Asbury, H., The Great Illusion Doubleday, New York 1950 344pp. Becker, H.S., Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance.The Free Press of Glencoe New York 1963 179pp. DeQuincey, T. Confessions of an English Opium Eater (1822) NewAmerican Library New York 1966 335pp Dole, V.P. and Nyswander, M. Heroin Addiction- A MetabolicDisease, Archives of Internal Medicine 120 July 1967 19-20. Goodman and Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics7th Edition Macmillan New York 1985 1839 pp Grinspoon, L. The Harmfulness Tax: A proposal for regulationand taxation of Drugs Unpublished. Address to InternationalMeeting on Antiprohibitionism Brussels September 29, 1989 11 pp. King, R. The Drug Hangup; America's Fifty-Year Folly. CharlesC. Thomas Springfield IL 1972 389 pp Lindesmith, A.R. The Addict and the Law. Indiana UniversityPress, Bloomington IN 1965 337 pp. Lindop, G. The Opium -Eater A Life of Thomas DeQuinceyTaplinger Publishing Co. New York 1981 433 pp The Merck Manual Fifteenth Edition. Merck, Sharp and DohmeResearch Laboratories Rahway, NJ 1987 2,696 pp Mikuriya, T.H. Taming drug-dependency with a credit cardMedical World News Dec 12, 1980 P 100 _____________ Physical, Mental, and Moral Effects ofMarijuana: The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report. Internat J.Addictions vol 3 No 2, Fall 1968 253-270 Musto, D.F. The American Disease. Yale University Press, NewHaven 1973 354 pp. Nadelmann, E.A. Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,Consequences, and Alternatives Science 245: September 1, 1989,939-947 Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission 1893-94 Simla,India: Government Central Printing House, 1894, 7 Vols 3,281 pp. _____________ Supplementary Vols 1 & 2: 417 pp (Classifiedmilitary data published separately) Syllabus for the Psychopharmacology Course Harvard MedicalSchool Sept 30 Oct 2, 1988 Harvard Medical School Department ofContinuing Education, Boston, MA 514 pp. Terry, C.E. and Pellens, M. The Opium Problem. Bureau ofSocial Hygiene New York 1928 1045 pp (Reprinted by PattersonSmith, Montclair NJ 1970) Trebach, A.S. The Heroin Solution Yale University Press, NewHaven, CT 1982 331 pp ____________ The Great Drug War Macmillan, New York 1987 401pp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-76IA087-000625-B007-1http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/haans1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035555 text/html 81192HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:43 GMTContent-length: 80974 Why is There a 'War on Drugs'? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Why is There a 'War on Drugs'? by Dave Haans Note: This essay was written for a graduate level coursecalled "Sociology of Addiction" at the University ofToronto. The professor of the course was Patricia Erickson (seethe Bibliography). It was completed on December 23, 1994. You maydistribute this document freely, however please do not change itin any way. Thanks. INTRODUCTION To ask the question "why is there a 'War on Drugs'?' mustseem to some to be a bit like asking 'why are there laws againstmurder?' Such a large amount of popular wisdom exists to supportan effort to stop the use, trafficking and production of illicitdrugs that such a question must be at best facetious. Images of the drug war, pouring forth across media from theradio to popular movies, convey a sense of evil and brutalitythat beckons for immediate, and brutal, retaliation. Once thequestion is asked, however, the onus is immediately on the oneasking the question to provide evidence that is contrary to theaccepted norm. This person who dares ask the question, even ifs/he is sincere and honest, may quickly find that they areclearly outside of the 'norm' in society, and that few peoplewill bother to help them in answering their own question. Thequestion, then, carries with it a great weight, and often timesremains unasked, both at the public and governmental levels. It is the question 'why', however, that will be the purpose ofthis paper, with regards to the War on Drugs. Answering thisquestion will of course necessitate using all of the toolscurrently used to define, describe and evaluate the War on Drugs.For example, it will have to be shown that there actually is aWar on Drugs; that legislation has been enacted that makes theWar on Drugs a reality; that the War on Drugs is not a necessaryfact of legal or social life in this country; and that plausiblealternatives have been largely ignored. What will be of ultimateinterest, however, is why, given the realities of its socialuselessness, there is a War on Drugs. IS THERE A 'WAR ON DRUGS'? The American Experience Most of our Canadian conceptions of the War on Drugs are theresult of the American War on Drugs. Ronald and Nancy Reagan's1986 'declaration' of the War on Drugs mixed metaphors of war,illness, crusades and religious righteousness in order togalvanize a nation into action against illicit drugs. GeorgeBush, carrying the same theme, further made the issue both adomestic and international one (Elwood, 1994). While thisreaction to the perceived problem of drugs typifies the mostrecent reaction to illicit drug use, it is certainly not theproduct of the 1980's. In early 20th Century America,international concern over opium trading was reflected by theUnites States legislating the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914,which put in place a taxation on the trade of opium into the U.S.(Brecher, 1972). Aside from its rather benign face, the HarrisonAct contained a clause that law enforcement officials viewed asbeing justification for the arrest and imprisonment of physicianswho prescribed opiates to their patients. This led to the almostovernight creation of a black market, and caused those addictedto opiates to reduce their quality of life substantially in orderto maintain their addiction. It is this affiliation with acriminal element which allowed for more punitive laws to be putin place, in the mistaken belief that drug use led to crime. Bymany accounts, even of the time, the laws and not the drugsthemselves, forced many addicted individuals to turn to crime tomaintain their addictions (Brecher, 1972). The Canadian Experience In Canada, a similar scenario had unfolded parallel (andprevious) to the American experience. Concern over theinternational trade of opium had made necessary the first of theanti-opium legislation that sought to criminalize its use andmovement outright. The result was the Opium Act of 1908, and theOpium and Drug Act of 1911 (Giffen, Endicott and Lambert, 1991).These acts sought to at first reduce, then eliminate opiumtraffic inside Canada, in order to complement efforts to stopinternational trading in this substance. As Giffen, et al (1991)describe, the 1911 Act was influenced by far more than simply awish to help China with its opium problem -- at the time, astrong moralistic tide was washing over the country, and opiumand a host of other drugs were blamed for crime, immorality andthe like. More importantly, hostility towards the Chinese whichmanifested itself in the 1907 anti-Asiatic demonstration, andfurther publicity about Chinese opium use, led to the creation ofthe beliefs of extreme negative effects of opium (p. 53). In 1986, just two days after President and Mrs. Reagan'sdeclaration of war on drugs, Prime Minister Mulroney deviatedfrom a prepared speech to announce that "drug abuse hasbecome an epidemic that undermines our economic as well as oursocial fabric" (Erickson, 1992, p. 248). However, PrimeMinister Mulroney neither said this in a dramatic address toCanada's public, nor further elaborated on his remark. While hisremark resulted in the creation of "Canada's DrugStrategy", by most accounts very little has changed withrespect to the Federal Government's treatment illicit drugs(Fischer, 1994; Erickson, 1992). Does This Constitute a 'Drug War'? In early United States and Canada, then, the factors whichbrought about prohibition of illicit drugs were a concern withinternational opium trade to China (and, seemingly, how thattrade could be replaced with trade in U.S. and Canadianproducts), an increasingly racist (and very public) attitudetoward immigrants from the Pacific Rim, and a new moralistic tidesweeping both countries. The effects of these factors wasprohibition of most psychoactive drugs (save for alcohol andtobacco), and almost immediate police involvement in the controlof the newly-illicit drugs. Whether this constitutes a "drug war" is debatable.On one hand, there seems to be no explicit declaration of waragainst drugs to be found at the turn of the century. On theother hand, there are many facets of what Bruce Alexander (1990)calls "warlike aspects of current drug-control policy"(p. 50). For example, Alexander writes that a War on Drugs may bedefined by its war language, violent imagery, legal violence,illegal police violence, spying, and its casualties. A closerlook at the evidence available from the era of early illicit drugprohibition satisfies some of these requirements. For example,public action against drugs such as cocaine in 1910-11 wasdefined as a "fight" against cocaine, and cocaine userswere typified as "fiends in human guise" (Giffen et al,1991, p. 83). As well, the Opium and Drug Act of 1911 set down severalmeasures that were very much war-like. First, the police weregiven extensive powers which allowed them to seize, confiscate,and destroy drugs (Giffen, et al, 1991, p. 80). The 1911 Act alsoshifted the burden of proof from the police to the defendant,forcing the charged to prove that any illicit drugs seized werefor scientific or medical purposes. Finally, the 1911 Act closedoff the chance for any appeal on the grounds of technicalities(Giffen, et al, 1991). The casualties in the early War on Drugs were mainly Chineselabourers who had legally entered the country to peaceably workfor wages that could not have been earned in their own country.The actual use of the 1911 act was to imprison, and later (aftera 1922 amendment) deport Chinese opium users, until a diminishingnumber of Chinese targets for the illicit drug laws caused anewer focus on Caucasian drug users (Giffen, et al, 1991, p. 97). Back to the Present Alexander (1990) argues that the whole of the illicit druglaws set the stage for an all-out war on drugs, even if theCanadian public is not as aware of the situation as the Americanpublic is. Even though no dramatic pronouncement of a drug war inCanada was ever made, Canadian drug laws reflect a War Measuresmentality which reduces the legal rights of the accused, andstrengthens the power, scope and role of the police forces. Forexample, police have almost unrestricted powers of search andseizure in drug cases (Alexander, 1990, p. 36). Police also havethe right to break into premises, destroy any property therein,"manhandle and beat the occupants, and to punch and chokepeople who are suspected of trying to swallow drugs"(Alexander, 1990, p. 36). These rights of the police, whichclearly come at the expense of the rights of the individual, areeffected only when illicit drugs are, or are suspected of being,involved. A drug war also contains language that clearly sets the stagefor the public's acceptance of these types of power. This iscertainly not a new turn of events -- since the very beginning ofdrug prohibition, drugs were associated with words and phrasesthat were meant to elicit visions of the public combating"evil imported from the Orient", the "curse ofcocaine" (Giffen et al, p. 82, p. 84) and even "thedownfall of the white race [by the Chinese]" (Alexander, p.31). President Reagan's drug war declaration conveyed an image ofillicit drugs "menacing our society" and"threatening our values and undercutting ourinstitutions" and "threat[ening] ... our nationalsecurity" (Reagan, 1986, pp. 1184-1186). These statementselicit images of an all-out attack on the United States by aforeign power. Prime Minister Mulroney echoed very much thesesame sentiments with regard to Canada two days later. Even today, utterances such as cocaine being "asubstantial evil in our society ... It ruins lives and destroysfamilies and is directly responsible for the commission of othercrimes," (Oakes, 1994a, p. A8) and "cocaine isundoubtedly an insidious and dangerous drug which undermines thevery fabric of our society" (Oakes, 1994b, p. A11) can befound in the daily newspaper. Obviously, with these images firmly implanted in the psyche ofa nation, any steps taken to eradicate the 'enemy' will be metwith little resistance. Any resistance that is proffered is boundto be met with a uninformed retort such as this: "I thinkhalf the children born are put to death by the sale of thesecordials and yet some gentlemen say the law is too strict"(Senate Debates, Canada, 1910-1911, italics mine). Yes, Virginia, There is a 'War on Drugs' This discussionpresented in the previous section did not touch upon images inthe modern media of an inner-city battleground, movie images ofevil organized drug rings or the tendency of the media to reportthe government's, rather than researchers' views on the drugs,both licit and illicit. However, the intent in the previoussection was to show that the governments in both Canada and theUnited States have waged a war on drugs that has existed, largelyunabated, for over 80 years. The next two sections will focus onwhether or not that war is justified, and whether alternativescould be used. IS THE 'WAR ON DRUGS' JUSTIFIED? In the Persian Gulf War that pitted a number of countriesagainst Iraq, President Bush went to lengths to ensure thatpeople believed that a war against Iraq was indeed a 'just' war.However, many researchers, asking whether the war on drugs isjustified, have come to the conclusion that this particular waris not (see Alexander, 1990, pp. xi-xii for a list of dissentersfrom the government's position). Further, there seems to be noeffort on the part of the Canadian Government to evaluate whetherthe War on Drugs is necessary. The recent tabling of Bill C-7,which seeks harsher penalties for illicit drug users and sellers,overshadows any effort on the part of the Government to seek are-evaluation of the effects of the laws on those affected bythem. Even though a large number of groups have voiced theirconcerns regarding Bill C-7 (Erickson and Smart, 1994), the Billis presently in its third reading, and stands a fair chance ofbeing passed. The Bill also largely goes against Canada's DrugStrategy, a program that was initiated after Prime MinisterMulroney's off-hand comment on the 'problem' of illicit drugs inCanada. Canada's Drug Strategy has an explicit 'harm reduction'emphasis (see the section entitled "Harm Reduction as anAlternative to the War on Drugs", below) that was to guideCanada's drug policy (Fischer, 1994). This being the case, it is now the task of this paper toexplore the drug problem, and to ascertain whether there reallyneeds to be a drug war. This question is important because one ofthe main assumptions of a War on Drugs is that illicit drugs doso much harm that they must be outlawed. As we shall see, this islargely a fallacy, and the presence of a War on Drugs in the faceof the facts of the consequences of illicit drugs is made evenmore ironic by the Government's long-standing commitment to itsprohibitionary policies. Back to the Beginning The previous section of this paper showed that the early druglaws in Canada formed the basis for a long-standingprohibitionary approach to the use and trafficking of opium. Notdiscussed at length however, were the social conditions thatpreceded these laws. It is useful to describe these socialconditions, and in doing so the gulf between drug laws and thereality of the effects of the drugs in question can beilluminated. In the latter half of the 19th Century, Canadianindustrialists on the West Coast encouraged immigration ofChinese labourers, mainly because they were willing to work forless than their Caucasian counterparts (Alexander, 1990, p. 30),and they were seen as being "conscientious, thrifty, andlaw-abiding" (Solomon and Green, 1988, p. 89). The Chinesealso brought with them the habit of smoking opium (Boyd, 1982).This remained a non-issue with most people, until Chineseimmigration was seen to be threatening the livelihood of whiteworkers (Boyd, 1982), who were feeling the effects of decline inrailway employment and the gold rush in British Columbia (Solomonand Green, 1988). This sentiment came to a peak in September of 1907, whenanti-Asian feeling resulted in the Anti-Asiatic riot inVancouver's Chinatown (Alexander, 1990, p. 30). After being sentto British Columbia to investigate claims for damage incurred byseveral Asians in the riot, then Deputy Minister of LabourMackenzie King was 'shocked' to find that a Chinese opiumindustry was in place. He recommended in his official report thatthis trade, which was not subject to taxes, be immediately halted(Solomon and Green, 1988, p. 91). In 1908, the Opium Act was madeinto law, and for the first time the sale, importation andmanufacture of opium was prohibited (Alexander, 1990). The social backdrop of this period was increasing anti-Asiaticsentiment, and the fear that Asians were likely to influenceCaucasians to use opium. At this time, a mythology was beingcreated which helped to set the tone for further legislation. Opium itself seemed not to be the problem, but opium smokingwas seen to "exemplify the alien, inferior and unassimilablenature of the Chinese" (Giffen et al, 1991, p. 57). Theprevailing fear was not of opium itself, but of whites beingencouraged by the Chinese to use opium. Solomon and Green addthat the success of this law, and the failure of other laws thatsought to suppress alcohol, tobacco and other substances at thetime, was due to the fact that (p. 88): it was directed againstChinese opium smokers and Chinese opium factories, but at thesame time posed no threat to the larger number of predominantlymiddle-class and middle-aged Caucasian users who were addicted tothe products of the established pharmaceutical industry With anemphasis on racial factors, and a complete mythology regardingthe social effects of opium, the stage was set for newer and morepunitive laws regarding opium and other drugs, such as morphine,heroin and cocaine. In the next number of years, culminating in the 1929 Opium andNarcotic Drug Act, Canada saw a shift in its policies. Solomonand Green (1988) write of how the newly created Department ofHealth was given responsibility for the supervision of Canada'sFederal drug laws, through the creation of the Narcotics Division(p. 97). At the same time, the RCMP was founded, and charged withthe execution of Federal laws. The RCMP's 'raison d'etre' soonbecame the enforcement of drug laws, and was a great influence onthe Narcotics Division, which found little resistance whenrequesting special powers be given to the RCMP to penalize drugusers and traffickers. These special powers included policeofficers being able to search dwellings without a warrant, theonus on the defendant to prove s/he had no knowledge, consent, orauthority in possession cases, and the police being able toprosecute doctors who were prescribing maintenance doses toaddicts. Penalties were stiffened to include whipping, anddeportation of immigrants who had been charged and had servedtheir sentences. During this time, warnings about the perils of drug useabounded. The anti-Asiatic campaign was also on an up-swing. In1922, a highly influential and inflammatory book was published.It was written by Emily Murphy, an early feminist and jurist.Through it, Mrs. Murphy gave "a thorough introduction to theWar on Drugs mentality in its modern form" (Alexander, 1990.p. 31). Included were racist epithets, and an image of the drug'addict' (all illicit drug users were addicts, in Mrs. Murphy'sopinion) that was so evil and depraved that s/he begged for swiftand harsh discipline. In the 1920s then, the RCMP and the courts were given enormouspowers to stop the 'menace' of drugs. However, by the end of thedecade, convictions had fallen rapidly, mainly due to the factthat the majority of Chinese drug offenders had either died outor been deported (Solomon and Green, 1988, p. 99). The image ofthe drug user had changed from a morally weak individual to thatof a "fiendish criminal, obsessed with the need to addictothers and motivated by lust and greed" (Solomon and Green,1988, p. 100). This set the stage for continued criminalsanctions for the rest of the century. Rather than a focus on race, which typified early anti-drugmeasures, the focus today is on moral, social, economic andhealth concerns (Alexander, 1990, p. 33). However, this change inemphasis does not make the War on Drugs more justifiable by anymeans. Rather, it simply reflects a change in who is to becharged with drug offences. The Effects of Illicit Drugs The personae of the War on Drugs is a frantic one. With imagesof the drug user as criminal, the police being given massivepowers, a huge criminal network in place to supply illicit drugsto an unwitting populace, and 'crack babies' being born at themercy of their delinquent mothers, one is hard pressed to findevidence in the popular media that would suggest that the War onDrugs doesn't need to exist. At the very base of the drug war isthe assumption that illicit drugs do social and medical harm, andthey must be stopped at any cost. It is this assumption whichwill be examined next. Opium and Related Drugs Opium was the first drug to be made illicit in Canada, largelydue to anti-Asian sentiment. However, even at the time, therewere questions as to the medical effects of the drug. DuringSenate debate on the 1908 Opium Act, Dr. Joseph Sullivan was theonly person to question its alleged effects. In part, he stated: I fail to find in statistics anything about the injuriouseffect of Opium on the Chinese. Above all things, the Chinesehaving this habit ought to be treated with a great deal ofconsideration (quoted in Giffen, et al, 1990, p. 72) Dr. Sullivan's remark is borne out by the fact that, asidefrom physical addiction often present in continual users ofopiates, there are no serious side effects of the continued useof them. Health and Welfare Canada's (1989) "Licit andIllicit Drugs in Canada" reveals that (p. 11): Despite media dramatizations of heroin withdrawal, cessationis rarely fatal and is similar to a bad case of influenza.Observations of heroin-addicted individuals who have beenmaintained on daily doses under medical supervision show nosignificant psychological or physical negative effects from thedrug. However, many adverse effects of heroin use are related tothe addiction lifestyle and methods of drug administration. Marijuana Popular reports of the effects of other drugs also do not holdup when examined more closely. Marijuana was thought by Mrs.Murphy to drive its users insane, make them become "ravingmaniacs", and lead them to a premature death (Solomon,Single and Erickson, 1988, p. 370). However, if this were true,adverse psychological effects would be well known by now. Instead, there have been few cases of patients reporting totreatment facilities with these kinds of effects. Health andWelfare Canada seems to indicate that this is surprising, giventhe high rates of usage in some populations (1989, p. 10). Cocaine Cocaine is another drug that was (and is) widely reported tohave severe effects on the individual. While lethal in very highdoses, cocaine actually is reasonably safe in moderate doses(Alexander, 1990, p. 202-203). Similarly, crack cocaine's labelas "the most highly addictive form of all drugs ever knownin history" has been countered with research reports thatmore or less simply report that "cocaine does not producephysical dependence" (Akers, 1991, pp. 783-784). This list could be extended, but the point can be summed up bystating that (as Alexander (1990) does) "a large body ofcareful research shows that recreational use of illicit drugs,including marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, does not lead toaddiction or other harm for the majority of users" (p. 64).But what of the other popular edict of the anti-drugorganizations and police and Presidents Reagan and Bush and PrimeMinister Mulroney, etc., which states that there is nothing lessthan an epidemic of illicit drug use, which tears at the veryfabric of society? The final section of this consideration of whether or not awar on drugs is justified will focus on the proportion of peoplein our society which actually use drugs, and what the effects ofthis use actually are. Use of Illicit Drugs Some of the best trend data on drug use come from theAddiction Research Foundation, which has surveyed self-reporteddrug use among Ontario students since 1968, and Ontario adultssince 1977. These surveys have been conducted once very two yearsin the case of students, and once every three years in the caseof adults (Smart and Adlaf, 1990). In general, the use of drugshas dramatically declined among both students and adults. Withrespect to cannabis, the percentage of students who reportedusing the drug at least once in the previous year peaked in 1979at a rate of 31.7%, and then fell gradually to a low of 11.7% in1991. Students' use of heroin in the previous year had peaked in1979 at 2.3%, then fell to 1% in 1991. Following the same trend,use of cocaine for students peaked at 5.1% in 1979, thengradually fell to 1.6% in 1991 (Smart, Adlaf and Walsh, 1991, p.13). For adults, the trends have been somewhat similar, however thepeak years for use in the previous year come somewhat later(possibly because the students who continued using were nowclassified as 'adults', in other words, a cohort effect wasobserved). The peak year for cannabis use in the previous yearfor Ontario adults was 1984, with a percentage of 11.2% adultsreporting the use of cannabis at least once. This percentage fellto 6.8% in 1991. With respect to cocaine, use rates remainedrelatively constant, with between 1.7 (1984) and 2.1% (1989) ofadults reporting having used cocaine in the previous year (Adlaf,Smart and Canale, 1991, p. 7). Although self-reported rates are not always the most reliableindicator of drug use (and with respect to the above studies, donot include teenagers outside of the education system), thesedata show that at least in Ontario, the vast majority of studentsand adults are non-users of marijuana, cocaine and heroin. Taking a national perspective, we find that the percentage ofthose individuals in Canada fifteen years of age or older thathave never used marijuana or hashish is 80%. For cocaine, thepercentage of people who have never used is 97% (Single, Williamsand McKenzie, 1994, p. 113). These data do not support in any way the claims made by PrimeMinister Mulroney two days after President Reagan declared theAmerican War on Drugs. If drugs had become an"epidemic" in Canada in 1986, use rates certainly donot reflect this. As for Prime Minister Mulroney's comment thatdrug use was eroding the social and economic fabric of thecountry also bears closer scrutiny, although it should be notedthat it is impossible to define what, exactly, Prime MinisterMulroney meant by this comment. The focus of the next section ofthis paper, however, will be a discussion of the effects of drugson people who use them. This focus will not be a pharmacologicalone, but a social one, taking into account a more importanteffect of drug use--the social sanctions that accompany those whodecide to use illicit drugs. The Effects of the War on Drugs Anti-drug sentiment comes complete with a whole selection of'facts' and 'figures' which support the 'fact' that drug usecauses severe social upheaval. This is evidenced by many of thepreviously quoted remarks of even well-intentioned groups andindividuals who fear that the use of drugs has severe social,economic and psychological effects on the individual, thosearound the individual, and society in general. While this may bethe popular response to the problems of drug use, there is muchmore evidence to support the view that anti-drug legislationitself is the cause of the plight of drug users, and not theother way around. Brecher (1972) is certainly one of the firstdocumenters of the history of drug legislation to espouse thisview, and may in fact have been one of the creators of a paradigmshift in drug research that has carried through to this day. InLicit & Illicit Drugs, Brecher illustrates the history of alltypes of licit and illicit drugs, and documents anti-druglegislation in the United States and Canada. The first effects ofthe early narcotic legislation were almost immediate; Brecherwrites that the result of these laws was that "the door wasopened wide to adulterated, contaminated and misbranded narcoticsof all kinds" (p. 47). Previously law-abiding addicts wereforced to turn to the black market in order to secure theirmaintenance doses of these drugs. Just six weeks after thepassage of the 1914 Harrison Act in the United States, Brecherquotes an editor in the New York Medical Journal as writing thatthe immediate effect was seen in the flocking of drug users tohospitals and sanitoriums, an increase in violence due to addictslooking to obtain drugs (some in a delirious state due towithdrawal), and that time would show further effects, in thefailure of promising careers, the disruption of families, thecommission of crimes, and the influx into hospitals of those whowould have otherwise led normal lives (p. 50). In Canada, predictably, anti-opium legislation also resultedin the creation of covert smuggling operations, which resulted inthe price of opium rising dramatically. In a society founded uponcapitalist principles, drug traffickers sprang up to reap themonetary rewards of the early opium legislation. As a result,enforcement of the opium laws became more zealous, whichincreased the profitability of the black market trade, which thenincreased the likelihood that the trade would continue (Giffen,et al, 1991, p. 117). In later years, morphine and heroin were toreplace opium, mainly because they were easier to conceal due tothe fact that they are more powerful, and take up less space. Theopium users, in order to maintain their addictions, had tointermingle with and develop contacts with the criminal world(Giffen, et al, 1991, p. 118). Before opium legislation, users could carry on useful,prosperous lives (as many Chinese did at the turn of thecentury), while addicted to opium. After anti-opium legislation,however, irresistible profits were to be made on the blackmarket, causing users to be involved in the same violence, crimeand corruption that typifies accounts of the illegal drug tradetoday. Persistent calls for harsher legislation were made becauseoften, the defenders of these laws mistook "the violentside-effects of prohibition for the effects of the drugsthemselves" (Alexander, 1990, p. 60). This pattern of anti-drug laws and sustained attainability ofdrugs through the black market typifies the 20th centuryexperience with drug prohibition. These laws also have otherconsequences that are directly related to the criminalization ofdrug use in modern times. These consequences form the main partof the public image of the drug user, and are used to furthersupport the notion that tougher laws and police powers areneeded. Erickson (1993) summarizes several finding of researcherswho have studied this problem in relation to opiates (p. 1169): Forced to obtain opiates illegally and at a much inflatedprice, addicts/users formed a deviant and sometimes criminalsubculture; money went to purchase drugs rather than to food andpersonal hygiene; sharing and using dirty needles led to highrates of infection with diseases such as hepatitis; contaminateddrugs and unknown potency contributed to high morbidity andmortality; criminalization further reduced legitimate economicopportunities. Of course, not all illicit drug use in our society is ofopiates, nor of an addictive nature. Even with illicit drugscommonly thought of as being non-addictive, however, the law haseffects on the user that seem to overshadow the relativelyharmless direct consequences of the actual use. The consequencesof the law regarding marijuana (which in Canada today can be assevere as those applied in cases of opiates and cocaine) manifestthemselves in reduced opportunities for employment (Erickson andGoodstadt, 1979), the offender wishing to remain more secretiveto both his or her family, and disrespect for cannabis laws(Erickson and Murray, 1986). The stigmatizing effect of even thelightest of punishments on the 'cannabis criminal' haveimplications, therefore, on the user's self-image and the user'splace in society, and are largely an unintended effect of thelaw. An Answer to The Question The genesis of anti-drug legislation, as presented above, wasracist attitudes towards the Chinese labourers who were seen tobe a threat to the Caucasian work force. The focus in those timeswas not on the effects of the drugs themselves, as there was, andis, ample evidence to support the theory that illicit drugs arenot generally harmful in and of themselves. Nor, as is frequentlyargued, are there expansive social consequences arising from theuse of these drugs. If anything, the market in illicit drugsbenefits the police by keeping them busy, and allowing an easyoutlet for their influence in anti-drug laws. As for an epidemic in drug use, there seems to be fewstatistics to substantiate even a minor threat to the health ofCanadians based upon the numbers of Canadians who do use illicitdrugs. Finally, the major negative impact of drugs on their users isthe result of the drug laws themselves, and not drugs per se. In short, the War on Drugs is in no way justified by anyevidence gathered to date. As will be discussed below, there are alternatives to the Waron Drugs. In particular, a model of 'harm reduction' will beexamined closely, and the evidence which would support an effortof this type presented. As well, 'Canada's Drug Strategy', aprogram based on harm reduction principles and announced in 1987,will be critiqued. HARM REDUCTION AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE WAR ON DRUGS Harm reduction is a broad classification of proposals whichshift the focus from prohibiting the use of drugs to dealing withthe problems associated with drug use. As discussed earlier, theWar on Drugs has brought about its own set of problems associatedwith drug use. Therefore, a successful program of harm reductionwould also have to deal with the problems of the War on Drugs aswell (Nadelmann, 1994, p. 35). True harm reduction approaches were developed fairly recentlythrough programs in the Netherlands, the U.K. and Australia (DesJarlais and Friedman, 1994). The focus of harm reduction is onreducing the problems associated with drug use on a community andindividual level, rather than an effort to prohibit drug use at asocietal level. Harm reduction also focuses on the realisticallyattainable goals of reducing the negative consequences of druguse, such as the supplying of clean equipment to injection drugusers (IDUs) in order to reduce the prevalence of AIDS and HIVinfection in the IDU population. It is these immediately'treatable' aspects of drug use which are targeted first, so thatthe use of drugs can be as risk-free as possible. A furtherconsideration is the reduction of drug use, although abstinenceis only an option when it would be clearly appropriate (Riley,1994, p. 1). Clearly then, there is a stark contrast between harm reductionand prohibition as models of dealing with drug use. Harmreduction assumes that there are effects of drug use that canbenefit the user (as in the case of life-saving medication), andthat there are also harmful and even neutral effects. Harmreduction offers a pragmatic means for the analysis of whetherthese effects are harmful or not (Riley, 1994, p. 1), a far cryfrom prohibitionist models, which assume that all illicit druguse is inherently harmful. Also, the emphasis is not on drug useper se (as in the prohibitionist model), but solely on thenegative consequences of such use. The concept of harm reduction is not entirely new, however. Itcan be traced back to the 'British System', which emerged inanswer to a set of recommendations by the Rolleston Committeewhich was formed in the 1920s in the U.K. (Riley, 1994, p. 1). The committee argued that in certain cases "maintenanceon drugs may be necessary to help drug abusers lead usefullives" (Riley, 1994, p. 1). The modern-day model for theharm reduction approach is located in Merseyside, near Liverpool.In response to the rising use of drugs such as heroin in theearly 1980s, the Merseyside clinics, along with doctors,pharmacists and the police worked together to establish aharm-reduction model. Their efforts concentrate on treating users on an individualbasis, supplying them with either the drugs they needed oreffective substitutes, and exchanging syringes, all of which mayhelp the user to lead more healthy, productive and fulfillinglife (Riley, 1994). The effects on the social problems in Merseyside as a resultof the harm reduction program there have been encouraging. Riley(1994) writes that of all the English Regions, Merseyside had thelowest rate of HIV-positive IDUs, and the Merseyside police werethe only force in 1990 and 1991 to register a decrease in crimerates (p. 5). The success of Merseyside is partly due to the factthat it is a collaborative effort between clinicians, police,pharmacists and doctors. Another factor which sets Merseyside'sharm reduction strategy apart from other prohibitionary models isthe fact that it is community based, and not a set of rulesimposed from the government at the Federal level (asprohibitionary models are). Reducing harm in one's own communitygives immediate and tangible benefits that can be appreciated byall concerned. This helps to ensure the continuation of theprogram which gives those benefits, and encourages theparticipation of people who enjoy its benefits. Several examples of a harm reduction approach exist in Canadaas well, especially with reference to alcohol. Single (1994)writes that the Alberta Liquor Control Board allowed for thespecial early opening of a downtown Edmonton liquor store, inorder to allow for a supply of potable alcohol to Skid-rowinebriates who were previously using other substances, such asshoe polish, which were easily attainable in the morning (pp.2-3). Other programmes informed by the harm reduction model areavailable, and include such things as special training to ownersand employees of bars and taverns that allow them to encouragemoderation, designated driver programs, the promotion of 'light'beers and wines (Single, 1994), and making available informationregarding the alcohol content of different beverages (Riley,1994). Also, more than 30 needle exchange programs have been runin several major Canadian cities, which help to reduce the spreadof AIDS through the use of dirty needles and works (Riley, 1994). Unfortunately, it is the spread of AIDS that is the drivingforce behind many harm reduction programs, such as needleexchanges. In the United States, over one-third of all AIDS casesare related to injection drug use (Des Jarlais and Friedman,1994, p. 82). IDU is strongly associated with AIDS because therelatively easy transmission path from one user to another whenneedles and other injecting equipment (such as cotton, and thewater used to clean the equipment) are shared. Also at risk are the partners of injection drug users, evenwhen the partner is a non-user. The problem exists because many injection drug users findobtaining clean needles and other 'works' impossible, difficultor inconvenient. In New York, where needle exchange programs areillegal, the incidence of HIV (the retrovirus thought to causeAIDS) among injection drug users is approximately 60 per cent(Riley, 1994). Although it is presently difficult to find strongevidence that needle exchange programs help to prevent AIDS andHIV because of the time lag between infection and detection,researchers point to percentage of IDU related AIDS in citiessuch as New York, which have not instituted such programs (Riley,1994). As well, those cities that responded early to the spreadof AIDS and HIV show IDU related cases to be much lower thanthose that didn't (Des Jarlais and Friedman, 1994). The harm reduction model, then, is an effective answer tocontrolling the problems associated with drug use. The emphasison getting many different members of the community involved helpsto give those people the feeling that they are helping to solve aserious problem, which benefits them and the community. The objective standpoint offered by the harm reduction modelis helpful in getting beyond the rhetoric of the War on Drugs aswell, since harm reduction focuses on objective (andnon-judgmental) information about drugs and their effects (Riley,1994, p. 11). The harm reduction model reduces the conflictbetween the drug user and the community, by trying to erase theboundaries between these two groups, and by getting the drug userto be more a part of the community. Canada's Drug Strategy -- Kinder, Gentler Repression The examples of harm reduction shown above are primarilycommunity based. As a result of Prime Minister Mulroney'saforementioned comment, a national strategy was announced in1987, which was termed "Canada's Drug Strategy"(Erickson, 1992). Canada's Drug Strategy has an explicit harmreduction emphasis, and an emphasis on reducing drug-related harmto individuals and communities (Fischer, 1994, p. 71). TheStrategy allocated the sum of $210 million in its first fiveyears (and an additional $270 million in 1992) mainly to theprevention and treatment of drug use, while 30 per cent of thismoney was intended for the traditional area of law enforcement(Fischer, 1994). This national effort would seem to indicate a shift inCanada's policy on illicit drugs, but seemingly little evidenceof that shift is apparent. Soon after the announcement ofCanada's Drug Strategy, laws were enacted (in 1988 and 1989respectively), which prohibited the sale of drug paraphernaliaand increased the power of police to seize the assets of arresteddrug offenders (Erickson, 1992, p. 249). Bill C-85, introduced at the end of the ConservativeGovernment's reign (in 1992), clearly sought to strengthen theprohibition of drugs in Canada, at the expense of the drug user. The proposed law, coming under attack by opposition membersand from the drug policy research and practice community, wasdropped (Fischer, 1994). (Also, while several external drugpolicy and research agencies were present during the debate ofthe Bill, one group, the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse, wasnot invited. This was quite surprising, because of the fact thatthis centre had been created solely out of Canada's Drug Strategyitself to serve as an 'arm's length' agency to the FederalGovernment for drug research and policy development (Fischer,1994, p. 77).) As a further shock to those in drug policy and researchagencies, the new Liberal government (which had criticizedBill-85 extensively during Parliamentary debates) tabled BillC-7, which was almost a word-for-word simulation of Bill C-85. This Bill continues the repressive prohibition policies, andis currently in its third reading in Parliament. Further, no shift was to be observed with respect to drugrelated offences since the Strategy's inception. The number ofdrug-related offences reported by police hovered around 60,000for the first three years of the Strategy's implementation(Jensen and Gerber, 1993, p. 457). Finally, money allocated to the provinces by the FederalGovernment for the creation and/or continuation of prevention andtreatment programs has not been utilized -- due mainly to thestructure of the program. Provinces have had to put up 100 percent of the cost of these types of programs before receiving halfof these funds from the Federal government. As a result, over 50per cent of the allocated money has not been used by theprovinces (Fischer, 1994). Despite being based on a harm reduction approach then,Canada's Drug Strategy seems to be more like prohibition in harmreduction's clothing. Rather than focus solely on reducing theharmful consequences of drug use, and the even more harmfulaspects of the effects of drug prohibition, Canada's DrugStrategy neither balances enforcement and prevention / treatment,nor effects a new outlook on drug policy in Canada. WHY IS THERE A 'WAR ON DRUGS'? Having explained that Canadian policy with respect to the useof illicit drugs constitutes a War on Drugs, that the initialimpetus for prohibitionary policies were borne out ofmisinformation, mistrust and sensationalism both out and insideof Parliament, and that there are well-known and effectivealternatives to the War on Drugs, this paper will now explore itsmain question. There are numerous explanations for the reasonthat a War on Drugs exists. These explanations will be discussedin turn, in the hope that a more comprehensive view (one thatcovers both psychological and sociological explanations) will beattained. Psychological Explanations Ethan Nadelmann (1994), writes (p. 43): Indeed, the only way to explain and justify many currentpolicies is by reference to the fears, prejudices and primitivemoralisms of those who have transformed drug control policy intoa modern version of an authoritarian crusade. This quote is taken somewhat out of context (as Nadelmann waswriting about harm reduction), but serves as a good introductionto a psychological explanation of why there is a War on Drugs.This quote is correct to a point, as illustrated in previoussections of this paper. Many aspects of the current policies cameout of the fear of the effects of these drugs, prejudice towardsthe Chinese at the turn of the century, and the moralistic tidethat was sweeping our country. However, this quote simplifies theproblem somewhat, and doesn't allow for an explanation of whypeople continue to use illicit drugs in the face of prohibition,why prejudices were rarely explicitly stated in the course of themaking of (even the early) Canadian laws regarding drugs. Nordoes it explain the active role of Federal and local law agenciesalmost consistently being a part of drug legislation (in short,if they were afraid, why would they want to be so closelyinvolved in the War on Drugs?). And why does the prohibitionmodel continue to dominate Canada's agenda with respect to drugsin our increasingly secular and liberal society? Alexander (1990) offers a psychological explanation of hisown, drawn from years of research and interviews with people fromboth sides of the issue. The two main groups, he argues, are the'drug warriors', who spearhead the War on Drugs, and the'resisters' who defy the War on Drugs by using illicit drugs, orare simply appalled by it, although they may have little interestin the War on Drugs itself (p. 327-328). Other groups are alsoinvolved in the War on Drugs. A small group, whom Alexander callsthe 'villains', go to extremes to either carry out or resist theWar on Drugs, and in doing so promote the kinds of violence thattypify the worst consequences of drugs and the war against them.There are also 'double-standard bearers', who both promote theWar on Drugs, and yet are resisters as well. Finally, the largestgroup Alexander calls the 'neutrals', who fund the War on Drugsand have their opinions swayed to varying degrees by bothwarriors and resisters (pp. 328-329). In Alexander's eyes, the drug war is not being fought over thedrugs themselves, but centres itself around the need to blameothers for societal ills, and a power conflict regarding personalfreedom and social control (p. 329). Blaming Others Throughout history, people have pointed their finger atdifferent groups, in order to fulfil three psychological needsthat blaming serves. The first is that blaming helps one to feelthat one is doing something in the face of a bad situation. Second, blaming helps one to escape blame themselves. Finally,blaming helps to rally other members of society around thatperson. Societal ills become more tolerable when one group can beblamed for these ills (Alexander, 1990, p. 330-331). For theresisters, blaming the Government for repressive policies canhelp one to feel that s/he is doing something about the problem,and isn't implicated in the creation and continuance of othersocietal ills. Drug warriors perhaps get more of a benefit forblaming, however, as they also have been successful throughoutthe 20th Century in rallying the public around their cause. Conflict Over Power The drug warriors, Alexander (1990) argues, "embrace theneed to reinforce societal power and suppress personalautonomy" (p. 336). Their concern over illicit drugs, thenis that these substances may reduce the individual's compliancewith social conventions. Drug warriors, interestingly, are notconcerned with drugs which enhance the social order (p. 337).They have no objection to caffeine, little objection to nicotineand alcohol, and little concern for those in hospitals beinggiven any sort of pharmaceutical agent. Resisters, on the otherhand, place individual autonomy well above societal control. Theybelieve they should be free to consume illicit drugs as long asthat consumption does not hurt other people. Resisters are verymuch concerned with legal drugs that are used to control peoplein mental hospitals and in military applications (p. 339). The Psychological Explanations -- A Summary Alexander (1990) fills in many of the blanks left byNadelmann's succinct comment on the reasons for the War on Drugs.For example, a reason why resisters continue to defy the War onDrugs is put forth, as is the reason why a War on Drugs continuesto this day. Alexander admits that his explanation is apsychological, and not a political one (p. 326). Alexander'sexplanation is perhaps made more valid by the fact that he choseto conscientiously interview drug warriors and try to placehimself in their shoes, so to speak. Alexander's explanation alsoelicits elements of a major sociological perspective that hasbeen applied to the laws which are the expression of the War onDrugs. This perspective, called 'conflict theory' will bediscussed next. Sociological Explanations Conflict Theory Conflict theory arose out of a concern that structuralfunctionalism neglected conflict in society, was politicallyconservative, and failed to account for change in society(Ritzer, 1992, p. 61). This theory has evolved to includeelements of structural functionalism (for example, the functionsthat conflict serves) and a traditional Marxist focus on dominantand subordinate groups. In the sociology of law, conflict theoryoften depicts a: polarization of the forces of 'law and order' on the one handand left wing political activists and minority group membersreacting to what they saw as excessive police repression ofpolitical protests and urban riots on the other (Giffen, et al.,1991, pp. 8-9) This aspect of conflict theory assumes, however, that thedominant and subordinate groups are more or less homogenous innature. Most research in the field of drug policy recently,however, deals with power being located in "institutionalstructures in society (economic, governmental, religious,etc.)" (Giffen, et al., 1991, p. 10), which does notpresuppose homogenous groups. Both views have problems (Giffen,et al., 1991), however for the purposes of this paper both viewswill be considered, and discussion will focus on what may betermed a 'naive' view of conflict theory, one which allows forsome oscillation between the two different views of conflicttheory. This view is one that presupposes that the powerful insociety may selectively criminalize actions of those who aresubordinate to them. Given this bracketing, conflict theory has quite a bit ofexplanatory value. It also is supported (albeit sometimes moreimplicitly than explicitly) by a number of people involved indrug policy research (for a strong example, see Johns, 1991,below), although it seems to be clear that this theory is beingexplored more in the United States than here in Canada. Arational reason for this is that the United States has a muchbigger problem with lines being drawn between races and culturesthan we do in Canada. After attending a conference on drug issuesin the United States, Riley (1994b) remarked that manyresearchers felt the real reason for the war on drugs in thatcountry was that it helped to suppress blacks and minorities. Of course, conflict theory then allows for a certain amount ofspeculation on the motives of those in power. For example, it isthought by some that rhetoric in the U.S. war on drugs helpspresidents construct policies which are: ... targeted toward blacks and minorities without reference torace [and] polariz[e] the electorate among racial lines and ...weaken the traditional economic divisions between Democrats andRepublicans ... without communicating overt bigotry or anti-blackeffect to whites. (Edsall and Edsall, 1991, pp. 138-139) Johns (1991) under the heading "Race: The Creation of anEnemy Class," writes bluntly: "The enforcement tacticsof the War on Drugs are focused on minority populations" (p.155). In her paper, Johns (1991) posits that the War on Drugstakes attention away from the factors which underlie the problemsof drugs and trafficking, partly because the "more powerfulsegments in society" (p. 150) do not want attention focusedthe poor job they are doing to cure the ills of society. Johnsalso expands the group being oppressed include the poor, who havebeen hit with massive housing and health care cuts under theRepublican Presidencies. The dichotomy between those in power andminorities and the poor is self-perpetuating, in that thesegroups have a limited upward mobility (and, therefore crimes liketrafficking in illicit drugs becomes appealing), and when they dotry to increase their wealth through illicit means, those inpower see that as justification for minorities and the poor beingin the position they are in. Canadians have quite a bit of historical experience withracism as being one of the factors which precipitated much of theearly prohibition laws. However, one of the failings of conflicttheory becomes apparent when researchers in the history of thislegislation find little in the actual discussion of the laws thatpertains to race. Giffen, et al. (1991) write that the earlylegislation's principle proponents had the "altruistic aimsof supporting the international anti-opium movement" despitethe anti-Chinese sentiment of the times (p. 525). The fact thatthe laws were used solely against the Chinese at first isindicative of this anti-Chinese sentiment, and not the creationof the laws themselves. Later legislation was driven mainly byenforcement officials, as there was little in the way of publicoutcry for more rigorous anti-opium legislation (p. 525). In the United States as well, early marijuana legislation cameas a result of increased crime in the jurisdiction of enforcementofficials, who found marijuana to be an easy scapegoat in theirexplanation of the problems. It was only during a campaign tohave anti-marijuana laws established that anti-Mexican sentimentwas used to create an ominous mythology surrounding marijuanause. This complicates a simple conflict theory explanation,because the real focus was initially on marijuana, and not on aminority group. Thus, conflict theory is problematic in describing why thereis a war on drugs. It may help to explain (as Johns (1991)successfully does) why a War on Drugs continues in the U.S., butleaves unanswered questions when applied to the Canadiansituation. In the United States, perhaps, there is a strongermythology of a racial link with drugs, and if that is so, itcould be that those with power in the U.S. have bought whollyinto the mythology created by their predecessors. It is thecreation of mythology and the social construction of drugproblems and threats that will be discussed next. Social Construction of a Drug Problem In the above discussions of the effects of drugs on the user,it becomes clear that there are two arguments to be made. Thefirst is that drugs pose a threat that is almost unlimited in itsscope. This group elicits images of 'crack babies', evil, crime,death and insanity to describe the problem with drugs. The other group (usually more calmly) sees this as a case ofthe Emperor's New Clothes, and points to low self-reported use,and documented evidence that the 'problem' is created mainly fromthe effects of the repressive drug laws themselves. Some in thissecond group illustrate how members of the first group maybenefit from their calls of alarm. By doing so, they point outthat the gains to be made from alarming the public are such thatthe alarmists actually go out of their way in order to largelycreate a social perception of a problem when there is actually noproblem to begin with. This is often referred to as theconstruction of a social problem, and will be discussed in thissection. Jensen and Gerber (1993) write about Prime Minister Mulroney'sstatement that "drug abuse has become an epidemic thatundermines our economic as well as our social fabric" (p.455) as a failed attempt at the social construction of a drugproblem, in order to increase support for his leadership at thepolls. They cite statistics (similar to the one cited above) thatsuggest that no epidemic was actually taking place. In theirwords, "neither self-reports, official statistics, norhealth-related statistics provide consistent evidence that therewas an epidemic in illicit drug use during the 1980s" (p.458). In short, Prime Minister Mulroney had no objectivejustification to call Canadians' use of drugs, or theconsequences thereof, an epidemic that suddenly manifested itselfin 1986. What makes this effort a failed one, according to theauthors, was that the drug issue was not high on the agenda ofmany Canadians (previous to the PM's speech), and widespreadscepticism of the claims made by the Prime Minister prohibitedany significant social problem to be effectively constructed. In the United States, however, President Reagan's call for aWar on Drugs seemed to be wildly successful. By 1989, drugs wereseen by 64 per cent of the U.S. population as the leading problemin the country (Goode, 1990, p. 1088). In periodical literature,however, a peculiar trend in emphasis on drugs occurred. Articleson drugs rose almost exponentially in the few years leading up toPresident Reagan's announcement, and subsided in the yearsfollowing (pp. 1088-1089). Newspapers reflected public concern inthat the number of articles in The New York Times concerningdrugs and drug trafficking increased in 1986, fell slightly in1987, and then rose dramatically in 1988 and 1989 (p. 1089). Itwas clear to Goode that the U.S. was experiencing a moral panicover the use of drugs. Several researchers, himself included,asked 'why?, and why now?' and answered that America's problemwith drugs was indeed a social construction (Goode, 1990, p.1090). This answer was often based on the fact that self-reporteddrug use declined in nearly every drug and age category, and was"strikingly lower than was true for the late 1970s and early1908s" (P. 1091). However, Goode also noted that every other objective measureof the drug problem in the U.S. did rise during the 1980s. Theseincluded personal use of cocaine (and crack) once a week or more,larger numbers of overdoses, multiple illicit drug use problemsof a medical nature, larger number of arrests where drugs wereconcern, and increase in the number of police officers killed indrug-related incidents, and increase in drug-related homicides,and a higher number of babies born to cocaine addicted mothers(pp. 1091-1093). Goode uses this data to argue that socialproblems are constructed, but that they can be constructed ofboth objective and subjective factors. Goode's argument that the construction of social problems arenot created out of whole cloth points out the trouble with socialconstruction theory in certain instances. In the case of Jensenand Gerber's (1993) study described above, little evidence isgiven for the assumption that the PM specifically sought toincrease his standings in the polls, other than reporting thatthe public did not support him enough to win an election at thattime. However, two years later, he was re-elected on asingle-issue platform, but that platform was not the drug war.Perhaps his statement reflects more his reaction to PresidentReagan's call for the War on Drugs two days earlier, and a feebleattempt to test the waters of the opinion of Canadians on thesubject. Also, it seems to be clear (from Goode's data onperiodical publications and newspapers) that Americans were farmore concerned with the problem of drugs shortly before PresidentReagan called for a War on Drugs, while Canadians did not sharethis concern before PM Mulroney made his remark. One last point that needs to be discussed is the fact thatdeaths and illness resulting from licit drug use are far morenumerous than they are for illicit drug use (Goode, 1991, p.1094). This points to a question regarding the overwhelmingconcern with illicit drugs, especially when that concern isbrought about so dramatically, as was the case with PresidentReagan, and somewhat so in the case of PM Mulroney. Johns (1991)explains this as an effort to keep the mind of the public off thedamage that licit drugs (including alcohol, tobacco andpharmaceuticals) are doing, by constantly calling for acontinuation of the War on Drugs. Moral Entrepreneurs and Status Politics The concepts of moral entrepreneurs and status politics areclosely linked, and are themselves closely linked with theconstruction of social problems. Each of these two conceptsrequires that one person (in the case of the moral entrepreneur)or any segment of society (in the case of status politics)attempts to create rules that others must follow. In doing so,the rules define who is deviant in a society and who is not. Boyd (1983) writes that Becker (1963) argued that a study ofdeviance should not only study those labelled as deviant, butalso study those who create the label of deviance. The societalcreation of rules can be attributed to the work of a moralentrepreneur (Boyd, 1983, p. 260). Again, this sometimes requiresa certain amount of speculation on the interests and motives ofthe moral entrepreneur. For example, was Mackenzie King a moralentrepreneur? He certainly thought that he had a great deal ofinfluence on the early anti-opium legislation, and he depictedhimself as a lone force in getting this legislation passed(Giffen, et al., 1991, p. 74). Whether this was entirely trueseems, for the most part, to be debatable. Also, his motives seemto be more in line with legislating a form of social control,rather than specifically creating a definition of deviance. Thereseems to be more data on other groups' attempts to create adefinition of deviance, however. Boyd (1983) points out thatindividuals, and not groups or social institutions can be thoughtof as moral entrepreneurs (p. 260). The concept of status politics accommodates groups as well asindividuals. Status politics also merges smoothly with conflicttheory. Status politics deals well in cases where there are fewtangible gains to be made by the dominant group. The gain,rather, is a symbolic one, in which a particular life style (theone of the dominant group) is embodied in legislation, whether itis enforceable or not (Giffen, et al., 1991, p. 17). An exampleof this is the legislation which added marijuana to the list ofbanned drugs in 1923, even though little, if any, marijuana wascurrently in the country. In effect, banning marijuana legislateda culture and a life style that was free from the crime that hadbeen associated with marijuana use in the United States at thetime. CONCLUSION The politics of drug legislation is a complex web of class,power, race, fears, social conditions and law. In asking 'why isthere a War on Drugs?', we are also asking a question that begsfor psychological and sociological answers. However, theseanswers become more complex the deeper one travels into theliterature, and uncovers more factors which seem to vary overboth time and space. Alexander's (1990) psychological explanation attempts touncover the universal 'truths' that guide the impulses andemotions of both the drug warriors and the resisters. Here, thebattle is over social control and individual freedom, a problemJ.S. Mill (1859/1978) wrote as having "divided mankindalmost from the remotest ages" (p. 1). Alexander's theorycan help explain that a certain segment of the population wantsvery much to curtail individual freedom, by in effect legislatingtheir morality and fears onto the rest of society. This has muchin common with several of the sociological theories (for example,conflict theory), but where conflict theory in particular offersno explanation for (and indeed, neglects) drug use among those inthe dominant group, Alexander's theory allows both forhypocritical actors, and for the changing roles of the groupsover time. Alexander, in this sense, is quite aware of the factthat people's motives are independent of their actions, and thattheir actions have over time been focused against differentgroups, while their motives remain consistent. As well, since thepsychology of the situation is considered, actions can easily beirrational, and because of this account for actions which havelittle material benefit for the drug warrior or the resister. Conflict theory, on the other hand, has much in common withAlexander's theory, at least in that there are opposing sides. Wesee the same pattern of us-against-them, except that the sidesare more stringently defined. Conflict theory also fills in whatAlexander leaves out, and that is the political and sociologicalenvironment in which these actions take place. Within conflict theory, the reasons for the drug war are thatthe dominant group in society wants to legislate their life styleand culture on others, in order to maintain their hegemony. Inmuch of the American research, this hegemony comes at the expenseof the minority groups, and the poor. In Canadian research, theselines of power are much harder to define, and in it there islittle explicit feeling that drug legislation is specificallydirected towards one race or another. The effects of thelegislation were certainly felt by early immigrants to thiscountry, but the emphasis changed as that members of that groupwere no longer available to be persecuted. There is a feeling,however, that a class distinction is made, in that (as in theUnited States) these laws penalize the poor more than they do therich. Also, if the War on Drugs is a social construction, one musthave to consider that it is a superbly constructed one, and onethat has resisted all attempts to disarm it. The temptation tosay that the War on Drugs is simply a social construction,brought about by status politics is a strong one, however themotivations of those who successfully created it are sometimesmisinterpreted or misreported. Other times they are simply notknown. Social construction also neglects the way in which asociety can be moved to support even the most preposterousmeasures of the War on Drugs. Societal opinions are seen to betied by a string of unknown size to the person, or persons doingthe constructing. Again, it is a psychological explanation thatmay help to shed light on this process, by examining the ways inwhich people's fears and prejudices are manipulated. At the heart of it all, though, is the intense amount ofmorality that is present in any questioning of the reasons that aWar on Drugs is taking place. Even though the War on Drugs takesplace in a largely secular, liberal society such as ours, thereis never a dearth of people who seem to want to fight to the endto keep prohibitionist laws in place. The statements made by thedrug warriors, or the dominant group (or even the hypocrites whoboth decry the use of drugs in others, yet use drugs themselves),are the only consistent factor that pervades the history of theWar on Drugs. This takes the form of the rhetoric that has beenwritten and spoken from the earliest times, and it takes manyforms, including drug 'education', flyers, tracts, sermons,public service announcements, posters... even arcade games flashout the same messages to arcade-addicted youth. The rhetoric isthe result of the dogma of the War on Drugs, and need not beassociated with any religion in order to prove effective. Of course, early prohibition laws were not based entirely (orin some cases, at all) on an explicitly moral basis. But it isinteresting to note that in every case, the morality of drug usesprang up as justification for the early laws, and the laws thatfollowed. Conflict theorist have tried to explain at times thatmorality, whether in the form of racist attitudes or religiousinfluence, have caused legislation to be enacted, which is notalways the correct interpretation of the situation. However,their focus on the legislation as validating the life style andculture of the dominant group is not without cause, becauseimposing the life style and culture on another group isessentially a moral decision. Indeed, even when the earlylegislation focused on suppressing the international trade ofopium, it was a moral decision to curtail one form of economicactivity to benefit another. Conflict theory also helps to identify the groups that benefitfrom anti-drug legislation, whether it be the economic gains madeby multi-national pharmaceutical companies (as Johns (1991)argues), or symbolic gains made by the dominant group in society,or even just the satisfaction of seeing some of these laws affectonly a certain, despised group in society. When these gains aremade, unintended effects of the laws (which may be much morepunitive than the laws themselves) are justified through afeeling of moral superiority that often comes entirely at theexpense of those who suffer as a result. In sum, morality takes on many faces. It can take the shape ofcultural or economic superiority, and often manifests itself inthe rhetoric of the War on Drugs. It serves many purposes, aswell. It justifies authority and power of those making the laws,it justifies the economic superiority of those corporations whichmake money through the sale of licit drugs, and it justifiesprejudice against subordinates in society. The most interestingaspect of this morality, though, is that drugs themselves aren'tthe focus. The focus is on a large-scale battle between realpeople and their core beliefs, and not on evidence, rationality,or humanity. The War on Drugs, therefore, is at its heart abattle over a morality that is pervasive on a societal level,very well-entrenched, and deflects arguments of evidence,rationality and humanity at the societal level. What may beneeded to defuse the War on Drugs, then, is a grass rootsapproach that calls for a re-defined culture and moralityregarding drug use based on the Canadian tradition of a peaceablesociety. BIBLIOGRAPHY Adlaf, E.M., R.G. Smart, and M.D. Canale (1991) Drug Use Among Ontario Adults, 1977-1991. Toronto: Addiction ResearchFoundation. Akers, R.L. (1991) "Addiction: The TroublesomeConcept." The Journal of Drug Issues, 21, 4, pp. 777-793. Alexander, B.K. (1990) Peaceful Measures: Canada's Way Out of the 'War on Drugs'. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Becker, H.S. (1963) Outsiders. New York: MacMillan Publishing. Cited in: Boyd, N. (1982) "The Dilemma of CanadianNarcotics Legislation: The Social Control of Altered States of Consciousness." Contemporary Crises, 7, pp. 257-269. Boyd, N. (1982) "The Dilemma of Canadian NarcoticsLegislation: The Social Control of Altered States of Consciousness." Contemporary Crises, 7, pp. 257-269. Brecher, E.M. (1972) Licit and Illicit Drugs. Mount Vernon,New York: Consumers Union. Edsall, T.B. and M.D. Edsall (1991) Chain reaction: The impact of race, rights and taxes on American politics. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. cited in: Elwood, W.N. (1994) Rhetoric in the War on Drugs. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger, p. 3. Elwood, W.N. (1994) Rhetoric in the War on Drugs. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. Erickson, P.G. (1992) "Recent Trends in Canadian DrugPolicy: The Decline and Resurgence of Prohibitionism." Daedalus,121, pp. 239-267. Erickson, P.G. (1993) "The Law, Social Control, and DrugPolicy: Models, Factors and Processes." The International Journalof the Addictions, 28, 12, pp. 1155-1176. Erickson, P.G. and M.S. Goodstadt (1979) "Legal Stigmafor Marijuana Possession." Criminology, 17, 2, pp. 208-216. Erickson, P.G. and G.F. Murray (1986) "Cannabis Criminals Revisited." British Journal of Addiction, 81, pp. 81-85. Erickson, P. and R. Smart (July 11, 1994) "U.S.-styledrug policy isn't the answer." Toronto: Toronto Star, p. A12. Des Jarlais, D. and S.R. Friedman (1994) "AIDS and theUse of Injected Drugs." Scientific American, February 1994, pp.82-88. Fischer, B. (1994) "'Maps and Moves'" TheInternational Journal of Drug Policy, 5, 2, pp. 70-81. Giffen, P.J.; S. Endicott and S. Lambert (1991) Panic and Indifference. The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. A Study in the Sociology of Law. Ottawa: Canadian Centre on SubstanceAbuse. Goode, E. (1990) "The American Drug Panic of the 1980s:Social Construction or Objective Threat?" The InternationalJournal of the Addictions, 25, 9, pp. 1083-1098. Health and Welfare Canada (1989) Licit and Illicit Drugs in Canada. Edited by Marc Eliany. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services. Jensen,, E.L. and J. Gerber (1993) "State efforts toconstruct a social problem : The 1986 war on drugs in Canada."Canadian Journal of Sociology, 18, 4, pp. 453-462. Johns, C. (1991) "The War on Drugs: Why theAdministration Continues to Pursue a Policy of Criminalization and Enforcement." Social Justice, 18, 4, pp. 147-165) Mill, J.S. (1859/1978) On Liberty. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. Nadelmann, E.A. (1994) "Progressive Legalizers,Progressive Prohibitionists and the Reduction of Drug-related Harm."in Heather, N., et al, (1994) Psychoactive Drugs and Harm Reduction: From Faith to Science. London: Whurr Publishers,pp. 34-45. Oakes, G. (1994a) "Judge jails doughnut shop owner 18months." Wednesday, December 14. Toronto: Toronto Star, p. A8. Oakes, G. (1994b) "Drug importer jailed 9 years in$80,000 bust." Thursday, December 15. Toronto: Toronto Star, p.A11. Reagan, R. (1986, September 14) "National CampaignAgainst Drug Abuse: Address to the Nation." Weekly Compilation of Presidential Document, 22, 38, pp. 1133-1187. As quoted in Elwood, W.N. (1994) Rhetoric in the War on Drugs. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. pp. 28-29. Riley, D. (1994) The Harm Reduction Model. Ottawa: Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse. Riley, D. (1994b) Notes from the November 21, 1994 lecture on harm reduction, ATOPS Program. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation. Ritzer, G. (1992) Classical Sociological Theory. Toronto:McGraw Hill, Inc. Senate Debates, Canada (1910-1911) As quoted in Giffen, P.J.,S. Endicott and S. Lambert (1991) Panic and Indifference. The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. A Study in the Sociology ofLaw. Ottawa: Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse. p. 86. Single, E. (1994) "Toward a Harm Reduction Approach toAlcohol Prevention." 5th International Conference on theReduction of Drug-related Harm. Toronto, March 1994. Single, E., B. Williams and D. McKenzie (1994) Canadian Profile--Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drugs, 1994. Smart, R.G. and E.M. Adlaf (1990) "Drug Use in Ontario,Canada." Bulletin of PAHO, 24, 1, pp. 22-29. Smart, R.G., E.M. Adlaf and G.W. Walsh (1991) The Ontario Student Drug Use Survey: Trends Between 1977-1991. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation. Solomon, R.R. and M. Green (1988) "The First Century: The History of Non-medical Opiate Use and Control Policies in Canada, 1870-1970." in Blackwell, J.C. and P. Erickson(eds) Illicit Drugs in Canada: A Risky Business. Scarborough: Nelson Canada, pp. 88-116. Solomon, R.R., E. Single, and P.G. Erickson (1988) "Legal Considerations in Canadian Cannabis Policy." inBlackwell, J.C. and P.G. Erickson, eds (1988) Illicit Drugs in Canada: A Risky Business. Scarborough: Nelson Canada, pp. 370-391. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-77IA087-000625-B007-29http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/friedm1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035608 text/html 33918HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:56:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:52 GMTContent-length: 33700 Interview with Milton Friedman on the Drug War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy Interview with Milton Friedman on the Drug War The following is an excerpt from "Friedman & Szasz OnLiberty and Drugs." It is from a 1991 interview on"America's Drug Forum," a national public affairs talkshow that appears on public television stations. Randy Paige isan Emmy Award-winning drug reporter from Baltimore, Maryland;Professor Milton Friedman has been a Senior Research Fellow atthe Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace at Stanfordsince 1977, and is considered the leader of the Chicago School ofmonetary economics. Professor Friedman won the Nobel MemorialPrize in Economic Science in 1976, and is also the recipient ofthe National Medal of Science and the Presidential Medal ofFreedom by the U.S. government in 1988. Paige: Let us deal first with the issue of legalizationof drugs. How do you see America changing for the better underthat system? Friedman: I see America with half the number ofprisons, half the number of prisoners, ten thousand fewerhomicides a year, inner cities in which there's a chance forthese poor people to live without being afraid for their lives,citizens who might be respectable who are now addicts not beingsubject to becoming criminals in order to get their drug, beingable to get drugs for which they're sure of the quality. Youknow, the same thing happened under prohibition of alcohol as ishappening now. Under prohibition of alcohol, deaths from alcohol poisoning,from poisoning by things that were mixed in with the bootlegalcohol, went up sharply. Similarly, under drug prohibition,deaths from overdose, from adulterations, from adulteratedsubstances have gone up. Paige: How would legalization adversely affect America,in your view? Friedman: The one adverse effect that legalizationmight have is that there very likely would be more people takingdrugs. That's not by any means clear. But, if you legalized, youdestroy the black market, the price of drugs would go downdrastically. And as an economist, lower prices tend to generatemore demand. However, there are some very strong qualificationsto be made to that. The effect of criminalization, of making drugs criminal, is todrive people from mild drugs to strong drugs. Paige: In what way? Friedman: Marijuana is a very heavy, bulky substanceand, therefore, it's relatively easy to interdict. The warriorson drugs have been more successful interdicting marijuana than,let's say, cocaine. So, marijuana prices have gone up, they'vebecome harder to get. There's been an incentive to grow morepotent marijuana and people have been driven from marijuana toheroin, or cocaine, or crack. Paige: Let us consider another drug then, and that isthe drug crack. Friedman: Crack would never have existed, in myopinion, if you had not had drug prohibition. Why was crackcreated? The preferred method of taking cocaine, which Iunderstand was by sniffing it, snorting it, became very expensiveand they were desperate to find a way of packaging cocaine... Paige: The entrepreneurs? Friedman: Of course, they're entrepreneurs. The peoplewho are running the drug traffic are no different from the restof us, except that they have more entrepreneurial ability andless concern about not hurting other people. They're moreirresponsible in that way. But they're in business and they'retrying to make as much as they can. And they discovered a goodway to make money was to dilute this crack with baking soda orwhatever else--I mean, cocaine, whatever else they do--I don'tknow the procedure--so that they could bring it out in fivedollar and ten dollar doses. Paige: Let's talk about that more in a minute. But withregard to crack, considering the fact that it's very addictiveand considering the fact that... Friedman: That's very dubious. It is addictive, but Iunderstand from all the medical evidence that it's no moreaddictive than other drugs. In fact, the most addictive drugeverybody acknowledges is tobacco. Paige: Well, let me rephrase that then. All of theinformation I've seen on it suggests that it is a drug which isvery pleasurable. Friedman: Absolutely, no doubt. Paige: And the effect of it is also very short. Friedman: Yes. Paige: And it is very expensive because multiple dosescost a lot of money. My question is: If drugs were legalized andif crack cocaine were available at a low cost, could it not bedevastating in that it is so pleasurable, I am told, that morepeople could get it and stay on it for longer periods of time? Friedman: Well, maybe. Nobody can say with certaintywhat will happen along those lines. But I think it's verydubious, because all of the exper- ience with legal drugs is thatthere's a tendency for people to go from the stronger to theweaker and not the other way around, just as you go from regularbeer to light beer. That's the tendency that there is: fromcigar- ettes without filters to low-tar, filtered cigarettes, andso on. But I can't rule out that what you're saying might happen,but, and this is a very important but, the harm that would resultfrom that would be much less than it is now, for several reasons.The really main thing that bothers me about the crack is not whatyou're talking about, it's the crack babies, because that's thereal tragedy. They are innocent victims. They didn't choose to becrack babies any more than the people who are born with the fetalalcohol syndrome. Paige: As you now, we are already experiencing epidemicproportions of that. One out of every four babies going into onehospital, I can tell you, in Maryland is addicted. Friedman: But I'll tell you, it isn't that crack babiesare necessarily addicted, but they tend to come in at low birthweight, they tend to come in mentally impaired, and so on. Butyou know that the number who do that from alcohol is muchgreater. So, the same problem arises there. That's what bothersme. Now suppose you legalized. Under current circumstances, amother who is a crack addict and is carrying a baby is afraid togo the prenatal treatment because she turned herself into acriminal, she's subject to being thrown in jail. Under legalizeddrugs, that inhibition would be off. And, you know, even crackaddicts, mothers, have a feeling of responsi- bility to theirchildren. And I have no doubt that under those circumstances, it wouldbe possible to have a much more effective system of prenatalcare, a much more effective system of trying to persuade peoplewho are on drugs not to have children or to go off drugs whilethey have children. Paige: Let us turn to the early genesis of your beliefthat the drug laws may not be working the way the nation wouldhope them to. Tell me about the elements that you saw early onthat changed your mind or changed your way of thinking. Friedman: Well, I'm not saying "changed." Iwould rather say "formed" my way of thinking, because Ido not recall at any time that I was ever in favor of prohibitionof either alcohol or drugs. I grew up--I'm old enough to havelived through some part of the Prohibition era. Paige: And you remember it? Friedman: I remember the occasion when a fellowgraduate student at Columbia from Sweden wanted to take medowntown to a restaurant for a Swedish meal and introduced me tothe Swedish drink aquavit. This was a restaurant at which thisSwedish fellow had been getting aquavit all during Prohibition;they had been selling it to him. And this was just after therepeal of Prohibition. We went there and he asked them for someaquavit. They said, "Oh, no, we haven't gotten our licenceyet." And finally, he talked to them in Swedish andpersuaded them to take us into the back where they gave us aglass of aquavit apiece. Now that shows the absurdity of it. Prohibition was repealed in 1933 when I was 21 years old, sowas a teenager during most of Prohibition. Alcohol was readilyavailable. Bootlegging was common. Any idea that alcoholprohibition was keeping people from drinking was absurd. Therewere speakeasies all over the place. But more than that. We hadthis spectacle of Al Capone, of the hijackings, of the gangwars... Anybody with two eyes could see that this was a bad deal, thatyou were doing more harm than good. In addition, I became aneconomist. And as an economist, I came to recognize theimportance of markets and of free choice and of consumersovereignty and came to discover the harm that was done when youinterfered with them. The laws against drugs were passed in 1914,but there was no very great enforcement of it. Paige: That was the Harrison Act? Friedman: The Harrison Act. There was no very greatenforcement of it until after World War II, by which time I hadbeen able to see the harmful effects of price control, of rentcontrol, of other attempts for government to interfere withmarket things. So, it never occurred to me to be in favor of it. Paige: Was there any single event, anything youhappened to witness that made an impression upon you or was it... Friedman: No, there was no single event. It was acumulative effect. Paige: Of course, you know that there are those who saythat when Prohibition was over with, consumption dramaticallyincreased and that it would be a... Friedman: I beg your pardon, that's simply not true.That's not a fact. What is true... Paige: It has been argued. That has been argued. Friedman: You have statistically reported figures inthe books on the amount of alcohol consumed. That went up sharplyright after Prohibition, but that was "illegal" alcoholconsumption. If you take, as I have done, the chart of alcoholconsumption before and after Prohibition, alcohol consumptionafter Prohibition came back roughly to where it was before, and,over the course of the period since then, if anything, alcoholcon- sumption has been going down not in absolute terms, butrelative to the population and relative to the growth of income. For a time, it went up rather slowly, along with income, withone except- ion. During WW II, it shot way up. But that's whathappened during WW I. Of course, you never would have gottenProhibition if you hadn't had all the young men away in Francewhen the vote was taken, so that the women had an extraordinaryinfluence on it. But the same thing happened during WW II. Andthen after WW II, it settled down again. And more recently, thecon- sumption of alcohol has been going down on a per capitabasis. So, it simply is not true that there was a tremendousincrease. Friedman: So far as drugs itself is concerned, someyears ago, Alaska legalized marijuana. Consumption of marijuanaamong high school students in Alaska went DOWN. The Dutch, inHolland, do not prosecute soft drugs, like marijuana, and theywould prefer not to prosecute hard drugs, but they feel impelledby the international obligations they've entered into, andconsumption of marijuana by young people has gone down. And,equally more interesting, the average age of the users of harddrugs has gone up, which means they're not getting any more newrecruits. So, the evidence is very mixed. But I have to admit that theone negative feature of legalizing drugs is that there might besome additional drug habbits. However, I want to qualify that instill another way. The Child who's shot in a slum in a pass-by-shooting, in arandom shooting, is an innocent victim in every respect of theterm. The person who decides to take drugs for himself is not aninnocent victim. He has chosen himself to be a victim. And I mustsay I have very much less sympathy for him. I do not think it ismoral to impose such heavy costs on other people to protectpeople from their own choices. Paige: For us to understand the real root of thosebeliefs, how about if we just talk a minute about free marketeconomic perspective, and how you see the proper role ofgovernment in its dealings with the individual. Friedman: The proper role of government is exactly whatJohn Stuart Mill Said in the middle of the 19th century in"On Liberty." The proper role of government is toprevent other people from harming an individual. Govern- ment, hesaid, never has any right to interfere with an individual forthat individual's own good. The case for prohibiting drugs is exactly as strong and asweak as the case for prohibiting people from overeating. We allknow that overeating causes more deaths than drugs do. If it's inprinciple OK for the government to say you must not consume drugsbecause they'll do you harm, why isn't it all right to say youmust not eat too much because you'll do harm? Why isn't it allright to say you must not try to go in for skydiving becauseyou're likely to die? Why isn't it all right to say, "Oh,skiing, that's no good, that's a very dangerous sport, you'llhurt yourself"? Where do you draw the line? Paige: Well, I would bet that former drug czar WilliamBennet, some other folks along those lines, would probablysuggest that the present sale and distribution of illegal drugsis, in fact, an enterprise which harms another person and thegovernment has to step in... Friedman: [Simultaneously] It does harm a great many... Paige:...to protect the vulnerable. Friedman: It does harm a great many other people, butprimarily because it's prohibited. There are an enormous numberof innocent victims now. You've got the people whose purses arestolen, who are bashed over the head by people trying to getenough money for their next fix. You've got the people killed inthe random drug wars. You've got the corruption of the legalestablishment. You've got the innocent victims who are taxpayerswho have to pay for more and more prisons, and more and moreprisoners, and more and more police. You've got the rest of uswho don't get decent law enforcement because all the lawenforcement officials are busy trying to do the impossible. Friedman: And, last, but not least, you've got thepeople of Colombia and Peru and so on. What business do we havedestroying and leading to the killing of thousands of people inColombia because we cannot enforce our own laws? If we couldenforce our laws against drugs, there would be no market forthese drugs. You wouldn't have Colombia in the state it's in. Paige: Is it not true that the entire discussion here,the entire drug problem is an economic problem to... Friedman: No, it's not an economic problem at all, it'sa moral problem. Paige: In what way? Friedman: I'm an economist, but the economics problemis strictly tertiary. It's a moral problem. It's a problem of theharm which the government is doing. I have estimated statistically that the prohibition of drugsproduces, on the average, ten thousand homicides a year. It's amoral problem that the government is going around killing tenthousand people. It's a moral problem that the government ismaking into criminals people, who may be doing something you andI don't approve of, but who are doing something that hurts nobodyelse. Most of the arrests for drugs are for possession by casualusers. Now here's somebody who wants to smoke a marijuana cigarette.If he's caught, he goes to jail. Now is that moral? Is thatproper? I think it's absolutely disgraceful that our government,supposed to be our government, should be in the position ofconverting people who are not harming others into criminals, ofdestroying their lives, putting them in jail. That's the issue tome. The economic issue comes in only for explaining why it hasthose effects. But the economic reasons are not the reasons. Of course, we're wasting money on it. Ten, twenty, thirtybillion dollars a year, but that's trivial. We're wasting thatmuch money in many other ways, such as buying crops that oughtnever to be produced. Paige: There are many who would look at theeconomics--how the eco- nomics of the drug business is affectingAmerica's major inner cities, for example. Friedman: Of course it is, and it is because it'sprohibited. See, if you look at the drug war from a purelyeconomic point of view, the role of the government is to protectthe drug cartel. That's literally true. Paige: Is it doing a good job of it? Friedman: Excellent. What do I mean by that? In anordinary free market--let's take potatoes, beef, anything youwant--there are thousands of importers and exporters. Anybody cango into the business. But it's very hard for a small person to gointo the drug importing business because our interdiction effortsessentially make it enormously costly. So, the only people whocan survive in that business are these large Medellin cartel kindof people who have enough money so they can have fleets ofairplanes, so they can have sophisticated methods, and so on. In addition to which, by keeping goods out and by arresting,let's say, local marijuana growers, the government keeps theprice of these products high. What more could a monopolist want?He's got a government who makes it very hard for all hiscompetitors and who keeps the price of his products high. It'sabsolutely heaven. Paige: Of course, you know that there are conspiracytheorists who suggest it's there for a reason, and that's becausegovernments are in cahoots with the drug runners; you wouldn'tsay that. Friedman: No, it's not. I don't say that at all. Youknow, over and over again in government policy, good intentionsgo awry. And the reason good intentions go awry is because you'respending somebody else's money. Paige: Many would say that a lot of your theories aregrounded in the notion of personal interest; if it is in anindividual's personal interest to do something, he or she will dothat. Friedman: That's not a theory, and there's nobody whowill deny it. Is there anybody who will deny that you can expectevery person to pursue his own personal interests? Now thosepersonal interests don't have to be narrow. Mother Theresa ispursuing her own personal interest just as much as Donald Trumpis pursuing his. But they're both pursuing the personal interest. Paige: Some would say that that notion--that personalinterest is what propels societies as well as people--is aheartless philosophy and that the underclass would not fare wellunder that kind of a notion. You've heard that before. Friedman: Yes, of course. But the evidence is sooverwhelming. The only countries in the world in which low incomepeople have managed to get a halfway decent level of living arethose which rely on capitalist markets. Just compare the qualityof life, the level of living of the ordinary people in Russia andordinary people in, I won't say the U.S., but in France, inItaly, in Germany, in England, or in Hong Kong. Compare Hong Kongwith mainland China. Every society is driven by personal interest. Mainland Chinais driven by personal interest. The question is: How is personalinterest disciplined? If the only way you can satisfy yourpersonal interest is by getting something that other people wantto pay for. You've got to... Page: Or by forcing down other people's throats at the pointof a gun, I suppose. Friedman: If you can do it. Paige: At the extreme. Friedman: At the extreme. But that won't get theircooperation. You may be able to kill them. You may be able totake their wealth. But it won't create any more wealth. So, theonly societies which have been able to create broadly basedrelative prosperity have been those societies which have reliedprimarily on capitalist markets. That's true whether you takeHong Kong versus mainland China, East Germany versus WestGermany, Czechoslovakia before WW II and current. You cannot finda single exception to that proposition. Adam Smith put it best over two hundred years ago, when hesaid people who intend only to pursue their self-interest are ledby an invisible hand to promote the public interest even thoughthat was no part of their intention. Mr. Ford did not develop theFord car for the public interest. He did it for his privateinterest. Paige: But Adam Smith also saw a role for government,for example, in the administration of justice, didn't he? Friedman: So do I. I am not a zero government person. Ithink there is a real role of government. And one of the reasonsI object to so many of the things that government has gotten intois that it prevents government from performing its proper role. Abasic role of government is to keep you from having our houseburgled, to keep you from being hit over the head. And becausethe larger fraction of our law enforcement machinery is devotedto the war on drugs, you haven't got that kind of safety. Paige: But, of course, there is clearly the argumentthat if the police come and pick up a person who is addicted to adrug and does not have the money to buy those drugs, then they'realso taking a potential burglar off the street who's going tocome and get my house, right? Friedman: They are, butthey'll be more of them coming on, as we know, and besides whatare you going to do with them. Are you going to house them? Amajority of those people who are arrested are simply arrested forpossession, they're casual users. Paige: However, the sixty-five, seventy-five-year-oldwoman who looks out her window and sees drug dealers out in thestreet and she sees them carrying guns and selling drugs thirtyfeet from her front door has a right to call police and say,"I want these people off the street." Friedman: Absolutely. Paige: And police should take them off the street.Correct? Friedman: Absolutely. But it's a mistake to have a lawwhich makes that the main function of the police. I don't blamethe police. I don't blame that woman. I don't blame the drugdealers. Paige: In what way? Friedman: We put them in a position where that's thething to do. When we say to a young man in the ghetto,"Look, you get a reasonable job at McDonald's or anyplaceelse, you'll make five, six, seven dollars an hour. But on theother hand, here's this opportunity to peddle drugs in thestreet." Why does the juvenile have the opportunity? Becausethe law is easier on juveniles than it is on adults. Paige: But how would you see legalization affectingpoor in this country? Friedman: The poor? It depends on which poor. But inthe main, legalization as such would not have a major effect onthe poor. It would provide better opportunities for the poor byrendering the inner cities safe and a place where you might havesome decent, proper business. It would provide an opportunity todo more to improve schooling. The deterior- ation of theschooling, which is another case of ineffective socialism, has asmuch to do with the problems in the inner city as drugs do. Drugsaren't the only thing at work. But I don't believe that legalization should be viewedprimarily as a way to help the poor. Legalization is a way tostop--in our forum as citizens-- a government from using ourpower to engage in the immoral behavior of killing people, takinglives away from people in the U.S., in Colombia and elsewhere,which we have no business doing. Paige: So, you see the role of government right now asbeing just as deadly as if Uncle Sam were to take a gun tosomebody's head. Friedman: That's what he's doing, of course. Right nowUncle Sam is not only taking a gun to somebody's head, he'staking his property without due process of law. The drugenforcers are expropriating property, in many cases of innocentpeople on whom they don't have a real warrant. We're makingcitizens into spies and informers. We tell people to call up, youdon't have to give your name, just give your suspicions. That's aterrible way to run what's supposed to be a free country. Paige: Let us turn in the final few minutes then tospecifically what your vision is then. Under your system, if youcould make a wish and have it come true, what system would thatbe? How would you legalize drugs? How would you go about doingthat? Friedman: I would legalize drugs by subjecting them toexactly the same rules that alcohol and cigarettes are subjectedto now. Alcohol and cigar- ettes cause more deaths than drugs do,by far, from use, but many fewer innocent victims. And the majorinnocent victims, in that case, are the people who are killed bydrunk drivers. And we ought to enforce the law against drunkdriving, just as we ought to enforce the law against drivingunder the influence of marijuana, or cocaine, or anything else. But I would, as a first step at least, treat the drugs exactlythe same way we now treat alcohol and tobacco, no different. Paige: You know what Representative Charles Rangel(D-New York) would say. Friedman: I have heard Charles Rangel. He's ademagogue, who has had no relationship between what he says andthe interests of his own constitu- ents. His own constituents,the people he serves, are among the people who would be benefitedthe most by legalization of drugs. Charles Rangel is pursuing hisown self-interest. Paige: Forgive me for throwing out a name, but I justwanted to mention a typical response to that would be if youtreat it like alcohol, you're talking about full-page ads inmagazines with cocaine. You're talking about TV advertisers.You're talking about buying cocaine... Friedman: I beg your pardon. TV advertising isforbidden today for alcohol. Paige: For hard liquor, that's all. Friedman: For hard liquor. And I say treat this thesame way as you would treat Alcohol. So, presumably such adswould be forbidden for this. But, of course, in any event I'm not prohibiting anybody fromreading Mr. Rangel, and his ideas are at least as dangerous asthose full-page ads you're talking about. Paige: What scares you the most about the notion ofdrugs being legal? Friedman: Nothing scares me about the notion of drugsbeing legal. Paige: Nothing. Friedman: What scares me is the notion of continuing onthe path we're on now, which will destroy our free society,making it an uncivilized place. There's only one way you canreally enforce the drug laws currently. The only way to do thatis to adopt the policies of Saudi Arabia, Singa- pore, which someother countries adopt, in which a drug addict is subject tocapital punishment or, at the very least, having his hand choppedoff. If we were willing to have penalties like that--but wouldthat be a society you'd want to live in? Paige: Do these notions seem obvious to you? Friedman: Yes. I have thought about them for a longtime. I have observed behavior in this country and in othercountries for a long time. And I find it almost incredible howpeople can support the present system of drug prohibition. Itdoes so much more harm than good. Paige: If it is obvious, why is it that you're in sucha minority, particularly among...? Friedman: Of course. Very good question. And the answeris because there are so many vested interests that have beenbuilt up behind the present drug war. Who are the people who arelistened to about drugs? The people who have the obligation toenforce drug laws. They think they're doing the right thing.They're good human beings. Everybody thinks what he's doing isworth doing. Nobody is doing it for evil motives. But it's thesame thing all over the government. Paige: Wouldn't you agree that fear is one of thestrongest supports for the existing drug laws? Fear that, withoutthem, the bottom would fall out. Friedman: Yes, but it's a fake fear and it's a fearthat is promoted. Listen to what the former drug czar, Mr.Bennet, said. First of all, he stated that consumption of alcoholafter Prohibition has gone up three or fourfold or something. Hewas wrong, just factually wrong. He's made all sorts of scaretalk about how many new addicts there would be. He's neverprovided a single bit of evidence, never provided any examples ofany other place or anything. But why? Because he's got a job todo. Paige: Vested interests, you're saying. Friedman: Vested interests, self-interest, the sameself-interest that people object to in the market. But in themarket, if you start a project and it goes wrong, you have tofinance it out of your own pocket. Paige: Last question. You have grandchildren. Friedman: Absolutely. You have a two-year-old granddaughter. Friedman: Yes. Paige: And her name is? Friedman: Her name is Becca. Paige: When you look at Becca, what do you see for herand for her future? Friedman: That depends entirely upon what you and yourfellow citizens do to our country. If you and your fellowcitizens continue on moving more and more in the direction ofsocialism, not only inspired through your drug prohibition, butthrough your socialization of schools, the socialization ofmedicine, the regulation of industry, I see for my granddaughterthe equivalent of Soviet communism three years ago. Paige: Do you worry about drugs affecting yourgranddaughter somehow? Friedman: I don't worry about drugs, but I worry aboutgovernment doing something about drugs. I do not worry about hergetting addicted to drugs. She has good parents. Her parents willprovide her with good role models... Paige: I just mean the violence surrounding the drugtrade, just the... Friedman: The violence is due to prohibition andnothing else. How much violence is there surrounding the alcoholtrade. There's some, only because we prohibit the sale of alcoholto children, which we should do, and there's some because weimpose very high taxes on alcohol and, as a result, there's someincentive for bootlegging. But there's no other violence aroundit. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-78IA031-000651-B022-177http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dwarcon1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123559 text/html 26854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:18:53 GMTContent-length: 26636 The Drug War and the Constitution The Drug War and the Constitution by Paul Hager Following is a transcript of the speech I gave at the ICLUConference. I am appending the companion notes to the end. Textbetween brackets [] is description or commentary and not part ofthe actual transcript. I'd like to draw your attention to companion notes that I puttogether for this talk. They're located on the tables out backthere, and I think that those of you who are doing CLE have themin your manuals. Well, I'm going to attempt to descend into the murky depthsof political philosophy and Constitutional analysis. At theoutset, I do have a caveat: the arguments I am going to bepresenting have never been endorsed by Congress or the courts andI hope that during the question and answer session we can getinto this in a little bit more detail. The thesis that I want to advance today is that the drug warand the laws that prohibit the private consumption of certaindrugs are un-Constitutional. Prohibition laws, themselves,violate every tenet of limited government that is embodied in ourConstitution. To begin, let me pose a question: why was it necessary toamend the Constitution in order to prohibit the drug alcohol?And, while you are cogitating on that: how is it possible toprohibit other drugs without going through the formal amendmentprocess? Well, I think, in order to answer these questions, it'snecessary to take a look at what the Constitution is supposed tobe. At the recent confirmation hearings of Judge Clarence Thomas(uh, Clarence Thomas, by the way, -- he and I have at least twothings in common: we're both ex marijuana users [chuckles fromthe audience], and we're both married to attorneys) -- in anycase, there was a lot of discussion at the hearings about naturallaw and natural rights. Just about all of the participants seemedto agree that our system recognizes the existence of"inalienable" natural rights and that government existsto "secure" those rights for its citizens. It's just aswell that they agreed on that -- the architects of our system ofgovernment, in fact, had that principle in mind, and they viewedthe Constitution as being a blueprint for a limited government inwhich those powers that were to be made available to the federalgovernment would be listed. If a power is not listed in theConstitution, it is not supposed to be available to the Federalgovernment. Two hundred odd years ago, when the Bill of Rights --which we're here to celebrate -- was being debated, there werethose who opposed the Bill of Rights on the grounds that, uh,they're completely unnecessary. It's redundant -- the rightsalready exist and therefore they don't have a place in theConstitution. In fact, they made the argument that a Bill ofRights is dangerous because at some future point in time, peoplewould get the idea that if a right wasn't to be found in theConstitution -- like privacy -- it did not exist. Perhaps thebest articulation I've ever seen of this principle is to be foundin _The Federalist Papers_. [I hold up a paperback of _The Federalist Papers_.] Alexander Hamilton writing in Federalistnumber 84 -- and I'll just read some of this out to you. He says: "... bills of rights, in the sense and in the extent inwhich they are contended for, are not only unnecessary in theproposed constitution, but would even be dangerous." And then his argument is: "For why declare that things shall not be done whichthere is no power to do? Why for instance, should it be said,that the liberty of the press shall not be restrained, when nopower is given by which restrictions may be imposed? I will notcontend that such a provision would confer a regulating power;but it is evident that it would furnish, to men disposed tousurp, a plausible pretence for claiming that power. They mighturge with a semblance of reason, that the constitution ought notto be charged with the absurdity of providing against the abuseof an authority, which was not given, and that the provisionagainst restraining the liberty of the press afforded a clearimplication, that a power to prescribe proper regulationsconcerning it, was intended to be vested in the nationalgovernment. This", he concluded, "may serve as aspecimen of the numerous handles which would be given to thedoctrine of constructive powers, by the indulgence of aninjudicious zeal for bills of rights." Good writer, Mr. Hamilton. [I gestured with the book and putit aside.] Well, anyway, as we know, Hamilton's view did notprevail and 10 of the 12 Amendments that were proposed as a Billof Rights were ratified in December of 1791. In order to mollify critics and meet the arguments of peoplelike Hamilton, language was added to the Bill of Rights toaddress this idea of limited government and natural rights. I just happen to have a copy of the Constitution here --don't leave home without it [I hold up my pocket copy of theConstitution]-- and I'll read the language that bears on this. "The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rightsshall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained bythe people." That's the 9th Amendment, this lays out that whole idea ofrights existing apart from the Constitution. And then we have: "The powers not delegated to the United States by theConstitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved tothe States respectively, or to the people." That's the 10th Amendment and that has to do with delegationof powers and the idea of limited government. Well, let's go back to those questions. I think the answer tothe first question is fairly straightforward -- this idea ofalcohol prohibition. We were talking about a new power that wasbeing acquired -- surrendered by the people and the states - andso the 18th Amendment was passed to give that power to theFederal government. In the case of our second question --prohibiting other drugs -- I would argue that we are talkingabout new powers being granted to the Federal government thathave never been surrendered by the people and the states. Ergo,the drug war, prohibition laws, the DEA, the whole ball of wax,are all unconstitutional. I think what we have here is a primeexample of the illegal acquisition of powers by a centralgovernment through a process of slow accretion. And this wasexactly the sort of thing Hamilton was warning against back in1787. If it is the case the federal government can't get involvedin the prohibition business, what about the state governments?Uh, I think one answer to this is to look at the right of privacywhich is protected by the 9th Amendment and extended to thestates by the 14th. The right has been invoked to protect privacyin such areas as family planning -- birth control -- and, atleast so far, the right of privacy seems to be protecting awoman's choice whether or not to have an abortion. Furthermore,this same right should apply in matters involving an individual'sdecision to consume, privately, a recreational drug in his or herhome. One argument that might militate against this idea of a rightof privacy taking precedence might be -- uh, well, what if thepeople who use drugs are infringing on the rights of otherpeople. For example, users of cocaine and opiates. Is there acompelling state interest -- is there some kind of balancing testthat we can apply that gives the state the right to intervene? I'd like to pose a hypothetical here that we can use for thepurposes of analysis. Let's posit the existence of a drug that is100% addicting and potentiates violence in its users 100% of thetime. I think we'd have a very clear case of there being acompelling state interest to get itself involved in prohibitingthis drug on the grounds that the state is protecting the rightsof the non-users. Well, suppose we begin reducing thosepercentages. Let's suppose that we're talking about a drug thatis 15% addictive and potentiates violence in some lesserpercentage of its users. We have an empirical answer for that: I've just described alcohol. And, just for another forinstance, let's suppose that we have a drug that is 90% addictivebut doesn't seem to correlate with violence at all. Again,empirically we have an answer: I've just described cigarettes. I would argue that pharmacological and population data can beadduced to compare alcohol and tobacco with other drugs likeopiates and cocaine derivatives. And, if we do this, we find thatalcohol is, in fact, more addictive than many forms of opiatesand many forms of cocaine although less addictive than crackcocaine. Furthermore, smoked tobacco is generally recognized asbeing the most addictive drug around. That other area, having todo with violence and anti-social behavior, once again we findthat the drug that is the greatest potentiator of violentbehavior is alcohol. And if we look at the other drugs likeopiates and cocaine, we find that most of the violence that isassociated with these drugs is associated with the blackmarket/organized crime component of the drug trade and is not apharmacological feature of the drug itself. Well, I'm the political coordinator of the Hoosier CannabisRe-legalization Coalition, and I haven't said a word aboutmarijuana yet and I probably should -- uh -- marijuana, which isthe Nation's number one illegal drug, which is estimated to havebeen used by over 60 million people, is recognized as beingrelatively non-addictive. For a point of comparison, if we lookat the common drug caffeine -- which I was dosing myself withearlier today -- caffeine, which is in coffee and soft drinks, isgenerally recognized as being more addictive than marijuana. Furthermore, no scientific evidence has ever been broughtforth that would support the idea that marijuana leads toviolent, anti-social behavior. Thus, by no stretch of theimagination is there a rational or scientific justification formarijuana prohibition and, perforce, there is no marijuanaprohibition law that passes Constitutional muster. Moreover,using alcohol and tobacco as our metrics, even heroin and crackprohibition cannot be justified. At this point, it's probably time to boldly go where noConstitutional interpreter has gone before and so I'm going tomove into more speculative areas. The 1st Amendment, whichprotects religion and speech, I think also by extension protectsthought and belief. Well, what is the seat of religion, thoughtand belief? [A pregnant pause.] The brain, right? [Tapping mycranium.] In fact, speech and belief are manifestations of theinternal state of a person's brain. Science is beginning toinform us as to how chemicals and neurotransmitters, indeed thephysical "wiring" of our brain defines who we are andhow we think. Unless we get involved in metaphysics I think wehave to recognize that there is physical basis for belief. WhereI'm heading with this is that, if it is the case that yourphysical brain state determines whether you are a Methodist, anagnostic, or a Nazi then clearly the state of your brain isprotected in some sense. The question I'd like to put to you is:if it is the case that the 1st Amendment allows a person to alterhis or her cognitive system by reading "Mein Kampf" --which might well alter it permanently, you might become a Nazifor the rest of your life -- then how is it possible for thegovernment to step in and say that a person may not temporarilyalter his or her cognitive system for two or three hours bysmoking a marijuana joint? [Scattered applause.] Also, anotherway of looking at this same thing is, what is the rationale forsaying that programming your brain across the visual or auralpathways is OK but programming your brain _chemically_ across theblood-brain barrier is not? And finally -- uh, and I think that this is the mostfrightening prospect in this whole thing -- consider this: if astate government can come up to you and can say, you may not passdelta-9-THC -- the principal intoxicant in marijuana - you cannotpass that across your blood-brain barrier, what is to prevent astate from saying at some point in the future, you _must_ passdrug X -- let's call it soma like in _Brave New World_ -- youmust pass soma across your blood-brain barrier? I guess what I'marguing is that the government has intruded into your biochemicaland physiological brain and in principle, once the government cando this, then in principle the government can control any part ofyour body. I think I've just about wrapped up the general comments Iwanted to make. One thing I might suggest: we might also talkabout some specific areas where government has been in violationof Constitutional rights all at the behest of this drug war. Thank you. ---------------------companion notes totalk------------------- The Drug War and the Constitution by Paul Hager Companion Notes By focusing on the Constitutional dimension of drugprohibition, I've attempted to approach the issue from adifferent perspective. In claiming that the drug war and drugprohibition violate the U.S. Constitution and fundamentalprinciples of civil liberty I am aware that there is a dearth ofpresent day case law to support my arguments. Instead, I haverelied on the writings of Hamilton, Madison, and Jay in TheFederalist Papers and, to a lesser extent, selected writings ofThomas Jefferson that appear in Jefferson: Writings (Merrill D.Peterson wrote the notes and selected text, ISBN 0-940450-16-X). I assert that current prohibitionist policy entails a grantof power to government that was never contemplated and was, infact, explicitly rejected by the framers of the Constitution. The Harrison Act of 1914 was the first major step by theFederal government in the direction of drug prohibition. The 18thAmendment and the enabling legislation of the Volsted Act were tocome later, in 1919 and 1920 respectively. An excellent analysisof the case law interpreting the Harrison Act is to be found inArnold S. Trebach's book, The Heroin Solution (Yale UniversityPress, 1982, ISBN 0-300-02773-7), chapter 6. For a short overviewof drug prohibition "cycles" in U.S. History, and theplace of the Harrison Act in them, see "Opium, Cocaine, andMarijuana in American History", by David F. Musto,Scientific American, July 1991, volume 265, number 1. An excellent source on the "heroin problem" andpossible solutions is The Hardest Drug: Heroin and Public Policy, by John Kaplan (University of Chicago Press, 1983, ISBN0-226-42427-8). Professor Kaplan devotes the first two chaptersof the book to exploding the myths about heroin's addictivenessand dangers that have been used to justify its prohibition.Kaplan also argues that the Harrison Act was in large partresponsible for the development of many of the social problemsthat we now associate with heroin use and considers the Act tohave been a mistake. Unaccountably (given the foundation helays), Kaplan shies away from legalization strategies completelyand offers heroin maintenance programs with possible coercivetreatment as his alternative to the present approach. ArnoldTrebach, on the other hand, argues in his book that doctorsshould be allowed to prescribe heroin to addicts as needed and toinclude heroin in their pharmacopoeia. Trebach's legal analysisof the Harrison Act (mentioned above) is used to buttress hisargument in favor of a liberal interpretion of the Act.Interestingly, Kaplan, who considers the Act to have been amistake, favors a much more restrictive solution than doesTrebach who considers the Harrison Act to have been anappropriate piece of social engineering. On the subject of marijuana, John Kaplan is also the authorof a book entitled Marijuana -- the New Prohibition (1970).Kaplan argued convincingly for marijuana decriminalization inthis book. Arnold Trebach is currently the head of the DrugPolicy Foundation, an organization that seeks alternatives to thedrug war. The organization generally favors full legalization ofmarijuana but embraces a variety of opinion regarding changes inthe legal status of other drugs. The issue of "addictiveness" of drugs iscomplicated. The term itself has fallen into disfavor among thescientific establishment and "drug dependence" isgenerally preferred. I will stick with the more common term forsimplicity. It turns out that the picture of addiction that is afavorite with police departments and drug czars is far fromaccurate. In "The Tragedy of Needless Pain", (by RonaldMelzack, February 1990, Scientific American), scientific evidenceis presented that morphine used for pain relief is not addictive.Trebach notes statistics that gave a rate of 500,000 heroinaddicts and 3,500,000 "chippers" or non-addictedoccasional users in the late 1970's which would mean a 12.5%addiction rate. Laboratory studies show a higher rate but thesestudies use medical grade, pure heroin. In Health Consequences ofSmoking: Nicotine Addiction (Surgeon General's Report, 1988), acomparison is made of the relative addictiveness of smokedtobacco and several other drugs (the 15% figure for alcohol comesfrom this source). The Surgeon General's Report observes that ofservice men who became addicted to heroin in Vietnam,aproximatedly 90% were able to avoid readdiction upon return tothe U.S. The report also mentions the frequency of"chipping" in heroin use but notes that nonaddictedcigarette users are exceedingly rare. The addiction rate of 90%for cigarette smokers also derives from the Surgeon General'sReport. Other sources that give some picture of comparative addictioninclude "Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,Consequences, and Alternatives" by Ethan Nadelmann (Science,September 1, 1989). In building his case for drug legalization,Nadelmann cites National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) researchthat gives a surprisingly low value for cocaine addiction rates. A more complete comparision of addictive potentional is to befound in the magazine, In Health, in an article entitled"Hooked, not Hooked" by Deborah Franklin (Nov/Dec1990). Franklin cites addiction experts' rankings of variouslegal and illegal drugs as follows (p. 41): 1) Nicotine 2) "Ice" (smoked methamphetamine) 3) Crack 4) Crystal Meth (injected methamphetamine) 5) Valium (diazepam) 6-8) Quaalude 6-8) Seconal (secobarbital) 6-8) Alcohol 9-10) Crank (snorted methamphetamine) 9-10) Heroin 11) Cocaine 12) Caffeine 13) PCP 14) Marijuana 15) Ecstasy (MDMA) 16-18) Psilocybin Mushrooms 16-18) LSD 16-18) Mescaline (The rankings as they appear in the magazine are in the formof a bar graph -- I've converted them to a rank ordering. Notealso that, although amphetamine is broken down according to themethod of administration, other drugs with multiple modes ofadministration are not. I.V. injection will, for a number ofreasons, be more addicting than oral ingestion. Concentration isalso an important factor as well. Although the"potency" of heroin is considered to be 3 to 4 timesthat of morphine, heroin is actually diacetylmorphine -- morphinereacted with acetic anhydride. In the body, heroin breaks down tomorphine in order to produce its effect. Apparently, the"potency" of heroin is the result of the ease withwhich heroin crosses the blood-brain barrier before it breaksdown to morphine.) The Drug Policy Letter, Vol II, number 2, Mar/Apr 1990 (anewsletter published by the Drug Policy Foundation) uses a back-of-the-envelope calculation to expose the myth that "crackis the most addictive drug known to man." It is often saidthat if one uses crack just once, a person is addicted. Accordingto the NIDA-sponsored National Household Survey, 2.5 millionpeople have tried crack, and 480,000 used it in the month priorto the survey. Even if one assumed that anyone who used the drugin the past month was an addict, that would still give anaddiction rate of only 19%. Using this same method for alcoholwould give a 62% rate and, for powdered cocaine a 13% addictionrate. Though this is not the sort of analysis that should be usedto gauge addiction rates, it does give the lie to the "onepuff and you're hooked" claim. A number of the sources cited above present evidence thatviolent criminal activity associated with heroin and cocaine useis actually the result of the high cost of the drugs coupled withthe low socio-economic status of inner-city addicts. In otherwords, violent crime is not a pharmacological feature of the drugitself but a reflection of black market economics. The same DrugPolicy Letter cited above also reports on research done byGoldstein, Brownstein, Ryan, and Bellucci on the drug componentof violence in New York City. They found that only a very smallproportion of drug-related murders were a function of the drugitself and most of those were caused by alcohol. Heroin and otheropiates, in particular, are well known to not provoke aggressiveor violent behavior in people under the influence. Two monographs by Professor Bruce L. Benson and ProfessorDavid W. Rasmussen of the Policy Sciences Program of FloridaState University in Tallahassee give another view of drug use andviolent crime from the perspective of incarceration rates inFlorida. Benson and Rasmussen find that the overwhelming numberof people who have been arrested for a drug offense have noarrest history for a violent or property crime. (See "DrugOffenders in Florida", July 1990, and "Drug Crime andFlorida's Criminal Justice Problem", December 1990.) This isnot the result one would expect if the drug-violent crimeconnection were as intertwined as apologists for the drug warwould have us believe. Notes on Additional Materials Along with these notes, I'm including two additional items.The first is "Marijuana Myths", a collection of sometypical anti-marijuana and D.A.R.E. Program falsehoods and theirrefutation. Each of the numbered refutation sections has anassociated reference section which will allow readers to check mysources. The second item is Report #126 of the ABA Law StudentDivision which recommended that the ABA reverse its 18 yearposition favoring marijuana decriminalization. Report #126 offersno references of any kind, scientific or otherwise. This isunderstandable because most of its assertions are withoutscientific foundation. If this represents the sort of evidencethat is considered acceptable for a major policy reversal of theABA, I believe it reflects badly on the level of scholarshippracticed by the national organization. One item that appears in #126 deserves a comment. Much ismade of the increased potency of marijuana. In the Journal ofPsychoactive Drugs, Vol. 20(1), Jan-Mar 1988, Tod Mikuriya, M.D.and Michael Aldrich, Ph.D. address this matter in "Cannabis1988 Old Drug, New Dangers The Potency Question." In acareful piece of research, Mikuriya and Aldrich demonstrate thata review of independent, contemporary assays of importedmarijuana from the early 70's show it was every bit as potent asmodern domestic sensimilla varieties. (Anyone who has personalexperience with Thai Sticks, Panama Red, and Oaxacan in theperiod from the late 60's to early 70's can attest to the potencyof the imports.) They also reveal that improper DEA and policeevidence handling techniques (e.g., no refrigeration of seizedmarijuana) led to an underestimate of street potency in the 1970sbecause samples degraded rather quickly in evidence warehouses.Besides the country's illicit experience with marijuana, Mikuryaand Aldrich point to the extremely potent forms of cannabis(i.e., marijuana) tonics that were in common use in the UnitedStates prior to marijuana prohibition in the 1930's. Such tonicswere frequently given to children with no reported ill effects.Eli-Lilly and Parke, Davis, & Co. entered into a"joint" venture to produce a potent strain of domesticcannabis sativa for their cannabis pharmaceuticals which theycalled cannabis americana (note: a picture of the 1929Parke-Davis catalogue for "Cannabis U.S.P." can befound on page 113 of Dr. Andrew Weil's book, Chocolate toMorphine: Understanding Mind-Active Drugs, written with WinifredRosen, 1983, ISBN 0-395 -33108-0). Parke-Davis claimed uniformeffectiveness for their cannabis extract at a 10 milligram doselevel (the effective dose of pure delta-9-THC, the maincannabinoid, is between 25 and 50 micrograms per kilogram). Forthose who appreciate irony, take note that Parke-Davis, whichused to make a profit from selling legal cannabis, now makesmoney from marketing drug testing kits which primarily detectmarijuana use. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B33-79IA031-000651-B022-204http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/cundiff1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123620 text/html 10220HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:36:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:44 GMTContent-length: 10002 Crime and the Drug War by Kirby Cundiff, Ph.D. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Crime and the Drug War by Kirby R. Cundiff,Ph.D. Appeared in: Claustrophobia, August 1994 In 1907, when Georgia and Oklahoma made the manufacture, sale,or transportation of intoxicating liquors illegal state wide, thehomicide rate in the United States was 1 person per 100,000 peryear.[2] Before the end of the decade, 13 states plusAlaska, Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia had gone dry.[6]By 1919--when the 18th amendment was passed, making alcohol useillegal nationwide--the homicide rate had grown to 8 per 100,000.The murder rate climbed steadily until it peaked at 10 per100,000 around 1933, when our nation admitted its mistake, andrepealed the 18th amendment. By 1943 the homicide rate haddrastically shrunk to 5 per 100,000 and stayed near that leveluntil 1964 when the United States made the same mistake all overagain (see graphic).[2] In December of 1964, having been ratified by 40 countries, theSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961 went into effectrestricting narcotic drug use to medical and scientific purposes.It also internationally banned narcotic drug trade outside ofgovernment monopolies.[8] History was about to repeatitself. From 1964 to 1970 in the United States, the number ofstate prisoners incarcerated for drug offenses more than doubledfrom 3,079 to 6,596 (it was 90,000 in 1989)[9], and thenew concentration on enforcing victimless crimes caused thehomicide rate to skyrocket. Between 1964 and 1970 the homiciderate doubled from 5 per 100,000 to 10 per 100,000, where it hasremained, with minor fluctuations, until today.[2] LyndonJohnson had declared war on drugs, to be followed by RichardNixon declaring War on Drugs in 1969, Ronald Reagan declaring Waron Drugs in 1982, and George Bush declaring War on Drugs in 1989.[4] At the turn of the century, both heroin and aspirin werelegally available and sold for approximately the same amount.Today aspirin can be purchased at the corner drug store for 20cents per gram; heroin costs $50 per gram. [p. 33, 3] Theprice of heroin rose drastically after it was made illegal due tothe dangers involved in its sale. Dealers are willing to killeach other for profits obtained from such a lucrative market;junkies are willing to rob and kill for money to support theirhabit--money, if drugs were legal and cheap, that they couldeasily obtain by working at McDonald's. You and I, through highcrime rates caused by the War on Drugs and high tax rates used tosupport the War on Drugs, pay the price. During prohibition"liquor store" owners murdered each other to protecttheir turf just as drug dealers do today. Today, liquor storeowners are generally peaceful. Eliminating the enormous profitsinvolved in black-market businesses eliminates the motive forviolent crime, and therefore the violent crime. More law enforcement is commonly touted as the answer toAmerica's violent crime problem. Since 1970 the percentage of theAmerican population in prison has tripled with no noticeableeffect on the homicide rate.[2] More than 1.3 millioncitizens are now in jail.[p. 24, 3] The United States hasa larger percentage of its population in prison than any othernation[2], and still maintains the highest homicide ratein the industralized world. [1] We have even thrown away parts ofour constitution in the name of fighting crime. Asset forfeiturelaws allow law enforcement officers to seize the property ofAmerican citizens without even charging them with a crime, eventhough the 5th amendment to the constitution clearly states"No person shall be...deprived of life, liberty, orproperty, without due process of law..." Of course if youwant your property back you do have the right to post a bond andtry to prove yourself innocent, of a crime you have not even beencharged with, in a court of law. No attorney will be provided foryou if you cannot afford one. Over $2.4 billion worth of assetshave been seized since 1985, $664 million in 1991 alone--and in80% of the cases no charges were ever filed.[7] Disparities between the poor and the rich are often consideredcauses of our high crime rate, but the United States has not onlyone of the world's highest crime rates, but also one of theworld's largest middle classes. The religious right claimsAmerica's huge crime rate is caused by a break-down of familyvalues. This would require family values breaking down suddenlyin 1907, returning in 1933, and suddenly breaking down again in1964. Many liberals believe that America's large crime rate isdue to our lack of gun-control laws, but America's gun-controlpolicy has changed little throughout this century. There is noway gun control can explain the enormous fluctuations inAmerica's homicide rate. The United States government's substancecontrol policies are the only answer. The only way to lowerAmerica's violent crime rate, short of turning the United Statesinto a totalitarian state, is through ending the War on Drugs. The growing list of people who support decriminalization ofdrugs in America include: WilliamF. Buckley, George Carlin, George Crockett, Alan Dershowitz,Phil Donahue, Hugh Downs, MiltonFriedman, Ira Glasser, Michael Kinsley, David Letterman, JohnMcLaughlin, Andy Rooney, Carl Sagan, Kurt Schmoke, Tom Selleck,George Shultz, George Silver, Tom Snyder, Robert Sweet, ThomasSzasz, Garry Trudeau, and Donald Trump.[5] Organizations opposed to the War on Drugs include the Cato Institute, the Libertarian Party, the National Organization for the Reformof Marijuana Laws, and the ReasonFoundation. Kirby R.Cundiff has a doctoral degree in theoretical physicsfrom the University ofIllinois. He is currently the graduate advisor to the Universityof Illinois College Libertarians. "Crime, Law Enforcement, and Penology." Britannica Book of the Year 1993, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 117. "The Crime Scene." Forbes, 14 September 1992, 308. "Drugs in America." Rolling Stone, 5 May 1994. Hazlett, Thomas W., "Looking Backwards." Reason, May 1993, 70-82. "Honor Roll." Illinois Libertarian, April 1993, 10. Kobler, John., Ardent Spirits, New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1973, 196. Paff, John. "Fear". Libertarian Party News, December 1993, 17. "Pharmacology." Britannica Book of the Year 1966, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 605-607. World Almanac and Book of Facts 1993. New York: Pharos Books, 950. Published: Claustrophobia, August 1994 (phobia@bronze.coil.com) May be reprinted without permission, ifreprinted whole. (c) 1994 KirbyR. Cundiff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-80IA087-000625-B007-114http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/open_letter3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035716 text/html 7479HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:57:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:30 GMTContent-length: 7262 It's Time for a New Battle Plan in the Losing War on Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate From: Orange County Voices section of the Los Angeles Times September 22, 1996 It's Time for New Battle Plan in the Losing War on Drugs by Judge James P. Gray Our great country is reeling from self inflicted wounds resultingfrom our current failed "war on drugs." It is clear that we arenot in better shape today than we were five years ago regarding drug use and abuseand all of the crime and misery that accompany them. Unless we change ourapproach, we can have no legitimate expectation that we will be in bettershape next year than we are today. However, we will not pursue change until we realize, as acountry, that it is all right to talk about this issue-and that just because wetalk about the possibility of changing our drug policy does not mean that wecondone drug use or abuse. During the election season, let us as voters challenge allcandidates for all offices to take a fresh and objective look at our most basicdrug policy assumptions and recommend changes based upon the evidence.Let us tell all candidates in the clearest of terms that it is not onlyall right, but it is essential to discuss this critical issue openly fully. In the "war on drugs," victory is now literally beingviewed as slowing down the pace of defeat. Our present policy has made cocaine themost lucrative crop in the history of mankind. It has made marijuanathe most lucrative crop in California, easily outdistancing thesecond-leading crop, which is corn. Our present policy is directly funneling tens of billions ofdollars per year into organized crime, with all of its accompanying violenceand corruption both in our country and around the world. Our presentpolicy is directly causing our children in the inner cities and virtuallyeverywhere else to have drug dealers as their role models, instead of peoplewho have gotten their education and worked hard to be successful. Our present policy has at the same time both increased streetcrime and diverted scarce resources away from its prosecution. Our presentpolicy has directly spawned a cycle of hostility by the incarceration ofvastly disproportionate numbers of minority groups. And our presentpolicy is directly responsible for medical doctors being unable toprescribe appropriate medications for their patients who are either in painor are suffering from a number of devastating diseases. If there is any universal agreement in any area of drug policy,it is that the education of our young and our not so young people iscritically important in combating drug abuse, and that to an appreciabledegree for non-addicted users, it works. Social pressure is anothereffective deterrent to drug abuse, as is drug treatment, which has beendetermined by the Rand Corp. in a 1994 study to be seven times more effectivethan drug prosecution, even for addicted drug users. Similarly, education. social pressure and treatment have beeneffective in decreasing the use of other dangerous and sometimes addictivedrugs, such as alcohol and tobacco-even though these drugs are not illegalfor adults. It may be that the recently documented increased use of marijuanaby teenagers, and the frustration and resignation shown by theirparents, has resulted from less emphasis upon drug education. If so, maybe weshould at least consider investing our increasingly scarce resources wherethey will be most productive, instead of routinely continuing to spendenormous and never-ending tax dollars on the incarceration of nonviolent drugusers. All responsible citizens understand the necessity of holdingpeople accountable for their actions. However, our citizens are becoming increasingly aware that the criminal justice system is simply notable to make meaningful progress in this area because of the obsceneprofits to be made in selling illegal drugs. As a result, thousands of Americans such as Dr. Milton Friedman,former Secretary of State George Shultz, Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimoreand former San Jose Chief of Police Joseph McNamara have signed aresolution calling for the investigation of change by a neutral commission. This resolution actually was passed by Congress and signed intolaw by President Clinton as a part of the recent crime bill; however, ithas been widely ignored since that time. The signatories of the resolutioninclude large numbers of judges; civic, business and religious leaders;probation officers and prison officials, medical doctors, teachers andcounselors. There is wide support for the investigation of change-our presentpolicy simply will not stand scrutiny. We are the ones who elect our governmental officers, so theresponsibility for their silence and inaction is ours to bear. However, this canbe changed. Let all candidates know that we voters understand thatthe honest exchange of information is the only way we will begin to reducethe continuing harm wrought by these dangerous drugs in our country.Tell them we demand that the law be followed and the neutral commission beappointed. If we the voters demand that these important issues be discussed,our leaders will follow. James P. Gray is a judge of the Superior Court in Santa Ana, Ca. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-81IA087-000625-B007-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/open_letter.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035731 text/html 8164HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:57:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:38 GMTContent-length: 7947 Open Letter to the Drug Czar by Judge James P. Gray Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate An open letter to the nation's drug czar General Barry McCaffrey Director, Office of Drug Policy The White House Dear Gen. McCaffrey: Our great country is reeling from wounds which we have beeninflicting upon ourselves because of our current failed drug policy. It is clearthat we are not in better shape today than we were five years agoregarding drug use and abuse and all of the crime and misery which accompanythem, and, unless we change our approach, we can have no legitimateexpectation that we will be in better shape next year than we are today. However,we will not pursue change until we realize, as a country, that it is allright to talk about this issue - and that just because we talk about thepossibility of changing our drug policy does not mean that we condone druguse or abuse. Change for the better starts with a leader who has a provenrecord of honesty, dedication, experience, and results - one who will beable to discuss realities without effectively being labeled as"soft" on crime or criminals. Our country desperately needs a person in authoritywho will not be afraid to take a fresh and objective look at our mostbasic assumptions and recommend changes based upon the evidence. Ourcountry needs you. You are known to be an intelligent, non-political, dedicatedpublic servant who is in that position of authority and respect. If you would speak about our country's futile efforts toeradicate the growing of these dangerous drugs in, and the shipping of themfrom, various foreign countries, people in and out of our government willlisten. If you would quote the Rand Corporation study of June, 1994,which concluded that drug treatment is seven times more effective thandrug prosecution even for heavy drug users and 11 times more effectivethan interdiction at our country's borders, people will begin torealize why we are going broke trying to incarcerate our way out of thispervasive and multi-faceted problem. If you would acknowledge that no one in law enforcement will eventell us with a straight face that we seize more than 10 percent of theillegal drugs in our society and that the more candid estimate is that weseize only about five percent, our people will begin to understand thateach seizure of a ton of cocaine is not a victory, but is insteadmerely a symptom of the depth of the problem. Our citizens and taxpayers will then realize that for every tonof cocaine we seize, we easily fail to seize between nine and 19 tons. In the War on Drugs, victory is now literally being viewed asslowing down the pace of defeat. Our present policy has made cocaine the most lucrative crop inthe history ,of mankind. It has made marijuana the most lucrative crop in myhome state of California, easily outdistancing the second leadingcrop, which is corn. Our present policy is directly responsible for the material and demonstrable reduction of our cherished liberties under the Billof Rights. Our present policy is directly funneling tens of billions ofdollars per year into organized crime, with all of its accompanying violenceand corruption, both in our country and around the world. Our present policy is directly causing our children in the innercities and virtually everywhere else to have drug dealers as their rolemodels, instead of people like you who have gotten their education andwho have worked hard to be successful. Our present policy has directly spawned a cycle of hostility bythe incarceration of vastly disproportionate numbers of our minoritygroups. And our present policy is directly responsible for medicaldoctors being unable to prescribe appropriate medications for their patientswho are either in pain or are suffering from a number of devastatingdiseases. We all understand the necessity of holding people accountable fortheir actions. However, our citizens recognize that what we are doingin the critical area of drug policy is not working. They are frustratedbecause their ostensible leaders are afraid to discuss the subjectopenly. As a result, thousands of Americans such as Dr. Milton Friedman,former Secretary of State George Shultz, Mayor Kurt Schmoke ofBaltimore, and former San Jose Chief of Police Joseph McNamara have signed aresolution calling for the investigation of change by a neutral commission. This resolution actually was passed by Congress and signed intolaw by President Clinton as a part of the recent crime bill; however, ithas been widely ignored since that time. The signatories include aformidable list of judges; civic, business, and religious leaders; probationofficers and prison officials; medical doctors; teachers; and counselors.There is wide support for the investigation of change - our present policysimply will not stand scrutiny. However, our country needs a credible personin government like you to step forward and legitimize thediscussion. We do not ask you to support any particular method or approachfor addressing the drug problem. We simply ask you to agree thatthere are fundamental problems with our current policy and that both ourgovernment and our citizens need better to understand the history and socialforces which drive this problem, and our options for the future. We need to investigate the possibility of change. Education andthe honest exchange of information are the only ways we will begin to reducethe continuing harm wrought by these dangerous drugs in our country. Accordingly, we ask you publicly to join us in a non-partisan and non-political search for the truth. If you would do this, yousimply could not provide our country and all of its people with a greater ormore lasting service. Sincerely, Judge James P. Gray Judge Gray is a judge in the Superior Court of California inOrange County. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-82IA087-000625-B007-168http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/open_letter2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035742 text/html 7474HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:57:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:34 GMTContent-length: 7257 A View from the Front Lines of the Drug War by VolneyBrown Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate From: Opinion Section, Orange County Register September 10, 1996 A view from the front lines of the drug war by Volney V. Brown Jr. Mr. Brown, who lives in Dana Point, was a US Magistrate in LosAngeles from 1982 to 1995. In his open letter to the Register of Aug. 12, Superior CourtJudge James Gray observed that drug law enforcement has been unable to stopthe flow of street drugs. He called for us to reason together to have dialogue on thesubject of illicit drug use - before again mindless ly escalating the war ondrugs, which diverts tax money from other programs, arguably promotesgeneral crime, and has a tendency to impair the civil liberties of everyAmerican. The published response of Register readers was quite negative.Despite the evidence, they "feel" that the drug war can still bewon by more arrests and ever-longer sentences. Well, I have fought the drug wars, and I am coming out ofretirement to say that Judge Gray is right. What is wrong with drug law enforcementis that it has never worked, and it never will. In his first term, President Richard Nixon declared war onillicit drugs, particularly heroin, and sharply increased drug law enforcement. He directed Attorney General Richard Kleindeinst to create a newentity, patterned on the Organized Crime Strike Forces, named Office forDrug Abuse Law Enforcement. The president designated Myles Ambrose, theheavy-hitter then in charge of the Bureau of Customs, as ODALE director, withthe twin titles of special assistant attorney general and specialassistant to the president. Ambrose thus became the nation's first "drugczar." ODALE greatly supplemented the efforts of existing federal,state, and local drug law enforcement agencies so that illicit drug salescould be ended once and for all. Because of my earlier experience as a federal prosecutor, I wasrecruited out of private law practice is ODALE regional director forCalifornia, Arizona, and Nevada. I established offices at San Francisco, LosAngeles, San Diego, and Phoenix (each headed by a tough drug prosecutor),with a combined staff of some 150 attorneys, drug agents, and supportpersonnel. We decided to test the effectiveness of simultaneously arrestingevery drug seller on the streets of an isolated city, and picked Phoenix forthe exercise. Using more "buy money" than Arizona had ever seenbefore, we bought into each street dealer we could find, two or three times each. Itturned out that Phoenix had 76 drug pushers. In the middle of a week night,with the help of state and local police, we arrested all 76 at the sametime. For a week it was impossible to buy drugs on the streets ofPhoenix. The single local drug treatment program was swamped. Addicts whocould not get treatment left town to score elsewhere. But on the eighth day, new street pushers began to appear in thecity, and before a month had elapsed, it was business-as-usual. We hadspent tens of thousands of federal tax dollars, and sent scores of pushers toprison, but there was no lasting effect on the availability or price ofillicit drugs. So, in San Diego, we tried another trick. We in ODALE learnedthat virtually all of the heroin there was being sold by a known gang.State and local police had been unable to bust the gang because theonly really effective investigative tool - a court-ordered wire tap - wasprohibited by California law. Because our federal program was not inhibited by state law, ourin-house lawyers applied for and obtained a federal wire tap order. Afterthousands of employee hours at a command center manned around the clock, wearrested all 39 members of the drug gang. For a week it was impossible to buy heroin on the streets of SanDiego. But on the eighth day new street pushers began to appear in thecity, and before a month had elapsed it was business-as-usual. We had spent hundreds of thousands of federal tax dollars, and wesent every one of the 39 pushers to federal prison, but there was nolasting effect on the availability of heroin or its price. In one respectwe were worse off for our success. Before, we knew who was selling, butafterwards we had no idea. The ODALE program did not survive the resignation of itspresidential creator and patron. But in the 18 months permitted us, my 150people identified, investigated, indicted, prosecuted, convicted, andsent off to the penitentiary more than 1,100 drug dealers. We led all otherODALE regions. We were, as we remain, proud of ourselves. But in the end, in our territory it was not more difficult ormore expensive to obtain illegal drugs than it was in the beginning.We had failed to solve, or even affect, the "drug problem"with law enforcement. If we had been given 10 or 20 times the resources, we still wouldhave failed. I have learned from experience that there is no practical levelof law enforcement that will prevent people from using the narcotics anddangerous drugs they wish to use. Judge Gray is right. We need to consider alternatives to themindless repetition of useless and expensive drug law enforcement efforts. I know because I have been there. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-83IA087-000625-B007-206http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/grspch.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035803 text/html 18665HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:57:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:50 GMTContent-length: 18447 Darkening Shades of the Drug War -- Brown Vs. Gray Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy DARKENING SHADES OF THE DRUG WAR: BROWN VS. GRAY Address of The Honorable James P. Gray Orange County Superior Court Judge, State of California, atthe Crime, Drugs, Health & Prohibition II Conference Harvard Law School, May 21, 1994 I don't always get such a nice introduction. Actually, itreminds me of one I received a little while ago -- which was alot shorter -- and basically was along the lines of: "I knowyou all want to hear the latest dope from the courthouse, sohere's Judge Gray". [Laughter.] But I am here speaking from my own personal standpoint withmuch appreciation of what has happened so far today as well as, Iconfess, a great deal of sorrow and some invigoration. I amappreciative of the Clinton Administration allowing Dr. Brown tocome and share some thoughts with us. And I think that is veryimportant and it's certainly clearly important to get andmaintain a dialogue from all facets of this very multifaceted,difficult and complex problem. I am truly filled with sorrow, however, that we were not ableto engage in a dialogue with Dr. Brown. [applause.] He left -- hecame here and spoke with us and he listed his thoughts -- which Iwould like to address in a moment -- and then regretfully was notable to stay and respond to, I think, some very legitimatequestions. Because he listed eight myths, as he called them, andI believe that all eight are...easily rebutted. [Applause.] Andso I am invigorated feeling the way I do -- a person who is in anelected position in Orange County -- again a fairly conservativearea -- I'm up for election in 1996 and I'm ready for it. But Ihave heard lots of arguments. I have heard people say we shouldhave debates and actually now, in my county, I'm having a greatdeal of difficulty finding anyone to come and take thealternative position. And in the last two years, I have not --myself -- heard the alternative position expressed as eloquentlyas I heard it today. And so I am invigorated to believe thatwe're going to be successful, because that's the best they can doand there simply is a response to everything they bring up.[Applause.] What is it? What is it that are these eight myths? Well, thefirst is, as you recall: Nothing is getting better -- and he saysthat is a myth. The problem with that is it's just the focus onthe wrong area. He is right if he's talking about education,because we are making progress with regard to education. So it isa myth that nothing is getting better. The problem is theeducation is not married to [our] present system...which is, ineffect, prisons. Whichever option we choose, everyone agrees wewill continue to utilize education as a part of it. He did not, however, ask the real question and that is: Howmany people here feel that we, in our beloved country, are inbetter shape today, with regard to this critical issue of druguse and abuse and all of the crime and misery that goes with it,than we were five years ago? How many people feel that way? Inever get anybody raising their hands. We all know that we arenot in better shape today. And if that's true -- and I fullybelieve that you will agree with me, that it's true -- we have nolegitimate expectation of being in better shape next year than weare in today, unless we change our approach. So the correctquestion is: Are we in better shape today than we were five yearsago? And had he asked that question, I think that we could havebeen on our way to a legitimate discussion. Number two. He said [it was a myth] that current drug policyis making things worse...He then said we have to address violenceand HIV areas, but he went on to talk about, very generally,families, less productivity, the community issues and the rest ofthat. Let's address those and talk about, for example, who therole models in today's society -- in our inner cities andprobably everywhere else. And this can be addressed because therole models -- as I'm sure we all know -- are not people who workall day, go to school at night in order to attempt to better himor herself. The role models for our inner city youth, andprobably everywhere else, are who? Are sellers of drugs. And thatis something that is truly challenging and damaging our veryfabric: our families, our employment, communities. And if we are telling our people -- which we are, today -- youprobably can do nothing in your life that will bring you as muchmoney as you can get, by selling drugs, that is corruptive. It issimply undercutting our work ethic. It is undercutting ourcommunities. These are the questions that we need to ask and notjust the mundane, quickly once-over: "Let's talk about ourfamilies and crack babies". Because every crack baby that isborn in the country today -- and there are lots of them -- areborn under our present system. And we need to look at that aswell. In fact, let's really look at prisons -- which is the issuein our society today. And what are we doing? The San FranciscoChronicle published an article on May 4, saying that we have 286percent greater numbers of women in the California state prisonsystem today than we did ten years ago. I am in the juvenilecourt now, in Orange County. I deal, on a daily basis, withchildren that are abused and neglected. About a quarter to 30percent of these babies are there because their mothers are inprison. Every time we arrest a woman, 80 percent of those areeither pregnant or have small children. So we are taking thechildren to the state. We are paying the money for that and weare disrupting the family. These are issues that we must address,and I don't hear people talking about that. It's time that wefocus attention upon it. Number three. The myth, supposedly, is that enforcement addsto the problem. Does enforcement add to the problem? Without adoubt. We are slitting our wrists. [Dr. Brown] says thatenforcement is reducing the supply and drives up the price -- andhe's absolutely right, and that is part of the problem. Theproblem here is not the drugs: It is the money. The problem isthe gangsters that are caused by the fact that these drugs bringin such a great amount of money. So it's time to address that.And instead of issuing a decree, supposedly to repeal the law ofsupply and demand, have we focused upon the fact that the veryworst thing that could happen in the United States of America isto have us all of a sudden successful in closing off our borders? The very worst thing that could happen to our country would beto close off our borders and keep all of this opium out of ourcountry. Why? The law of supply and demand. The demand willremain the same and if the demand is there it will be met. Howwill it be met? Anybody that has a high school chemistryeducation can, in his garage or bathroom, manufacturer illicitchemical drugs, Ice and all of these other synthetic drugs thatgo along with it. And then we have no quality control whatsoeverand will really be in trouble. Has anybody ever seen a person who took one dose of a badbatch of synthetic drugs? It does enormous damage. The lucky onesdie. These are the problems that we will visit upon ourselves.Every time we're successful in seizing another ton of cocaine, weraise the price and directly result in more burglaries, morepurse snatchings, more damage to our society. And so, yes, in myview, the problem is not the police. The problem is the system.The system is not working, it's time to recognize it and look atour options. Number four was: There was not massive support for change. Itdepends how you ask the question. He says that the Gallup Pollsays -- and I'll take it at face value -- 80 percent of thepeople are not in favor of the legalization of drugs. There is agroup in Orange County, they're called the Drug Use is Life Abuse-- very overstated, by the way. There's a lot of caffeine on thistable here and that's being used -- I don't believe I am abusingmy life to drink iced tea. But this group is out there, passingout polls. And two years ago, they came out with a poll askingjust that: How many of you people feel that legalizing drugs is agood or not a good idea? 80 percent of the people said: No,legalizing drugs is not a good idea. We in Orange County,however, are discussing this issue. I'm speaking with Kiwanisclubs and all of the rest; and so are lots of other peoplediscussing the area. One year after [the first poll], 63 percentof the people said: No, legalization of drugs is not a good idea.We made a 17 percent gain in public opinion in one year. If wewere to pass that poll now, we'd be in the majority, with thesame type of gain. It's time that we address this and discuss it. And endemic inthat, critically and fundamentally important -- is that we getacross to our fellow citizens: It's OK to talk about this issue.Just because we discuss our options does not mean that we condonedrug usage. If we can get that message alone across, we will havebeen successful, because everything else will fall. If we canonly convince our people that just because we're discussing thisissue, just because we would even employ a different option, doesnot mean that we condone drug abuse -- we will be successful.That's all we need to do. Number five. Legalizing or decriminalizing drugs willeliminate violence -- and he says this is a myth. Of course it'sa myth. It is a straw man. We will never be able to get rid ofviolence in our society. We have always had it, we always will.We will always have crime, certainly. We will always have drugabuse, certainly. But [Prohibition] contributes mightily toviolence in our society. Are you aware, as Ethan Nadelmann willtell us: After the repeal of alcohol prohibition, what happenedto violent crime in our society? It went down 65 percent in thenext year and continued to go down for every year thereafteruntil the beginning of the Second World War. I am convinced thesame thing will happen in our country, once we come to our sensesand employ a different system. [Applause.] Then, another straw man myth. Legalizing is free of costs. Ofcourse not. Any system that we employ will have its problems. Anysystem that I can come up with -- you, we as a country can comeup with -- will have some problems. Holland has realized that,and other harm reduction countries. They realize these drugs areharmful. I certainly believe that heroin, cocaine and marijuanaare dangerous drugs. I believe that very strongly. I don't takethem and I never will, regardless of what we do. But let's try torecognize that and reduce, minimize the harm that willnecessarily flow from this. But let's not stand quiet whensomeone presents a straw man saying: "Aw, you're still goingto have problems under your system". Because of course weare -- let's try to minimize those problems instead of simplysetting up straw men. Number seven? There are excellent foreign models -- and hecalled that a myth. Well, he mentions in Holland a problem withforeigners -- and he's right. At the last Drug Policy Foundationconference, a year ago last November, there were two men from the[Dutch] Ministry of Health who I cornered -- because I wanted toeducate myself about the system that Holland is using -- and Isaid, after they explained to me their system -- which I wasenormously impressed with -- I asked them: "What are the twobiggest problems you have in Holland today?" They looked atme and said: "Number one is we are a small country, [and]about a third of the people that use drugs in Holland areforeigners. They come here to have a good time and we don't knowwhat to do about it". [H]owever, to equate that with ourcountry -- so much larger -- is simply silly. We will not havethat problem if we were to go to a system like Holland's. By theway, the second largest problem they had really embarrassed medeeply. They'll embarrass you too. He looked me in the eye andsaid: "The second biggest problem we have is the governmentof the United States of America -- they will not leave usalone!" What difference does it make to us how Hollandaddresses this enormous problem domestically in their owninternal affairs? We are heavy handed and we ought to behaveourselves. [Applause.] To be honest with you, I don't know whatis happening in Italy today. And if anyone does, maybe we can allhelp each other. I do know that Italy changes -- it depends whattime it is as to which system they have. But it's difficult toget statistics. But I think that that is something that we shouldeducate ourselves about and try to help each other... The eighth personal myth is that this is just a personalmatter. Do I need to respond? Yes, it is a personal matter and ifthe government is going to eliminate everything that is wrong andharmful in our society, as we heard this morning, they willeliminate power tools, they certainly should eliminate donuts --a very, very harmful substance -- and we can continue going on.Obviously, mother's milk is a gateway drug and there we go.[Laughter.] So what we need to ask is: Are prisons a myth? We in the Stateof California have indeed added 13 new state prisons to our stateprison system in the last ten years, reaching now to the numberof 28. We have 13 more on the drawing boards, ten of [will have]their doors open by the turn of the century. Today one out ofevery six people that work today for the state of California,work for the Department of Corrections. It is a growing industry.An accountant came up to me a little while ago and said:"You know, if we continue going forward in the future -- aswe have in the last twenty years in the state of California -- bythe year 2020, literally everybody in the state of Californiawill literally be in prison or running one." And he isabsolutely right. Finally, as we say, it is time to investigate the possibilityof change. Mike mentioned the Hoover Resolution, which wasfounded back in February of last year by such flaming radicals asMilton Friedman, George Schultz, Joe McNamara -- the formerpolice chief of San Jose -- numbers of medical doctors, anOakland high school principal and others. The resolution sayswhat I believe is irrefutable. Namely, what we're doing todayunder the criminal justice system is not working. We havesubstantial medical and social problems presented by the drugabuse in our society. It is time to address them with medical andsocial solutions. We beseech our president and congress to have,to empower one final neutral commission to investigate this fromall aspects. Law enforcement, of course. From a religiousstandpoint, from a community standpoint, social, medical oranywhere else. We ask that you also sign the resolution, notnecessarily today. If you want copies, this beautiful lady herein the green has some copies. Take them home with you, circulatethem. If you don't have one, you can look in the present DrugPolicy Foundation newsletter. It simply recommends that weinvestigate the possibility of change. If what we're doing is notworking, it's time to look into change. There is a slogan that Ibelieve is instructive, and that slogan is not: "Just sayno" -- although I really buy into that, because"no" should be spelled K-N-O-W. [Laughter/applause.] What I would do instead is utilize the following slogan: Ifyou want to keep getting what you're getting, keep doing whatyou're doing. And what we're doing now isn't working and we'regetting a whole lot of grief, and it's time to look into thepossibility of change. If people are not interested ininvestigating our options -- be it legalization,decriminalization, medicalization, regulated distribution -- OK,fine and well. Then let's at least investigate what we are doingnow, which is prohibition. Let's at least investigateprohibition. And if people do not even agree to investigate whatwe're doing now, I'm afraid I must ask: Why not? What do you haveto be afraid of? It's time to look into this, to better ourselvesand our beloved country. We can't do any worse. Thank you verymuch. [Applause.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-84IA087-000625-B007-232http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/jgray1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035815 text/html 19601HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:58:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:44 GMTContent-length: 19383 Keep Doin' What We're Doin'? No, We Must Reassess Our DrugPolicy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate KEEP DOIN' WHAT WERE DOIN'? No, We Must Reassess Our Drug Policy By Judge James P. Gray James P. Gray is a former federal prosecutor in Los Angelesand criminal defense attorney in the United States Navy, and isnow a trial judge In the Orange County Superior Court. On April 8,1992, 1 did something unusual for a trial judge: Iheld a news conference in the plaza behind the Santa AnaCourthouse. At that time, I publicly set forth my conclusionsthat what we are doing through the Criminal Justice System withregard to our attempts to combat drug use and abuse in oursociety, and all of the crime and misery that accompany them, isnot working. Since that time, I have discussed this subject with manydifferent groups of people, and when I do, I always ask for ashow of hands as to how many people feel that our country Is In abetter condition today with regard to this critical problem thenwe were five years ago. Almost never do any people raise theirhands. Then I remind them that if this is true, and if wecontinue to pursue the same approach. no one can reasonablyexpect that we will be in a better condition next year than weare in today. Fortunately, however, we have options. So now we must simplyinvestigate our options and come up with a more workableand effective approach. Before I begin my general discussion of this matter, however,I would like to address nine threshold points so that we canbetter understand each other 1. All of us are on the same side on this issue, we all aretrying to reduce drug use and abuse, and all of the crime andmisery that accompany them. We may simply disagree upon the bestoption to accomplish that goal. 2. We must have more responsibility and accountability in oursociety, not less; and the courts, the police and-the prisonsystem have an important part to play in bringing these back toour society. 3. Without a doubt, heroin and cocaine are dangerous andsometimes addicting drugs. But so also are alcohol and tobaccodangerous and sometimes addicting drugs, and virtually everyoneagrees that we would only compound their haffn by making themillegal. 4. Just because people discuss various options about how bestto combat drug use and abuse, or even because they believe thatwe should employ a different option, does not mean that thesepeople condone drug use or abuse. 5. Education in this area is critically important and hasdefinitely had some positive results; however, it will continueto be used effectively no matter which option we employ, 6. Law Enforcement has been doing a magnificent job inattempting to enforce our current approach. However, the problemis with the approach - not the police, the courts and the rest ofthe Criminal Justice System. 7. We have never had a drug-free society, and we never will.Recognizing this fact, we should try to employ an approach whichwill reduce the overall harm that flows from drug use and abuse. 8. No matter which option we employ, there will always be animportant role to be played in it by the Criminal Justice System. 9. This is a complex and multifaceted problem area, and doesnot beneficially lend itself to little sound bites and slogans.However, If we adopt a slogan, we should use something like:"if you want to keep gettin'what you're gettin', keep doin'what you're doin'. Well, what have we been doin' in our country with regard todrug use and abuse? For the past decades, we have been attemptingto combat this critical problem with a program of massiveincarceration of our people. However, it is becoming increasinglyclear to everyone that this program has been and is a massivefailure. And we have gone broke in the process. We have built 12new state prisons in the State of California in the past 10years, at the cost of hundreds of millions of dollars. Yet evenso, today our jails and prisons are well beyond beingovercrowded. Now, an additional 12 new state prisons are on thedrawing board, with many of them scheduled to be completed by theturn of the century. This has already been shown not to work.Some people say that we can just as effectively address crime bybuilding new prisons as we can effectively address a fataldisease by building new graveyards. In so many ways they areright. Today, almost one in every five people who work for the Stateof California works for the Department of Corrections. We arecutting back upon our education, closing many of our libraries,and denying medical treatment for drug addiction to large numbersof our people who desire and need it. At the same time we areusing our scarce resources to incarcerate people who use and selldrugs at the cost of about $25,000 per year per person. Oneaccountant recently calculated that if we continue on the samecourse in the future as we have for the last twenty years, by theyear 2020, literally everyone in the State of California willeither be in prison, or running one. In addition, by pursuing this approach, we have made cocainethe most lucrative product in the history of the world. We havealso made marijuana the most lucrative crop in the State ofCalifornia, easily outdistancing the number two crop, which iscorn. Make no mistake, any people who traffic In human misery byselling these drugs for their own profit should be sent toprison. However, would it not be better to have a system that didnot so strongly encourage this activfty? On February 26, 1993, 1 was one of a group of nineteenconcerned cftlzens that met at the Hoover Institution on thecampus of Stanford University and unanimously passed a resolutionwhich recommends that our country investigate the possibility ofchange In the way we choose to combat our drug problems. TheResolution, which recommends that these medical and socialproblems be treated with medical and social solutions, is printedseparately herein. It further recommends that one final blueribbon commission be immediately empowered by the President andCongress to conduct this investigation as publicly and fully aspossible, and then to recommend revisions of the drug laws ofthese United States in order to reduce the harm being caused byout current policies. The original signers of the Resolution include Dr. MiltonFriedman, the Nobel laureate professor of economics; Dr. JosephK. McNamara, author and former Chief of Police of San Jose;George Shultz, former Secretary of State; Kurt L. Schmoke, Mayorof the City of Baltimore; Reverends Leonard B. Jackson and J. D.Moore of the First A.M.E. Church of South Central Los Angeles; aformer high school principal from the Oakland area, and severalmedical doctors. Since that meeting, the Resolution has been signed by numbersof judges and justices in California as well as other state andfederal judges around the country; the Mayors of San Francisco,Oakland, Upland and San Jose; the Chiefs of Police of SanFrancisco, Oakland and San Jose; State Senators Marion Bergusonand Robert Presley; Orange County Supervisors Harriet Wieder andThomas Riley; the Sheriff of San Francisco; the Board ofSupervisors of Mendocino County; the Central Conference ofAmerican Rabbis; Stanley Marcus, co-founder of Neiman-MarcusStores; the Board of Directors of the California Academy ofFamily Physicians; Abigail Van Buren ("Dear AW; all 23chaplains at RlkeFs Island Prison in Now York City; and thousandsof other members of the legal, medical, law enforcement,entertainment, business and education communities and concernedcitizens and taxpayers. The credibility of this neutral Commission is a matter ofconsiderable importance. Its members should includerepresentatives from law enforcement, medical and drug treatmentprofessionals, former addicts, members of the clergy, universityscholars, etc. Hopefully the Commission would be chaired bysomeone like General Colin Powell, former Surgeon General C.Everett Koop, or someone of similar stature. This is obviously a large area of inquiry, and many of theissues are interrelated. However, the Commission should addresshistorically how our country chose to employ our presentapproach. Professors Charles H. Whitebread and Richard J. Bonniepublished an extensive Inquiry into the legal history of Americanmarijuana prohibition in the October 1970 Issue of the VirginiaLaw Review. As a judge, I am embarrassed to read of citations tothe Congressional Record that show that issues of public healthand public safety were not even considered by Congress in makingthis substance illegal. Instead, the motivation appears to havebeen racism and fear of economic competition. The Commissionshould consider and publish these facts. The Commission should also investigate what we have done inour country that has been successful and not successful - andwhat other countries around the world have done as well. Itshould inquire into what has caused the upsurge in drug usage,crime, and court and prison overcrowding in our country that hasnot been present to such a degree in other countries. It shouldInvestigate the fact that between 1980 and 1993, the number ofwomen imprisoned in California increased 450%, from 1316 to 7232,with a large majority being non-violent drug offenders, and 80%of whom have children under the age of six years old. Then itshould consider the effect this incarceration has had upon theupbringing of these children. There are so many other areas in which our present approachhas impacted upon all of our people which we have not focusedupon. By following our present policies, we have funneled about70 billion dollars per year of untaxed revenue Into organizedcrime. We have undermined the work ethic in our society by makingthe trafficking of these drugs the most lucrative activity inwhich most of our people can engage. This has directly resultedin our youths, both in our inner cities and everywhere else,having drug sellers as their role models instead of people whowork hard and pursue an education. Our approach has also directlyresulted in the continual deterioration of the relationshipbetween the police and the communities they are attempting toserve. The 'War on Drugs' in our country in many ways has become awar upon our own people, especially our minorities, who have beenincarcerated in vastly disproportionate numbers. Our presentapproach has directly resulted in the exportation of mom moneyfrom our shores than any other single cause, except for oil.Indeed, as a result of this drug money, we have actually exportednarco-terrorism to the rest of the world. Our approach has alsoresulted in a crime being committed upon our people by deprivingclean needles to those who are drug addicted - thus exacerbatingthe AIDS epidemic. And our approach has materially anddemonstrably resulted In the erosion of our civil liberties setforth in the Bill of Rights. By our history over the last several decades, we have provedthat there is a sheer impossibility of preventing consentingadults in a free society from selling small amounts of drugs forlarge amounts of money. The Criminal Justice System simply cannotprevail against this reality. Even though these street drugs aretoday as illegal as we can make them under our statutes and ourConstitution, they are fully available in any quantity, governedonly by price. It truly Is time for us to investigate thepossibility of changing away from this failed approach. Some people raise a legitimate concern that if we were to goto a different system then large numbers of additional people wouldbecome addicted to them drugs. This very Issue has beenresearched before by numerous neutral Investigative groups, suchas New York Mayor La Guardia Committee in 1944; President Nixon'sNational Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse in 1973;California Attorney General Van de Kamp's Research Advisory Panelin 1989; as well as an in-depth book entitled Licit andIllicit Drugs which was published by the editors of ConsumerReports Magazine in 1972. None of these neutral bodies felt thatthere would be a material increase In usage, and they furtherwent on to say that even if there might be, we still should goaway from the Criminal Justice System approach because of theenormous benefits that our society would receive. In addition, on June 13, 1994. the RAND Corporation released astudy about the most effective way to reduce cocaine use in thenation. According to this highly-regarded think tank, drugtreatment programs are seven times more cost effective inreducing cocaine use than law enforcement efforts. It also statedthat drug treatment is 11 times more effective than attempting tointerdict the drug at our borders, and 23 times more effectivethan attempting to control the drug supply overseas. The evidenceis all around us. The only real question remaining is, is anybodyreading it? So where do we go from here? Today the political reality stillis that our "leaders" do not believe there are enoughvotes for the investigation of possible change. However, thispolitical reality is changing. Several years ago, the SanFrancisco Chronicle aptly editorialized that with regard to ournation's drug problem, "the cure is worse than thedisease". On April 26, 1993, U.S. News and World Reportpublished an editorial by Its editor-in-chief, entitled"Fighting the Right Drug War. It concludes with thefollowing statement: "If President Clinton lacks the political courage tochange the old failed program and needs protective cover, let himat least appoint an independent commission charged withinvestigating prevention and treatment and instituting a sweepingnew program. Dr. Kildare, rather than Eliot Ness, is the rolemodel for banishing our deepest sickness." On May 11, 1993, the Los Angeles Times editorialized that"Perhaps the political climate is becoming more receptive toa now approach. Certainly the new Administration in Washingtonshould seize the moment for a fresh and comprehensive look atthe drug laws." Similarly, in the July/August 1993 issue of AmericanJails. which is the magazine of the American JailAssociation, San Francisco Sheriff Michael Hennessey wrote afeature article which decries the fact that our nation has, forno beneficial purpose, become "hopelessly addicted" tothe ever-increasing incarceration of drug offenders. He madecomparisons to alcohol prohibition and to the war in Vietnam, andthen said that "We have once again committed ourselves to acostly, unwinnable war which is tearing the fabric of society toshreds." Even Dear Abby has stated publicly in her column on May 3,1994 that "Just as bootleggers were forced out of businessIn 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, making the sale of liquorlegal (thus eliminating racketeering), the legalization of drugswould put drug dealers out of business. It also would guaranteegovernment approved quality, and the tax on drugs would providean ongoing source of revenue for drug-education programs. Anadded plus, There would be far less crowding in our prisons dueto drug-related crimes. It's something to consider." Attomey General Janet Reno was quoted awhile ago asacknowledging that the Government would have to seize 70% of theillegal drugs in this country before a program of druginterdiction would be successful. However, no one seriouslysuggests that we actually interdict more than 10% of these drugs,and a more realistic assessment tells us that the number iscloser to about 5%. Accordingly, for every ton on cocaine weseize, we easily fail to seize somewhere between 9 and 19 othertons - and the seizure rate for drug monies is even lower. As aresult. all of our efforts merely represent an acceptable"cost of doing business for organized crime. Food marketsaccept higher rates of spoilage for fruits and vegetables. What we are doing is not working. As judges, we are at thehelm of a sinking ship, and out citizens are really still notaware of the hopelessness of the situation. Our group requestsour leaders and citizens who are aware of the magnitude of theproblem to sign the Resolution and go on record as recommendingthe investigation of viable altematives to the failed "Waron Drugs". There must be and is a better way. This factis so clear, that I make two promises without hesitation. Thefirst is that our country will adopt a materially differentapproach in order to combat this critical problem, because whatwe are doing now is so clearly not working. It is only a questionof when this important change will be made. The second promise isthat five years after we have adopted this different approach, wewill all look back with shock and dismay that we couldhave stayed with our present failed system for so long. It istime we get started. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B33-85IA087-000625-B007-262http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/commen.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035834 text/html 7786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:58:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:12 GMTContent-length: 7569 California Courts Commentary: Drugs and the Law Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicy California Courts Commentary: Drugs and the Law by James P. Gray Orange County Superior Court November, 1993 On April 8, 1992, I did something unusual for a trial judge: Iheld a news conference in the plaza behind the Santa AnaCourthouse. At that time, I publicly set forth my conclusionsthat what we are doing through the Criminal Justice System tocombat drug use and abuse in our society, and all of the crimeand misery that accompany them, is not working. Fortunately,however, we have options. On February 26, 1993, I was one of a group of nineteenconcerned citizens that met at the Hoover Institution on thecampus of Stanford University and unanimously passed a resolutionwhich recommends that our country investigate the possibility ofchange in the way we handle our drug problems. The Resolution,which recommends that these medical and social problems betreated with medical and social solutions, is printed separatelyherein. It further recommends that one final blue ribboncommission be immediately empowered by the President to conductthis investigation as publicly and fully as possible, and thenrecommend revisions of the drug laws of these United States inorder to reduce the harm being caused by our current policies. The original signers of the Resolution include Dr. MiltonFriedman, the Nobel laureate professor of economics; Dr. JosephD. McNamara, author and former Chief of Police of San Jose;George Shultz, former Secretary of State; Kurt L. Schmoke, Mayorof the City of Baltimore; Reverends Leonard B. Jackson and J. D.Moore of the First A.M.E. Church of South Central Los Angeles; ahigh school principal and several medical doctors. Since thatmeeting, the Resolution has been signed by numbers of judges andjustices in California as well as other state and federal judgesaround the country; the Mayors of San Francisco, Oakland and SanJose: Orange County Supervisor Harriet M. Wieder; the Sheriff ofSan Francisco; the Central Conference of American Rabbis; theBoard of Directors of the California Academy of FamilyPhysicians; all 23 chaplains at Riker's Island Prison in New YorkCity; and more than two thousand other members of the legal,medical, law enforcement, entertainment, business and educationcommunities and concerned citizens and taxpayers. By pursuing our present course, we have made cocaine the mostlucrative crop in the history of the world. We have funneledabout 70 billion dollars per year of untaxed revenue intoorganized crime. We have undermined the work ethic in our societyby making the trafficking or drugs the most lucrative activitythat most of our people can engage in. This has directly resultedin our youths, both in our inner cities and everywhere else,having drug sellers as their role models instead of people whowork hard and pursue an education. Our approach has directlyresulted in the continual deterioration of the relationshipbetween the police and the communities that they are attemptingto service. The 'war on drugs' in our country in many ways has become waron our own people, especially our minorities, who have beenincarcerated in vastly disproportionate numbers. Our approach hasdirectly resulted in the exportation of more money from ourshores than any other single cause, except for oil. Indeed, as aresult of this drug money, we have exported narco terrorism tothe rest of the world. Our approach has resulted in a crime beingcommitted upon our people by depriving clean needles to addicts -thus exacerbating the AIDS epidemic. Our approach hasdemonstrably resulted in the erosion of our civil liberties setforth in the Bill of Rights. As judges, virtually all of us have our own stories of howcorruption from drug monies has touched the Criminal JusticeSystem. Over the last several decades, we have proved the sheerimpossibility of preventing the sale of drugs for large amountsof money. The Criminal Justice System simply cannot prevailagainst this reality. Even though street drugs are as illegal as we can make themunder our statues and our Constitution, they are fully availablein any quantity, governed only by price. It truly is time for usto investigate changing this failed approach. Several years ago, the San Francisco Chronicle aptlyeditorialized that with regard to our nation's drug problem,"the cure is worse than the disease."' On April 26,1993, U.S. News and World Report published an editorial by itseditor-in-chief, entitled 'Fighting the Right Drug War.' Itconcludes with the following statement: "If President Clinton lacks the political courage tochange the old failed program and needs protective cover, let himat least appoint an independent commission charged withinvestigating prevention and treatment and instituting a sweepingnew program. Dr. Kildare, rather than Elliot Ness, is the rolemodel for banishing our deepest sickness." On May 11, 1993, the Los Angeles Times editorialized that"Perhaps the political climate is becoming more receptive toa new approach. Certainly the new Administration in Washingtonshould seize the moment for a fresh and comprehensive look at thedrug laws." What we are doing is not working. As judges, we are at thehelm of a sinking ship, and our citizens are not aware of thehopelessness of the situation. Our group requests thatCalifornia's judges, who are aware of the magnitude of theproblem, sign the Resolution and go on record as recommending theInvestigation of viable alternatives to the failed "War onDrugs." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statements on DrugPolicyWT01-B33-86IA031-000651-B022-233http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dpf89.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123638 text/html 115246HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:36:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:39 GMTContent-length: 115027 The Case for Drug Legalization and Decontrol in the UnitedStates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate THE CASE FOR DRUG LEGALIZATION AND DECONTROLIN THE UNITED STATES by Thomas L. Wayburn, Ph.D. Introduction Prohibition is Immoral It is easy to prove that the laws against drugsare unconstitutional. The Declaration of Independence states thatthe rights to "Life, Liberty, and the pursuit ofHappiness" are "unalienable" rights, i.e., rightsthat are incapable of being sold or transferred. The preamble tothe Constitution states that one of the purposes of theConstitution is to "secure the blessings of liberty toourselves and our posterity". The Ninth Amendment states,"The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shallnot be construed to deny or disparage others retained by thepeople." Clearly, the rights to liberty and to the pursuitof happiness, specifically mentioned in the Declaration ofIndependence, are retained by the people. Many people take drugsto pursue happiness. Thus, any law that denies them the libertyto take drugs is unconstitutional. Q.E.D. Some people pursue and attain happiness in noother way than by taking drugs; they work all day so that theycan pay for and enjoy drugs after work and on weekends. TheConstitution, which views people not as statistical averages butas individuals, should protect each drug user until such time ashe or she actually harms another person. Of course, as we allknow, the Supreme Court does not base its decisions on logic,therefore it would be very difficult to have the laws againstdrugs declared unconstitutional even though an irrefutable casecan be made in ten seconds. It might be argued that the need to"promote the general welfare" overrides the need to"secure the blessings of liberty", but that argument isspecious. The prohibition of alcohol caused social chaos; and,although reliable statistics are difficult to obtain because ofthe illegality, it is probably safe to say that prohibitionresulted in more people drinking than ever before, including manychildren and many who were poisoned by bad booze. Also,prohibition consolidated the position of organized crime inAmerica. The prohibition of drugs is having a similar, and worse,effect. This is only natural. Not much good can result fromlegislation that is inherently immoral. (As Brent [1] points out,one possible "good" result of prohibition is that,after some members of the Afro-American race or the Hispanicraces consolidate their positions as drug bosses, they can allythemselves with the establishment and become part of the rulingclass, start legitimate businesses, send their children to the"best" schools, etc., as did some members of otherundervalued races before them, e.g., the Kennedys.) Many Americans may be willing to repeal (drug)prohibition because it is impractical; but, some of them may beoffended when they are told that they must repeal prohibitionbecause it is immoral. Moreover, it is bound to be difficult toget the average American to recognize that the drug problem ismerely a symptom of a corrupt and inefficient social and economicsystem. Nevertheless, I must reveal the whole truth as I perceiveit no matter how unpopular it may be. I cannot imagine thatanything positive will be achieved by discussing only what is"politically acceptable" and inoffensive. Even if every single American were in favor ofa law that would violate the Constitution, it would be improperto enact such a law so long as we wished to retain the semblanceof a civilization. What we have in America today is not a war ondrugs, but a war against people, based on our need forscapegoats. Indeed, many people take drugs because of the miseryin their lives, but drugs are not the fundamental cause of themisery. The majority of the people, frustrated by our many socialproblems, have been whipped into a state of mass hysteria by themedia and by politicians who wish to divert attention from thetrue causes of the problems. This is reminiscent of the McCarthyera and the Massachusetts witch hunts, which, presumably, wereconducted by people who thought they were doing the right thing."The more things change, the more they stay the same." In order to provide a perspective differentfrom my own and to corroborate some of my points, I have includedthe preface to the book Ceremonial Chemistry [2], by permissionof its author, Thomas Szasz, the well-known social observer andprofessor of psychiatry. This clear, concise, and insightfulanalysis of the "drug problem", written over sixteenyears ago, appears in its entirety in Appendix A. The Fundamental Axiom. [Note (3-24-92): In myphilosophical system, three moral axioms and a number of otherfundamental assumptions are based on aesthetics, reasonableness,and utility. The first moral axiom is the fundamental axiomstated below except it is stated without reference to rights.Rights, then, are based on morals. Also, the terms materialismand dematerialism have been dropped in favor of competitionismand decompetitionism and the word decompetitionism is no morethan a writer's convenience. Basically, we don't like Isms! Mybasic theorem is that the abandonment of competition for wealth(or money), power, and fame is a necessary and sufficientcondition for sustainable human happiness. I mean the sustainablehappiness of all of humanity.] Nearly everyone agrees that our right topersonal liberty does not extend beyond the point where it beginsto interfere with the personal liberty of others. The personalchoice of individuals to take drugs in the privacy of their ownhomes or in other places set aside for that purpose does not, inand of itself, interfere with the personal liberty of anyone.Certainly, there are many cases where the use of drugs leads toexcesses and social disorder including pain and misery for thefamilies of the user, accidents in the workplace, and seriouscrimes that affect innocent people. This social disorder is whatsincere proponents of tough laws against drugs wish to prevent,but it is not an inevitable result of taking drugs and thenoninevitability is crucial. Thus, it is improper and immoral tocondemn all users of drugs and to deprive them of their civilrights because of the action of a few (or even of many). This isprecisely the punishment of an individual for a crime that he orshe has not committed. Moreover, it is not difficult to see thatthe laws against drugs cause more social disorder than theyprevent. The Fundamental Axiom of this paper is thatadult American citizens living in the United States have a rightto do whatever they please provided they do not interfere withthe rights of others. Probably this principle can be extended toa larger class of people, which might include children undercertain circumstances, but, for this paper, the above statementis sufficient. Morals, Ethics, and Laws Inevitably, this essay must concern itself withwhat is moral. I choose to distinguish two categories of morals.The first category consists of personal or arbitrary morals theviolation of which does not interfere with the rights or freedomsof any other person. Examples from this category are therequirement to do no work on the Sabbath, the proscription ofeating meat on Friday (no longer in fashion), the prohibition ofcertain sexual acts, and, most important for this discussion, thetaking or nontaking of drugs. Some of these lower morals aresimilar to the taboos of primitive tribes. The second categoryconsists of higher morals the violation of which does interferewith the rights of others. Examples from this category are"Thou shalt not kill", "Thou shalt not bear falsewitness against thy neighbor", and thou shalt not impose thyreligious beliefs on others. By definition, it is a violation ofa higher moral to interfere with the rights or freedom of others. We would like to have a system of absolutemorals, morals that are independent of culture or point of view.Of course, some religious people believe that we already have asystem of absolute morals given, for example, by the Bible, butmost of these people are not aware of the epistemologicaldifficulties that would have to be overcome to establish such asystem. Probably absolute morals are impossible and, eventually,it might be discovered that some sort of uncertainty principle orundecidability principle prevents the establishment of a systemof absolute morals. We do not need a system of morals that can beapplied to the entire world though. We need a system of moralsthat can be applied to the United States and is consistent withour Constitution. A system of morals may fall short of theabsolute and still be good enough to gain universal acceptancewithin a nation whose members are finite in number. Suffice it tosay that the Fundamental Axiom of this paper should be thecornerstone of such a system of morals. Whether a self-consistent and complete systemof morals can be constructed or not, a subset of a system ofmorals or a superstructure built upon it has been chosen to bethe law of the land, or at least that part of the law that dealswith human and institutional behavior, as opposed to governmentalprocedures. I submit that the law should be congruent with oursystem of morals and easily derivable from it. We are far fromthat advanced state where legislators would be almost unnecessaryinasmuch as anyone with an inference engine (computer andappropriate computer program) could test automatically whether agiven proposition was a "law" (or not) by deriving it(or its contradiction) from fundamental axioms or firstprinciples. The American legal system is in such shambles that wecan hardly be considered a society governed by laws at all.Although this begs the question, prohibition would not even beconsidered if laws were derived from first principles rather thanwilly-nilly to consolidate the power of the ruling class and toappease the superstitions of the people. Simply stated, we are probably going to havelaws into the foreseeable future. The laws should be derived fromand congruent with a system of morals with which we can allagree, but the Fundamental Axiom of this paper is nonnegotiable.In any case, there is no possibility of a nation living inAmerica in peace under a constitution unless we can agree toembrace higher morals and to recognize that some morals are amatter of personal preference. Since the religious right hasgiven the word "morals" a bad name, I will use the word"ethics" to refer to higher morals, even though I donot believe the religious right should have a monopoly on theword "morals". It is a corollary of the Fundamental Axiom,then, that no one has a right to impose an arbitrary system ofmorals on others. The correctness of this position iscorroborated by the failure of every attempt by church or stateto enforce an arbitrary system of morals. Prohibition, which, bythe way, required a constitutional amendment, was a dismalfailure and had to be repealed. The repression of drugs and thepersecution of drug users and dealers still continues, but theeffects are catastrophic and the drug trade thrives. (Onearbitrary aspect of the current laws against drugs is theillegality of marijuana, cocaine, and heroin and the legality ofnicotine, caffeine, and alcohol, all of which can be just asdangerous depending, of course, on the dosage.) Materialism and Dematerialism [Note (7-19-93): I now employ the terms competitionismand decompetitionism.] For the purposes of the discussionthat follows I must say what I mean by materialism anddematerialism. Materialism can be defined as the use of materialwealth as a measure of success, a reward for achievement oreffort, or as an inducement to behave in a certain way.Materialism leads to unequal distribution of wealth, which, inturn, results in economic and social strife. Only a (usuallyundeserving) minority, whose particular talents and inclinationscorrespond to making (or preserving) money, can depend onenjoying a comfortable old age. In order to have a flexiblesupply of human resources, in order to cope with the businesscycles, inevitable in a quasi-laissez-faire economy, and to keepthe price of human resources low, according to the laws of supplyand demand, it is necessary that there be a pool of unemployedpersons. These people are susceptible to both sides of the drugmarket, because of boredom and despair on the one side andbecause of the lack of any other opportunity on the other. Ofcourse, many people who are not reduced to such circumstanceselect to deal drugs, partly, at least, because materialismteaches that only those who acquire large amounts of wealth are"winners". Many people are upset (and frustrated) becausematerialism, as it manifests itself in a quasi-laissez-faire,free-enterprise, capitalistic society, has created a large numberof social ills, many attributable to poverty itself, one of theleast desirable consequences of materialism. They see reducedstandards of living, senseless crime, bizarre behavior (anddress), dishonesty in business and government, the decay offamily values, hopelessness, and cynicism marked by a newhedonism among the youth as signs of the decay of everything theyvalue. These people are easy prey to mass hysteria and crowdmadness. They are looking for scapegoats. An alternative to materialism is dematerialism.By dematerialism, I mean libertarian wealth-sharing, not thesocialism of Russia or China. Dematerialism requires the equaldistribution of wealth, modified slightly to account fordifferences in needs, and the production of wealth in acooperative setting according to the abilities of the individual,allowing for the need for abundant leisure. An education that isconsistent with the aims of dematerialism provides people withthe ability to enhance the material wealth and prosperity ofsociety, viewed as a collection of private individuals; but, moreimportant, it teaches people how to enjoy leisure in a mannerconsistent with their development as human beings, through thearts and sciences, sports, and other recreation, which mightinclude the use of drugs. Materialism feeds on itself and leads to alarge authoritarian government to control a society that isessentially unstable because of large differences in wealth. Aproperly-constituted, democratic, privatized, libertarian,wealth-sharing society, such as might exist under ourConstitution, would require only a small government because anonmaterialistic society is essentially stable. The successes orfailures of experiments in Capitalism, Socialism, Communism, andall of their "practical" implementationsnotwithstanding, the truth of the above assertions can be provedin the context of an appropriate system of ethics, moduloundecidability; that is, the above statements can be proved atleast as rigorously as social propositions are ever proved. Thatis the subject of another paper. For now, the above statementsmust be regarded as the author's point of view, a point of viewthat is entitled to as much respect as any other. Although thepostulate that materialism is unethical is not needed to advancethe thesis of this paper, namely, that drugs should be legal, itis useful to recognize that materialism may be the root cause ofmost of the drug problem including the laws against drugsthemselves. The Drug Problem Most of us agree that too many people aretaking excessive doses of too many drugs on too many occasions.The drug problem can be defined as these excesses coupled withthe misery and social disorder surrounding the illegal drugtrade. But, it is materialism and the laws against drugs, not thedrugs themselves, that are the cause of the problem. There is agrowing number of people, in addition to the dealers, who profitfrom the multibillion-dollar drug industry created by the lawsagainst drugs. The drug problem is not likely to disappear untilthe profit motive is removed. The Solution The reasonable solution, in a free society, iscomplete legalization and decontrol accompanied by unbiasededucation. By "decontrol" I mean decontrol of thepurchase and consumption of drugs. Prescriptions should continueto be used, but they would not be required for the purchase ofpharmaceuticals. Manufacturers should continue to be regulated,but the government should not control which drugs are produced orin what quantity. Employers have a right, sometimes a duty, todemand sobriety on the job, but people should be allowed to do asthey please elsewhere, provided they do not interfere with therights of others. Taking drugs, in and of itself, does notinterfere with the rights of anyone. The legalization of drugswill remove the thrill of breaking the law and the incentive toget people "hooked"; it will end the suffering causedby unmetered doses, impurities, substitutes, and substandardparaphernalia; legalization will move a huge segment of theunderground and extralegal economy into the legitimate economy,taking money away from criminals, eliminating crime and violence,and restoring many talented people to useful endeavor. Outline of This Paper The purpose of this paper is to show thatlegalization and decontrol is a practical solution to the drugproblem and that it is the ethical solution that should beadvocated by all right-thinking people of good will. A number ofadditional points that are made in this paper can be listed here:1) it is not the proper role of government to decide what is goodfor the people or what is not; 2) the war against drugs isessentially an attack on freedom of religion; 3) "drugaddiction" may not be a disease that requires treatment; 4)many people who advocate prohibition do not have respectablemotives; 5) the laws against drugs lead to numerous catastrophesand absurdities; 6) much of the misery experienced by manyconsumers of drugs is caused by the laws against drugs; 7) thesocial, political, and economic disorder on the supply side ofdrugs is caused by the enforcement of the laws against drugs; 8)in many cases the use of drugs is natural, proper, necessary, orotherwise justified; 9) the aggressors in the unwinnable waragainst drugs are guilty of the oppression of innocent people;moreover, the oppressors themselves are victims of crowd madness.No matter which aspect of the case one considers, no matter whatline of reasoning one pursues, rigorous logic always leads to thesame conclusion, namely, that the laws against the manufacture,sale, possession, and consumption of drugs must be repealed. I begin by pointing out the failure of methodscurrently being employed to end the drug problem and mention someof the absurdities and tragedies that are caused by thesemethods. The next section contains a short discussion of theimportant topics of addiction and treatment. There is someconfusion as to what people are talking about when they use theterm "drug addiction". It is not at all clear that drugaddiction is a disease; moreover, the question of whether thereis such a thing as an efficacious treatment for drug addiction isstill open. Next I give twelve reasons for legalizing drugsand I repeat a very important point that is usually ignored,namely, that the laws against drugs are essentiallyunconstitutional. I have pointed out that the taking of drugs inand of itself does not interfere with the rights of anyone. Onewonders then, with so many good reasons for legalizing drugs, whymany people still oppose the idea. In the next section, I attemptto answer that question, at least partially. Antidrug propaganda rarely has anything good tosay about drugs, particularly recreational drugs, i.e., drugstaken for the fun of it. In the next part of this paper, I list afew uses of drugs that are not abuses. I include here some of theresponses I have obtained in discussions with drug users whodemand repeal. Next, a few of the anticipated bad effects oflegalization are addressed and, finally, after summing up whatthe government should do, I suggest some possibilities for actionby individuals. Failure of the Current Approach Disaster, Absurdity, and Irony Nearly every day the newspapers carry anaccount of a disaster, the threat of disaster, or an absurditycreated by our government's "war on drugs". A U.S.agent is murdered; criminals seize control of a city, perhaps anentire nation; the government prepares to employ the military ina manner contrary to law. Suspects are beaten; their civil rightsare violated; the Constitution is trampled as law-enforcementagents spy on American citizens. Millions, perhaps billions, oftaxpayers' money is squandered by a government that has alreadyspent far beyond its means in a cause that is absolutelyguaranteed to fail. People who are reasonable in ordinary mattersadvocate cruel and inhumane policies. Police officers fall to thetemptation of huge profits; entire squads of narcotics agentsconspire with drug dealers; confiscated drugs return to the"free" market. Recently, in our town, two crack houses weredestroyed by bulldozers. The houses were punished for thebehavior of the people who occupied them! More recently stilllaws against attempting to buy drugs have been enacted. Can youimagine someone being arrested for saying, "Gee, I'm sotired; I wish I had something to pep me up for a few hours"!The Kiplinger Newsletter warns that imports from Central Americawill be delayed by exhaustive searches; so, now, the war on drugsinterferes with business itself, in an ironic twist of fate. The Beneficiaries Dealers, money launderers, law-enforcementagents, social workers, psychiatrists, physicians, lawyers,bureaucrats, drug testers, and dealers in drug-free urine are inon the action. Recently I saw a sign by the side of the roadadvertising cut-rate prices on beepers. (Beepers are widely usedby drug dealers, even to summon children in school.) Conveniencestore operators place items used to prepare and smoke crack inprominent places in the store. Only the dealers and the moneylaunderers are on the illegal side of the law and the moneylaunderers just barely. The others will fight legalizationroughly in proportion to the loss in income they will experienceif drugs are legalized. This is an important point. It is clearthat, in a market economy, the current approach to solving thedrug problem is not likely to succeed for this reason if for noother, namely, that there are too many people who have too muchto lose if the problem goes away. Thomas Szasz, the well-known social observerand professor of psychiatry, points out that the biggest gainersin the war on drugs are the politicians themselves [3]. Whenthings are going badly, there is nothing like a popular war todivert the attention of the people. Physicians After the politicians themselves, physiciansprobably have the most to lose since many physicians earn theirliving by writing prescriptions for people who have alreadydecided on their own course of treatment including which drugsare indicated. In addition, an informed population will recognizethat the non-use, use, and abuse of drugs and the withdrawal fromdrugs is not the province of the medical profession alone. Mostphysicians know about prescription drugs only what they read inthe Physicians' Desk Reference and in manufacturers' brochuresand they know about drugs not in the pharmacopoeia such as heroinand hashish next to nothing unless they or their patients areusing them. (Probably most patients are not discussing their useof illegal drugs with their physicians.) Thus, physicians are notentitled to a monopoly on the distribution of drugs and thetreatment of drug abuse. The Rehabilitation and Prevention Rackets Quacks and do-gooders are setting up clinicsand earning their living practicing half-baked and unproventechniques to stop, from using drugs, people who, for all weknow, have been enjoying drugs and are trying to stop onlybecause of outside coercion. (The insects who prey on humanweakness are coming out of the woodwork.) Educators lie to theirstudents and "public-service" groups buy televisiontime to lie to the public or to get well-known ex-addicts to lieto the public either because they (the ex-addicts) have beenbrainwashed or because they are afraid of what will happen tothem if they don't cooperate. "Drugs are all bad," theytell us. But, most people, including the children, know that thatcan't be quite true and so they reject the entire message eventhough some of it may have merit. For example, The Partnership for a Drug-FreeAmerica sponsors a television ad contrasting "brainwaves" from a fourteen-year-old before and after takingmarijuana. First of all, the ad implies that the significance ofthe signals is well-known, which is false. Epileptics sometimesexhibit quiescent brain waves, but epileptic seizures are oftenpreceded by moments of extreme mental clarity. The punch line isthat, if you are using pot, you are not using your brain. Now,that is patently false. Anyone who has experimented with potknows that, far from the absence of cerebral activity, there areoften valid insights, the obvious again becomes obvious (perhapsa little slowing down of the brain is useful, assuming, for themoment, that the quiescent brain waves do in fact reflect lessmental activity; a lot of mental garbage is cleared out), and thebeauty of music becomes more apparent (unfortunately, thelistener may be hearing music with little merit, but, at least,he's hearing all of it). Moreover, the liars behind ThePartnership don't have the guts to reveal who they are; noaddress or phone number is given in the ad. [Note in proof:Lately I have heard that the ad is faked, which certainly makessense. Where would they get a fourteen-year-old boy on"pot" without breaking the law themselves?] People wonder why American students do sopoorly. Part of the reason is, of course, TV. But, how canstudents develop self-reliance when their educators don't respectthem sufficiently to tell them the truth about drugs! Studentsdescend to the expectations people have of them. Also, youngpeople must be confused, at best, when they try to reconcile thestandard party line on the American economic and social systemwith what they can actually observe at home and in the streets,but that, perhaps, is another matter. Sports No discussion of drugs would be completewithout some mention of drugs in sports. We find here thatrigorous logic leads to surprising conclusions. The drugs used byathletes are of two types: (i) the usual recreational drugs(drugs that are taken for the fun of it) and (ii) steroids andother substances taken to increase muscle bulk or strength or insome other way to enhance performance. The banning or suspensionof athletes who are caught using illegal recreational drugs couldlead to the following absurdity: Some year, perhaps decades fromnow, a given National Basketball Association team wins thenational championship, after which it receives a formal challengefrom a team formed from among professional basketball players whohave been banned from the league for using drugs. To make itreally interesting the members of the outcast team could beallowed to use any substances they choose administered by themost skillful sports doctors or "dopers". In one case,the national champions are defeated decisively in a challengethey are honor-bound to accept. In another case, they decline thechallenge or are forbidden to accept it. In either case, do theyhave a right to consider themselves national champions? The veryexistence of a class of people who might be able to form a teamand defeat them compromises their championship. Farfetched? Notaccording to rigorous logic. The situation with steroids is more disturbingstill. The policing of athletes is nearly impossible assubstances that mask the use of other substances already exist.World records that are broken by athletes using banned substancesare compromised if not invalidated. Athlete A holds the worldrecord for the 100 meter race, but everyone, including A himself,knows that athlete B actually ran the race faster, not with amachine but with his own body. It appears, then, that the banningof steroids is as hopeless as the banning of other drugs. But, competitions that encourage or requireparticipants, if they want to be the world's best, to risk theirhealth and their lives are unethical. It is even worse to forcesomeone to take something he really doesn't want to take than itis to forbid someone to take something he wants to take. So, therealities of professional sports and world-class amateur sportsare even more unfair than the laws against drugs. Thus, theolympic games, professional and college football, evenhigh-school football, and many other activities that have grownto be national and international institutions should not beencouraged. (I do not favor the passing of even more laws;boycotts and nonparticipation by governments should besufficient.) There is no doubt that the seriousness with whichathletes and the general public treat athletic competition hasreached the point where all types of absurdities are commonplace.One wonders whether friendly competition of a local nature, theresults of which are not reported by the media, might somedaysupplant the current madness. On the subject of sports, what about the"runner's high"? Suppose the chemical substance thatgives the runner his high could be isolated and synthesized. Thenpeople could enjoy it without going to the trouble (and danger)of running. Naturally it would be banned. People would have to betested for it just as they are tested for other illegal drugs, inwhich case runners would test positive. When one starts with anabsurdity like drug prohibition, it is easy to derive anotherabsurdity. The Enforcers On the day following the completion of theprevious version of this paper a news story broke thatillustrates dramatically the failure of the government's currentapproach to the drug problem. It appears that the DrugEnforcement Agency (DEA) has been staging phony drug busts thatare reported by the media as real. Also, the DEA has beenfurnishing drug chemists with equipment and chemicals to makedrugs. The DEA claims that the staged arrests are designed togain the confidence of big-time dealers abroad, at least one ofwhom has been arrested subsequently. The agency claims thatassisting drug chemists makes it easier to keep tabs on them,that it is not entrapment, and that the drugs never reach thepublic. The Justice Department investigated the staged drugarrests and the concomitant deception of the media and, in turn,the people. In a matter of two or three days, it found noevidence of wrongdoing and closed the case. First of all, why would a dealer haveconfidence in a smuggler who loses the goods? In the secondplace, how does the DEA arrest a subject of a foreign power ifthe subject does not enter the United States? By what right doesit have jurisdiction? It would appear, at least to this observer,that the DEA is attempting to bolster its image and tomanufacture some success in the "war against drugs".But wait! There's more. One of the people involved in thesmuggling operation claims that seventeen duffle bags of cocainewere seized, whereas the DEA can account for only fifteen. Couldit be that someone in the DEA is involved in drug trafficking andthat the missing cocaine will find its way back to the market?For that matter, when was the last time you saw with your owneyes the destruction of confiscated cocaine? We have seenmarijuana burned from time to time, but cocaine destroyed? Concerning the DEA-supplied drug labs, one ofthe chemists alleged that DEA-sponsored chemists have given theDEA the slip and DEA-sponsored drugs have indeed been sold to thepublic. Also, it is not clear that this is not entrapment. Also,the drug chemist claims that, at one point, it was so obviousthat he was making drugs that he asked his supplier if he knew ofa better procedure to produce the drug. The DEA agent suppliedthe procedure for $2000. Are we supposed to believe that the$2000 ended up in the U.S. Treasury? You will draw your own conclusions about theseevents or withhold judgment, but it is clear to me that there issomething rotten in the DEA. Also, I suspect the JusticeDepartment of a cover-up. Sadly, if I am asked to choose to trustthe word of a drug-smuggler/drug-chemist or the word of a DEAagent, I'll take the smuggler/chemist every time. Attacking the Constitution Lately, the United States has asked for theextradition of "known" drug kingpins from Colombia.Does not the Constitution guarantee a fair trial by a jury ofpeers? How are these people, who played no role in the passage ofthe laws they are accused of breaking, ever going to get a fairtrial in the United States? Are we going to import Colombians forjurors! In addition, the United States government hasbegun seizing the assets of suspected traffickers without dueprocess, possibly depriving them of the resources they will needto defend themselves in a legal battle against a powerful enemy.Also, the United States, while interfering in the internalaffairs of a sovereign state, is aiding and abetting the seizureof assets without due process, which would be unconstitutional ifit happened here. Addiction and Treatment Addictions Most people are against drug addiction and sois this author, if drug addiction, indeed, exists, and, for thesake of argument, I am willing to agree that it does. But, I amalso against all the other forms of addiction that plaguesociety. While we are eliminating addiction to drugs, let useliminate addiction to TV, which is lowering the IQ of a nationand filling its collective mind with nonsense. Is there anaddiction to popular music, some of which is not really music atall? Some children and even some adults cannot leave it behindfor a minute. They wear earphones everywhere, even while drivinga car, "studying", or attending a lecture. That soundsmore like an addiction than a form of recreation or culture. Somewomen seem to be addicted to cosmetics. Some people are addictedto getting something for nothing! They easily fall prey to statelotteries, the coupon industry, sweepstakes, rebates onautomobiles, and the numerous forms of gambling. Incidentally,how can states prohibit the use of drugs, on one hand, andencourage, by expensive and insidious advertising, gambling, onthe other! Recently I read about the addiction of some people to,of all things, surgery! How are these addictions, all of whichcan be traced to materialism, going to be treated? The Meaning of the Term "Drug Addiction" With respect to the existence or nonexistenceof drug addiction it should be noted that at least five differentphenomena are referred to as "drug addiction". In oneclass of cases the "addict" is attempting to treat him-or herself for chronic depression. A drug has worked at leastonce and the victim hopes that it will work again and sometimesit does. In a second and completely different set ofcircumstances the use of a drug has caused, usually as a sideeffect, a symptom that can be relieved only by taking more of thedrug. After a good night's sleep the craving is gone. I believethis is the case with the ordinary use of cocaine and, for somepeople, with alcohol. It could be referred to as short-termaddiction. In other cases the victims experience acute withdrawalsymptoms that last several days or longer. This third class ofcases could be referred to as long-term addiction. Apparently,this is what heroin addicts and caffeine addicts experience. (Iam aware of the fact that some alcoholics seem to experience bothshort-term and long-term addiction.) It is this third meaning of the word that laysthe best claim to the term "addiction". However, manypeople are addicted to drugs in this "true" sense ofthe word if and only if they believe they are addicted. (Perhapsthe headaches I experience when I try to give up coffee occuronly because I expect them.) Perhaps all such addictions arepsychosomatic. A fourth behavior pattern that is often calledaddiction occurs when the user derives a great deal of pleasurefrom using drugs and therefore repeats the experience as often aspossible with or without consideration of the long-rangeconsequences. (After all, if you tell a twenty-year-old man thatdrugs will kill him in forty years, he is not likely to be tooconcerned, especially if he's having a good time.) And finally,many people take drugs repeatedly in order to perform a specifictask that cannot be performed as well or at all without drugs. It has occurred to me lately as I reread CeremonialChemistry by Thomas Szasz, who views the war against drugs asthe persecution of drugs, drug addicts, and drug pushers, thatmany people relish the idea of being persecuted. After all, Jesushimself in the Sermon on the Mount suggested that it might be ablessing to be persecuted under certain circumstances. I believethat many people believe that living the drug life satisfies theconditions alluded to by Jesus, namely, a pursuit of spiritualthings rather than material things. The Treatment of Drug Addiction I am very suspicious of counselors,psychoanalysts, ministers, priests, lecturers, gurus and other"professionals" who make their living by treating thespiritual problems of man. It is easy for a charlatan to pose asa spiritual healer. I don't believe anyone knows enough about thehuman mind and the spiritual nature of man to be certain he isnot doing more harm than good. In particular, it is not clearthat drug users should be subjected to professional treatment atall. Normalization of drug use, i.e., legalization, decontrol,and public tolerance, should make most problems disappear; but,when a problem persists even in a normalized society, undoubtedlythe best way to treat it is with ordinary human kindness andcompassion. Friends or family members are the ones who can helpthe most. In a normalized society, drug users who cannotcope and have no family or friends who can provide sufficienthelp fall into a special class, as do drug users who requirerestraint. Probably the state will have to intervene, but itshould do so in as nonauthoritarian and nonpatronizing a manneras possible. Of course, prisons will continue to exist as long asmaterialism exists, but not many drug users belong in prison. Thestate should supply help, i.e., food, clothing, shelter,information (not propaganda), job training (if needed), andconsiderate people (who might be fellow sufferers) to talk to,rather than treatment. In any case, treatment must be voluntary,particularly if the patient's freedom is to be surrendered.(Probably most treatments diminish the humanity of the patient bythe use of tranquilizers, by brainwashing, or by tactics similarto those employed by cults.) Remember, the term "mentalillness" is a metaphor! But, if "professionals"insist on treating "drug addiction", they damn wellbetter know what it is they are treating! Practical, Humanitarian, and Ethical Benefitsof Legalization Disclaimer The following is a list of the main practicaland humanitarian benefits that will result from the legalizationof drugs. The proof of each of these points is taken to beobvious. If it should happen that reasonable doubts arise as tothe truth of these assertions, it will be necessary to providemore detailed arguments. I have avoided purposely the recitationof statistics of indeterminate accuracy. I believe it issufficient to accept the fact that, for example, some people havedied because they bought impure drugs; it should not be necessaryto know the exact statistics. Perhaps a more ambitious author iswilling to make the effort to supply the numbers. Practical and Humanitarian Benefits 1) Legalization would remove the economicincentive to get people "hooked" and, as discussedbelow, prevent some people from changing from nonaddictive ormildly addictive drugs to more addictive drugs. (Some peoplebelieve that drug addiction is a myth manufactured by society andcaused by mass delusion and hysteria. People become addicted todrugs because they believe in drug addiction.) 2) Legalization would make it unnecessary for"addicts" to steal. Of course, some people were thievesfirst and addicts second. Whether or not they will continue to bethieves is another matter. Others have gotten into the habit ofstealing and the habit of stealing may be more difficult to breakthan the habit of taking drugs. But, in any case, there will befewer people stealing to pay for drugs and they won't have tosteal as much as they do now unless the government levies heavytaxes. A punitive tax on drugs would be unfair and unwise since,under heavy taxation, only the rich could afford legal drugs andthe black market would return. 3) Drug legalization would eliminate theviolence surrounding the drug business. This is a very importantpoint. 4) It would move a huge segment of theunderground economy into the legitimate economy, taking profitsaway from criminals, keeping drug money, unless it were spent onother imports, in the country, allowing reasonable, but notpunitive, taxation of the legal trade, providing alternate cropsfor tobacco growers, etc. As everyone now knows, some dealers arebecoming so rich that they can take control of sovereign states.The laws against drugs are the source of their wealth. The above four points are the ones usually madeby people who favor legalization on practical grounds alone. Manywriters and speakers have discussed these points and I shall notelaborate on them further. The next eight items have receivedless attention. 5) Legalization would remove the thrill ofbreaking the law. This is especially important if children aregoing to forget about taking drugs. On the other hand, if enemaswere made illegal, some children somewhere would dedicatethemselves to taking enemas. Naturally, it would be preferable ifchildren could be taught respect for the law, but there are twoimportant reasons why this cannot be done in general. The firstis that children see that many important people break the lawwithout losing the respect of society. In fact, in many importantcases, the prestige of the criminal is enhanced. At the veryleast the criminal becomes famous and children are encouraged bythe media to believe that only famous people count. The secondreason is that children know that many laws are unjust and aredesigned either to enhance the wealth, power, and privileges ofthe ruling class or to satisfy the biases and superstitions ofthe masses. (Yes! Many children know this.) It is crucial, then,that children, acting on their own, stop taking drugs becausedrugs no longer interest them, not because drugs are forbidden bytheir parents or the rest of society. 6) Legalization would end the suffering anddeath caused by unmetered doses, impurities, dirty paraphernalia,substitutes, and substances that have only a short history ofuse, e.g., designer drugs. In particular, it would end the deathscaused by AIDS for which the laws against drug paraphernalia, andthe sponsors of such laws, are directly responsible. Those whooppose legalization seem to be singularly lacking in compassion.It is not unreasonable to assign responsibility for a great dealof the misery surrounding the use of drugs to the people whoadvocate and enforce the laws against drugs and drugparaphernalia. Opponents of drugs like to say, "Drugskill." Yes, sometimes they do, but most of the deaths can betraced to unmetered doses, poorly prepared drugs (impurities),and "drugs" that turn out to be something other thandrugs (poison) sold by unscrupulous or incompetent dealers. Itmakes sense to license dealers and manufacturers, but to requireusers to register is, again, an infringement of personal libertyand it won't work. Content and strength of all drugs, includingcoffee, should be labeled clearly. 7) Many users of "hard" drugs beganby using "soft" drugs; but, due to the laws againstdrugs, there came a time when their drug of choice was notavailable. This is what led them from marijuana, say, to heroin.There are many similar instances of harm resulting from theunavailability of the drug user's favorite and familiar drug.Conversely, many troubled people choose to drink, and haveproblems associated with drinking, mainly because alcohol islegal and readily available. These people might have been able toselect a drug from a larger menu, marijuana say, that wouldprovide the same relief with fewer problems or no problems atall. (Sometimes I find it difficult to believe that there has notbeen a conspiracy to suppress the use of marijuana, amphetamines,and heroin so that the cocaine business could flourish.) 8) Legalization of all drugs would eliminatethe "drug life", the endless cycle of getting money,"copping", getting high, etc. that constitutes a careerfor many. Indeed, many addicts are among those who have most tolose from legalization. They would have to give up their entire"lifestyle" with its many positive aspects includinggood friendships, camaraderie, etc. 9) Legalization would restore many to usefulendeavor, even some who continue to use drugs. It woulddecriminalize an even greater number of people who use drugsproperly as discussed below. 10) Legalization and decontrol would allowpeople to exercise their right to be their own physicians. Manypeople could do this without deterioration in the quality ofmedical care they receive. The legitimate medical uses of drugsprohibit punitive taxes such as those levied against cigarets.Moreover, the legalization and decontrol of all drugs is a steptoward controlling medical costs, which we all know are spiralingout of control, to some extent because of the greed ofphysicians. 11) Drug legalization would eliminate the needfor controversial and perhaps unconstitutional intrusion into theactivities and physical bodies of suspected drug users, althoughthe need to have sober airline pilots, etc. will probably prolongthe debate on just how this is to be accomplished for some time,even after legalization. 12) Recently, subsequent to the original draftof this paper, new drug legislation has been enacted by Congressthat includes cruel and unusual punishment. Wayne Saums writes ina letter to the Houston Post as follows: The current drug hysteria is the closest thingto McCarthyism America has seen in 40 years. Draconian penalties,in a drug bill that just passed Congress, include $10,000 finesfor a single marijuana cigarette! The biggest mistake any American could make, inthe face of such insanity, is to assume he is safe if only hedoes not smoke marijuana. This drug is cheap and plentiful. An angryneighbor, a political opponent, anyone at all, would have only totoss a "joint" onto your property, into your home, oryour car. A police officer could stick it right in your shirt, oryour trash can! No, the truth is that, once police statetactics get to this advanced stage, no one is safe. NO ONE! Legalization would eliminate the possibilitythat some diabolical adversary could put us through the nightmareof being falsely accused, or even punished, by a PharmacologicalInquisition. Ethical Benefits Thus, there are many practical and humanitarianbenefits to be derived from legalization, but, in addition, thereare many ethical benefits beginning with respect for the NinthAmendment to the Constitution. The Ninth Amendment states that"The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shallnot be construed to deny or disparage others retained by thepeople." A fundamental right, recognized at least abstractlyby most Americans, is the right and freedom to do anything onepleases so long as it doesn't interfere with the rights andfreedom of others. This right is not explicitly stated in theConstitution, but it is retained by the people in accordance withthe Ninth Amendment. Whether or not the majority of Americansbelieve that the right to take drugs is reserved under the NinthAmendment, any interference with that right is unacceptable to alarge group of Americans and they will struggle to protect it.Thus, widespread disobedience of antidrug laws can be interpretedas political struggle. Apparently, Americans recognized that theright to take drugs falls under the Ninth Amendment when theyrequired a constitutional amendment to prohibit alcohol. Thiscorroborates my position that the laws against drugs areessentially unconstitutional; i.e., such laws cannot be enactedby Congress without a constitutional amendment. It required aconstitutional amendment then; why should it not require aconstitutional amendment now! Legalization would end the hypocrisy of banningmost drugs while not banning others, namely, alcohol, nicotine,and caffeine. The legality of alcohol is probably related to itsrole in the Christian faith. Thus, the banning of hashish, forexample, and not alcohol could be construed as a violation of thedoctrine of separation of church and state. We all know whycaffeine is legal. Most of the working people of the nation, atleast those who work in offices, are addicted to caffeine, butthat's what gives them the strength, or the will, to work longhours for the benefit of their employers, some of whom have a lotto say about what the law of the land will be. In the case ofcaffeine, many people who try to stop using it will experienceviolent headaches; so, at least in this sense, caffeine is trulyaddictive. People Who Oppose Legalization Hypocrites and Prudes Some members of society, particularly thereligious right, would like to impose their sexual and religious"morals" on others. The word "morals" isenclosed in quotation marks to distinguish these personal andarbitrary "morals" from higher morals about whichnearly everyone can agree. As discussed in the introduction, areasonable test of these higher morals, as exemplified by theSixth and Ninth Commandments, is that their violation does indeedinterfere with the rights of others. Some opponents oflegalization are genuinely concerned about the welfare of others,but many of them are simply too mean-spirited to approve ofpleasure. At least they do not approve of intense pleasure, anddrugs do, on occasion, provide some people with intense pleasure,a plain fact that deserves more discussion. Control Addicts There is another group of people in theopposition (to legalization) who simply like to control others.These are the control addicts. It is ironic that in their waragainst addiction they succumb to one of the most insidious ofall addictions, namely, the addiction to power. Of course, mostof these people have an appetite for power that can never besatisfied other than in the authority they exercise over peoplein their own family. They are perfect candidates to be parents ofchildren who escape into the world of drugs. Many control addictsmight benefit from taking drugs themselves, since one of the mostdesirable effects of some drugs is to shock people out of rigidmodes of thought. Taking drugs might be a form of therapy forcontrol addicts. Legislators The congressman from my district wants to applylethal force to stop the flow of drugs, but he doesn't have theslightest idea how to stop people from wanting drugs. As long aspeople want them, someone will find a way to deliver them,although the prices (and the profits) will be high. Addicts willhave to steal even more than they do now; criminals will haveeven greater incentive to murder other criminals who muscle in ontheir territory; and the problem will get worse. What thecongressman doesn't realize is that his policies are part of thereason that many people take drugs in the first place. He is partof the problem, not part of the solution. (Subsequent to thefirst draft of this paper a new and tougher drug law has beenpassed by Congress. As we watch the situation worsen in the wakeof this law, we should gain confidence in the essentialcorrectness of my position. For example, dealers will have evenless to lose by killing other dealers inasmuch as the law putstheir life at even greater risk. Of course, in many cases, thisrisk is what motivates them.) Uses and Users of Drugs The Right to Use Drugs In the beginning of this paper I made the claimthat taking drugs does not interfere necessarily with the rightsof anyone. The reader can prove this by performing a thoughtexperiment in which someone takes drugs and no one's rights areviolated. (For example, a man with no family lives alone; foodand drugs are delivered to him daily by a disinterested party;the fruits of his solitary labors, proofs of mathematicaltheorems, say, are picked up by the letter carrier. There is noimpact on society other than the benefits to be derived from hisproofs, which are assumed to be correct.) The reader shouldrealize that this one example of what many may feel is anabnormal case is sufficient to prove the premise. I maintain thatthousands of "normal" cases occur daily, but it is notnecessary to enumerate them. Nevertheless, I will offer someadditional evidence to support this important claim and to show,further, that taking drugs is not always bad. Drugs for Celebration Most of the discussion about legalizing drugsneglects the traditional and proper use of drugs in ritual andcelebration. Some opponents of legalization believe that theso-called recreational drugs have no valid use, but those samepeople probably would be disappointed if they could not have adrink or two on New Year's Eve, Christmas, or their birthdays.Many Americans don't consider Saturday night a success unlessthey become at least somewhat intoxicated. Is it really so bad towant to experience the exhilaration, release from tension, andjust plain joy of getting a little "high" with goodfriends? Most people consider complete abstinence a little weirdif not downright antisocial. People who never loosen up with adrink or the drug of their choice could be thought of asdeficient, a judgment that is undoubtedly too harsh. (Wayne Saumspoints out how much people enjoy that first cup of coffee in themorning with its "pure chemical high".) Drugs in Ritual and Religion Throughout recorded history intoxication hasplayed a large role in human ritual. Whereas the Catholic masscannot be celebrated without wine, the religious rituals of somenative-American Indians are incomplete without peyote. Governmentcontrol or taxation is inconsistent with freedom of religion.True religious freedom is not limited to a few establishedreligions, moreover vows of poverty preclude payment of taxes onsubstances that can be cultivated on the homestead withoutparticipation in the mainstream of the economy. The book, CeremonialChemistry [2] by Thomas Szasz, elaborates on the role ofdrugs in ritual and, in addition, explains why many people are soanxious to persecute people who use drugs other than the ones ofwhich they approve. Every person who participates in this debateshould read this book. In fact, I will go further and say thatanyone who advocates the regulation of drugs by government andhas not read this book should be disqualified from the drugdebate. For the edification, and convenience, of the reader, thepreface to Ceremonial Chemistry appears in Appendix A ofthis paper by permission of Dr. Szasz. Drugs to Kill Pain Another legitimate use of drugs is to eliminatepain. What could be more absurd and inhumane than limiting thedosage of painkillers taken by terminally-ill people because theymight become addicted! The place of the medical profession is toadvise not control. The final decision on the dosage ofpain-killing (or any other) drugs must rest with the patient. Forthat matter, drugs must be made available to those who wish toend their lives. Many people in American society rely on drugsto assuage the pain inflicted upon them by a callous,materialistic society and by their own mistakes or bad luck.Apparently, society is not yet ready to make the commitment toremove the circumstances that cause this pain and suffering noris society willing to pay the price to relieve human misery. Now,society wants to take away the drugs that provide the onlyrelief, however fleeting, that these people will ever enjoy.Ironically, it may be drug use and only drug use that ispreventing a violent revolution in America. Drugs to Enhance Ability Drugs can be used to enhance the ability ofpeople to perform certain tasks. Many jazz musicians in the 40sand 50s used drugs. I do not believe there was a single exceptionamong, at least, my fifty favorite jazz musicians. It was commonto hear people opposed to drugs say that musicians played welldespite the use of drugs, but does it make sense that all of themplayed well in spite of taking drugs! Maybe taking drugs helpedthem just a little. In any case, the connection betweenintoxication and the muse dictates that the music could not havebeen the same without the drugs. Actually, many "drugaddicts" do very well in society. Many famous entertainers,athletes, artists, and, yes, even scientists take or have takendrugs. I just found out from Jim Bouton's book, BallFour [4], that more than half of all major-league baseballplayers in the 60s and 70s took amphetamines. This doesn't provethat it made them play better, but it was said on one occasionwhen a famous ballplayer narrowly missed a fly ball that withfive more milligrams he would have made the play. So, in anycase, there was a widespread belief among major-leaguers thatamphetamine helped them. It's interesting, though, that people doapply a different set of standards to major-league baseballplayers from those they apply to the average drug user, just asracists accept black people provided they are celebrities. Afterall, the cult of fame and the cult of money are the core of ournational religion. "Very Unimportant People" As long as I have brought up the cult of fame Imight just as well say a few additional words on that subjecthere. In the minds of many Americans wealth, power, and fame aresubsumed under the general concept of Importance. Many peopletake drugs because society is telling them that they are notimportant or even significant. Many people are selling drugsbecause being a dealer makes them feel important. Television andother media seem to be telling us every day of our lives that, ifwe are not important, our lives are meaningless. A comicstripchild after seeing her grandfather on television says, "GeeGramps, you are a real person." This phenomenon goes alittle way toward explaining some of the so-called senselesscrimes reported in the media practically daily. Because it iscontrolled by commerce, television is one of the most perniciousinfluences in society. Special Uses of Drugs It is easy to construct hypothetical scenarioswherein the use of drugs makes possible an important humanactivity. For example, suppose that it is necessary to stay awakeand alert for several days in order to perform an importantscientific experiment. The use of artificial stimulants isjustified in this exceptional case. The use of a sedative isindicated if a person is required to remain motionless for a longperiod in order to participate in a test. Moderation No one advocates the use of drugs all of thetime by everyone. The infiltration of drugs into the lives of ourchildren is deplorable as are many other aspects of drug abuse.Some people should never touch certain drugs and they know whothey are. Perhaps no one should use drugs every day except forthe treatment of a pathology. On the other hand, there ispractically no one who would not benefit from the occasional useof one or another drug as an alternative to complete abstinencefrom all drugs. For nearly everyone there is a drug that can beused safely on special occasions to improve the quality of his orher life. I find it interesting that practically every discussionof drugs jumps from abstinence to abuse as though there werenothing in between. Drugs as a Spiritual or Intellectual Adventure Needless to say, the mere taking of drugs doesnot automatically elevate people to an elite class of individualscapable of discerning right from wrong and able to see throughall the illusions and myths perpetuated by society. Many drugusers are just as narrow-minded with respect to drugs that happento differ from their own particular favorites as are those whooppose the use of all drugs. But, of two hypothetical people whoexhibit the same moral and ethical behavior in all respects otherthan the taking or not taking of drugs, I would have to rankhigher, in the traits that distinguish us from the beasts, theperson who takes a risk in order to discover and experiencesomething new, even if the discovery and experience iscatastrophic. In fact, it could be argued that the taking ofdrugs, under many circumstances, indicates an intelligence higherthan the intelligence of the abstainer even though the latter mayexcel in prudence. Therefore, it is conceivable that the averageintelligence of the drug-taking population, which, of course,includes those who exercise moderation, exceeds that of theabstainers. Also, it should be pointed out that many drug usersclaim that drugs have helped them see through the mythsand illusions perpetuated by society. "Good Guys" and "Bad Guys" Moreover, the taking of drugs, particularly inexcess, cannot help but teach a lesson in compassion learned byvirtue of experiencing one's own vulnerability. Further, drugusers are rarely involved in the struggle for money and powerthat is destroying our civilization. On the other hand, manypeople who are waging the war on drugs employ devious andunderhanded tactics, not the least dishonorable of which isarranging a highly-contrived purchase of drugs near the WhiteHouse and then implying, for rhetorical purposes, that thepurchase was routine. Thus, it is not at all clear that those whoare trying to prevent people from taking drugs are the "goodguys" and those who are using drugs are the "badguys" as the establishment would have us believe. It seemsthat just the opposite is true. Fear of Death Also, it is interesting to note that thefollowing statement, attributed to Jesus, could be construed asapproval of drug users: "For whosoever will save his lifeshall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shallfind it." Of course, it is not clear that everyone who usesdrugs will die from taking drugs, nor is it clear that everyonewho destroys his life with drugs is moved by a divine purpose.Nevertheless, one wonders about all those people who want to goto heaven but are afraid to die. Some Words from Victims of the War On Drugs I have talked with many users of drugs. Some ofthem support the laws against drugs. Some users imagine that thelaws against drugs are the only thing standing between themselvesand lethal doses. If so, they would have to adopt the techniquesemployed by alcoholics to save themselves in a world wherealcohol is legal, cheap, and advertised on TV. But, many users ofdrugs are outraged at the attempts of society to deprive them oftheir personal liberty. Many believe, as I do, that it is not thefunction of the government, however well-meaning, to protect usfrom ourselves. The authors of the following ideas shall remainanonymous. I do not recall their exact words, thus theresponsibility for the wording rests with me although I shallemploy quotation marks, which are to be interpreted loosely. One well-known speaker on drugs sets the toneby saying, "I do not permit anyone to tell me what to putinto my own body." A woman, who contracted AIDS from herhusband, who was an intravenous drug user and has since died fromAIDS, says, "I blame every legislator, bureaucrat, andmedical lobbyist who is responsible for the restrictions againstthe purchase of new disposable syringes. I blame thelaw-enforcement agents too." A man who is dying of cancerand is forced to endure unspeakable agonies because he is a drugaddict and "cannot" be given the indicated dosage ofpainkillers asks, "Is it legal to do this to me?" A middle-aged man who has health insurance butstill objects to the outrageous fees charged by physiciansanswers, "Certainly I'd like to boycott doctors. They makefar too much money and most of them don't place their patients'interests far enough above money to spend enough of their time todo a good job. Of course, they're generous enough with yourtime. If I couldn't live without doctors, well ... no one evergot out of this life without dying. I would never be operated onnor would I ever submit to chemotherapy or other radicaltreatment; but, I should have access to the drugs I know about orcould find out about to treat my medical complaints; I should beallowed to have whatever drugs I needed to kill pain if I were ingreat pain; and I should be allowed to end my life if I wereseriously ill and it became impossible to kill the pain. InsteadI am forced to pay the doctor a ridiculous fee to write aprescription. Of course, I could petition the FDA [Food and DrugAdministration] to permit me to prescribe for myself and sue themif they refused, but I don't have the time, money, and energy.And, as we all know, I would lose." I agree with this man.We have a right to repair our own car or be our own gardener.Even more valid is our right to heal ourselves and to avoid doingbusiness with people who are extracting excessive profits fromsociety. A young mathematician tells his story: "Myphysician started me on a psychic energizer when I began to getulcers from drinking too much coffee. Now, he won't writeprescriptions for it because it has been classified as adangerous drug and is monitored by the state, which requires aprescription in triplicate. I can't do math without it and I amabout ready to turn to the black market. Is it fair for the stateto interfere with my career in this way? If this drug is adangerous narcotic, why wasn't it classified as such before Ibecame dependent upon it? It seems that the classification of adrug is a political decision." I have talked to numerous musicians who playclassical, jazz, and rock music and who are dependent on drugs.I've heard some musicians say, "I can play music withoutdrugs, but I don't enjoy it." Others say, "Drugs put mein a state of mind wherein I am receptive to musicalinspiration", "Drugs open up a part of my mind that isunavailable without drugs", "I couldn't begin to playinspired music without drugs." Other similar statements arecommonly heard. One musician complains, "Music is the onlything in life that matters to me and, for me, drugs and music gotogether. How dare the state try to deprive me of life as I wantto live it." A famous jazz musician is supposed to havesaid, "The three greatest things in the world are music,drugs, and sex, in that order." Notice, he choosesdrugs before sex. Now, taking drugs for the pleasure it gives issimilar to having sex for the pleasure it gives. There are peoplein this world who don't want anyone to have sex for pleasure. Howwould the average prohibitionist like it if sex for pleasure weremade illegal? Another famous jazz musician, now deceasedafter a reasonably long life of approximately 60 years, said tome, "I haven't had sex in two years and, if I never have itagain, it will be too soon." Now, this man not onlypreferred drugs to sex but rejected sex entirely, although it mayhave been deficiencies in society or the drugs themselves thatcaused him to abandon sex altogether. One can argue that theworld would be better off if a significant number of peoplesubstituted abstinence from sex for abstinence from drugs. As badas it is, our drug problem doesn't come close to our populationproblem. The main point, though, is that, for this man,prohibiting drugs was like prohibiting sex for the average man.If the government can stop people from taking drugs with today'stechnology, it might be able to stop people from having sex withthe technology of tomorrow. In Defense of Liberty It seems clear then that very many people,perhaps millions, believe that they have a right to manufacture,sell, buy, possess, and consume whatever drugs they please. Theyconsider a system irrational and unfair that punishes a drugdealer who sells a chemical to someone who wants to ingest it,but rewards a person who dumps, into the air or water, poisonsthat everyone must ingest whether they want to or not. Thesepro-choice people are bound to regard those who are attempting torepress drugs as tyrannical and evil. Normally, the criminaljustice system of the United States is directed against peoplewho acknowledge that they have done something wrong; and,needless to say, not everyone involved with drugs is completelyinnocent of wrongdoing. But, there is a large group of people whouse drugs and, yes, sell drugs who know that they have donenothing wrong. Those who persecute them will be fighting an enemywho knows he is on the right side. As for the ones who feelguilty about their involvement with drugs, enlightenment willreveal that they are not the guilty ones. As for you, William J.Bennett, you are fighting on the side of evil. The other day I saw a large piece of graffitithat said, in English and in Spanish, "The war against drugsis a war against people!" It is a crime to conduct such awar. If Czar William (Bennett) wants to behead people, has he notcommitted murder in his heart already; is he not a man ofviolence; are not his enemies entitled to retaliate violently,however ill-advised that may be! If the American people want towage a declared war on drugs, they should expect"drugs" to fight back. For example, drug enforcementagents not in uniform could be shot as spies. Prisoners of war onboth sides should be treated according to the Geneva conference,provided, of course, that they are "in uniform". Dealing with the Negative Aspects ofLegalization The Abuser as a Bad Example Naturally, there is bound to be some negativeimpact from legalization. Some individuals are bound to increasetheir intake of drugs and some will exhibit bizarre or antisocialbehavior, but there is a positive side even to that. If some drugusers make horrible examples of themselves, it will be adeterrent to others, particularly children. Perhaps some peoplewill try drugs who would not have been willing to break the law,but these must constitute a very small class of Americans. Astaking drugs begins to assume its natural role in society, freefrom the denormalizing effects of criminalization, most negativeactivity will die out. But, we should not expect to recover fromdecades of wrong thinking and bad public policies without somepain. Drug legalization could be compared to balancing thebudget, another pill that will have to be swallowed eventually. Physicians Who Are Addicts A recent letter to Time Magazine warnsthat the increase in drug use would not be trivial. It cites thehigh use by physicians, who have easy access to drugs but shouldknow better. While it is true that many physicians use drugs, thehealth care system in the United States is not exactly in a stateof collapse. At least the physicians and surgeons, whether theytake drugs or not, have managed to look after their own interestsquite well, and the number of doctors on skid row is notexcessive. If society at large does no worse with free access todrugs than the physicians have done, we will be able to withstandthe shock of legalization. The Dissemination of Information Of course, many nonphysicians will not"know better". It is up to the government, which causedthis mess in the first place, to do a first-rate job of informingthe public about the risks of taking drugs without neglecting tomention the positive aspects of drug use. There is no use indenying that many people may enjoy the occasional use ofrecreational drugs without incurring appreciable harm,particularly if drugs are free of harmful impurities and arelabeled properly. The dissemination of information is cheapcompared to the alternatives. Establishment Drug Firms One possible infelicitous aspect of druglegalization is that drugs would be manufactured and sold byestablishment chemists, engineers, and businessmen. I still havefaith in most chemists and engineers, be they establishment ornot, but my experience with American and foreign businessmen hasbeen most disappointing. It is possible that they might be moreunethical than the drug traffickers they would replace. Just lookat what they have done with cigarets, alcohol, and patentmedicines. The solution, I fear, in a capitalist society, isstrict government regulation of manufacturers. Of course, thiswould not be necessary in a dematerialist society because therewould be nothing to be gained by being unethical. Spending ofexcessive profits would be noticed and prevented by socialpressure. Despite the tolerable track record ofestablished drug firms, strict standards of purity, labeling,documentation, and pricing should be enforced. Also, thegovernment must ensure that the public is getting correct,complete, and up-to-date information on all drugs. Any drugwhatsoever may be manufactured, but the effects of new drugs mustbe understood sufficiently well that a well-informed public canhave expectations concerning the new drugs that are reasonablylikely to be fulfilled. A well-informed person, then, can beginusing a new drug at any time during the testing cycle, completelyaware of the risks involved. This could benefit many peoplesuffering from AIDS, for example, or other "incurable"diseases. The Social System Many people believe that a share of the blamefor excessive use of drugs must be placed on the many unnaturalaspects of our economic and social system. The abuse of drugs isa symptom of a deeper problem, the solution to which is a gradualmovement toward dematerialism preceded by the teaching of thenecessity of dematerialism, along with an open discussion of howthe difficulties of implementing dematerialism might be overcome.Suffice it to say that the prohibition of the free use of drugsis part of the problem, not part of the solution. In any case, wehave no choice as to whether or not we will endure whatevernegative impact accompanies drug legalization. We can only hopeto hold the damage to a minimum by making the necessary changesgradually and by providing help for people who request it. Conclusions The Correct Solution Legalization and decontrol is the correctsolution because it will eliminate most of the evil surroundingthe drug trade; it will have many desirable consequences and veryfew bad side effects, all of which can be overcome; and, finally,it is the ethical and prudent thing to do in a nation of freepeople who will not tolerate being told how to live their lives,particularly by people whose actions are not even based on decentmotives or good will. Legalization and decontrol could be gradualin order to absorb the shock of a sudden change in policy, but Ihesitate to say this because no matter how rapidly legalizationis implemented it is nearly certain to take place too slowlyrather than too rapidly. Education of the public, especiallychildren, should continue, but educators should tell the truthabout drugs or lose credibility. Employers should continue todemand sobriety on the job, so the testers probably will not beput out of business immediately. The tests, however, mustdetermine sobriety at the time of the test, not last Saturdaynight. A man can be drunk on Saturday night and fly an airplaneas safely as it can be flown on Monday. Anti-Discrimination Laws should be passed to make it illegal todiscriminate against drug users in employment, housing, etc. Ofcourse, the performance and behavior of drug users should beevaluated by the standards that apply to everyone else. Research Some of the money saved by abandoning the waragainst drugs should be devoted to research to develop betterdrugs, e.g., drugs that induce euphoria but have no unpleasantside effects or withdrawal symptoms. Research could be done todevelop drugs that do not require larger and larger doses toachieve similar effects or at least reach the saturation doseearlier. Perhaps we should stop trying to prevent people fromtaking drugs (they will always take drugs) but give them betterdrugs. However, we must be careful not to let the governmentcreate a "brave new world" by means of some futureclass of drugs. It is unlikely, though, that any drug will everbe as great a threat to freedom of thought as television andreligion are. Dematerialism as a Solution Naturally I believe that an important steptoward ending the drug problem (and the problems of crime,poverty, forced labor, unhappiness, injustice, inequality, andundemocratic government) is the teaching of the virtues ofdematerialism in the schools. The adoption of dematerialism bysociety will be extremely gradual. For those of you who thinkthey know why dematerialism won't work, let's hear your solution.For the rest, let's begin to think of ways to make dematerialismwork in the United States, to overcome its difficulties (and itdoes have difficulties), and to convince others that we must makea change. Most (in my opinion, all) social problems have beensolved theoretically. The difficulty is convincing a brainwashedpeople to adopt the theoretical solutions and to make thempractical. The failures of others to do this are not reallyrelevant (unless you can prove that people will never learn). Letters to Congress The drug problem persists because thegovernment and other institutions continue to pursue incorrectsolutions based on poor reasoning and hysteria. We, the people,should demand an end to this folly through letters and telegramsto our elected representatives. One letter is probably worth athousand votes since congressmen know that fewer than one in athousand writes. An Appeal to Reason The comments by Szasz in an address he gave atan anti-prohibition conference in Brussels last year [3] are soincisive that I must repeat them. Sadly, the war on drugs has offered, andcontinues to offer, modern man much of what he seems to crave:fake compassion and genuine coercion; pseudo-science and realpaternalism; make-believe disease and metaphorical treatment;opportunistic politics and unctuous hypocrisy. It is hard for meto see how anyone who knows anything about history, aboutpharmacology, and about the fundamental human struggle forself-discipline and the seemingly equally intense human need toreject it and replace it with submission to a coercivelypaternalistic authority - how any such person could avoid comingto the conclusion that the war on drugs is simply another chapterin the natural history of human stupidity. I believe that just as we regard freedom ofspeech and religion as fundamental rights, so should we alsoregard freedom of self-medication as a fundamental right; andthat, instead of mendaciously opposing or mindlessly promotingillicit drugs, we should, paraphrasing Voltaire, make this maximour rule: "I disapprove of what you take, but I will defendto the death your right to take it!" In closing, it is important to emphasize thatthe war on drugs is the longest, most protracted formallydeclared war of this turbulent century: It has already lastedlonger than the First and Second World Wars and the wars in Koreaand Vietnam combined - and its end is nowhere in sight. Indeed,because this war is a war on human desire, it cannot be won inany meaningful sense of that term. Finally, since its principalbeneficiaries are the politicians who wage it, we must, againstall odds, try to enlist some honest and humane [and courageous]politicians in our quest to lay before the people the case thatpeace, after all, is better than war - even if the 'enemy' isstupidly called "drugs". Other Methods of Effecting Social Change Although I don't claim to know much abouteffecting social change (hopefully the reader will know more), itseems to me that legalization could be achieved by strongadvocacy, education, demonstrations, and organized lobbying.Prolegalization groups exist and are growing in number and size.Despite the negative aspects of lobbying and other types ofconcerted effort, participation in prolegalization organizationsprobably is essential in American society as it (Americansociety) is presently constituted. One such group is the DrugPolicy Foundation, 4801 Massachusetts Ave. N.W., Washington,D.C., 20016. This group sponsors periodic meetings on issuespertaining to drug policy. These meetings are attended by manyresourceful people who support legalization and who could have aninfluence on government. Also, the first edition of The InternationalJournal on Drug Policy, 10 Maryland St., Liverpool L1 9BX,England, was published on July 1st, 1989. This bi-monthlypublication will concern itself with "the legal, social,medical, and educational issues [surrounding] the use ofpsychoactive substances". While the emergence of thisjournal should be viewed with cautious optimism, there is adanger that the people who contribute to it (and to the meetingsof the Drug Policy Foundation) will become a permanent part ofthe drug "industry" and thus become one more group ofpeople who have a vested interest in the drug problem never beingsolved. Remedies at Law There is one additional approach that I wouldlike to see tried, perhaps by a sympathetic attorney in his orher spare time, although I have no idea if one person couldmanage this alone. I would like to see someone file suit to getthe laws against drugs declared unconstitutional. The amount ofresources required to carry this out would depend on whether theintent was to win the case or not. The probability of winning islow because the decisions of the Supreme Court are not basedentirely on logic, but the action itself, if publicized properly,would help to educate the public and, if handled masterfully,would discredit authoritarians. Also, a class-action suit torecover damages for all those who have been injured by the lawsagainst drugs might have a similar"consciousness-raising" effect. Addendum So as not to disturb the organization of theSeptember 25, 1989 version of the paper, some new material iscollected in Appendix B. Thomas L. Wayburn Houston, Texas September 25, 1989 References 1. Brent, Joseph L., "How DrugEntrepreneurs Pursue the American Dream", Drug PolicyNewsletter, 1, No. 2, (1989). 2. Szasz, Thomas, Ceremonial Chemistry,Anchor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y. (1975). (Now availablefrom Laissez-Faire Books, New York.) 3. Szasz, Thomas, "A Plea for theCessation of the Longest War of the Twentieth Century: The War onDrugs", paper presented at The InternationalAnti-Prohibition Forum, Brussels, Sept.28-Oct.1, 1988. 4. Bouton, Jim, Ball Four and Ball Five,Edited by Leonard Shecter, Stein and Day, New York (1981). Appendix A: The Preface to the Book CeremonialChemistry There is probably one thing, and one thingonly, on which the leaders of all modern states agree; on whichCatholics, Protestants, Jews, Mohammedans, and atheists agree; onwhich Democrats, Republicans, Socialists, Communists, Liberals,and Conservatives agree; on which medical and scientificauthorities throughout the world agree; and on which the views,as expressed through opinion polls and voting records, of thelarge majority of individuals in all civilized countries agree.That thing is the "scientific fact" that certainsubstances which people like to ingest or inject are"dangerous" both to those who use them and to others;and that the use of such substances constitutes "drugabuse" or "drug addiction" - a disease whosecontrol and eradication are the duty of the combined forces ofthe medical profession and the state. However, there is littleagreement - from people to people, country to country, evendecade to decade - on which substances are acceptable and theiruse therefore considered a popular pastime, and which substancesare unacceptable and their use therefore considered "drugabuse" and "drug addiction." My aim in this book is at once simple andsweeping. First, I wish to identify the actual occurrences thatconstitute our so-called drug problem. I shall show that thesephenomena in fact consist of the passionate promotion and panickyprohibition of various substances; the habitual use and thedreaded avoidance of certain drugs; and, most generally, theregulation - by language, law, custom, religion, and every otherconceivable means of social and symbolic control - of certainkinds of ceremonial and sumptuary behaviors. Second, I wish to identify the conceptual realmand logical class into which these phenomena belong. I shall showthat they belong in the realm of religion and politics; that"dangerous drugs," addicts, and pushers are thescapegoats of our modern, secular, therapeutically imbuedsocieties; and that the ritual persecution of thesepharmacological and human agents must be seen against thehistorical backdrop of the ritual persecution of otherscapegoats, such as witches, Jews, and madmen. And third, I wish to identify the moral andlegal implications of the view that using and avoiding drugs arenot matters of health and disease but matters of good and evil;that, in other words, drug abuse is not a regrettable medicaldisease but a repudiated religious observance. Accordingly, ouroptions with respect to the "problem" of drugs are thesame as our options with respect to the "problem" ofreligions: that is, we can practice various degrees of toleranceand intolerance toward those whose religions - whether theocraticor therapeutic - differ from our own. For the past half-century the American peoplehave engaged in one of the most ruthless wars - fought under thecolors of drugs and doctors, diseases and treatments - that theworld has ever seen. If a hundred years ago the Americangovernment had tried to regulate what substances its citizenscould or could not ingest, the effort would have been ridiculedas absurd and rejected as unconstitutional. If fifty years agothe American government had tried to regulate what crops farmersin foreign countries could or could not cultivate, the effortwould have been criticized as meddling and rejected ascolonialism. Yet now the American government is deeply committedto imposing precisely such regulations - on its own citizens bymeans of criminal and mental health laws, and on those of othercountries by means of economic threats and incentives; and theseregulations - called "drug controls" or "narcoticcontrols" - are hailed and supported by countlessindividuals and institutions, both at home and abroad. We have thus managed to replace racial,religious, and military coercions and colonialisms, which nowseem to us dishonorable, with medical and therapeutic coercionsand colonialisms, which now seem to us honorable. Because theselatter controls are ostensibly based on Science and aim to secureonly Health, and because those who are so coerced and colonizedoften worship the idols of medical and therapeutic scientism asardently as do the coercers and colonizers, the victims cannoteven articulate their predicament and are therefore quitepowerless to resist their victimizers. Perhaps such preying ofpeople upon people - such symbolic cannibalism, providing meaningfor one life by depriving another of meaning - is an inexorablepart of the human condition and is therefore inevitable. But itis surely not inevitable for any one person to deceive himself orherself into believing that the ritual persecutions of scapegoats- in Crusades, Inquisitions, Final Solutions, or Wars on DrugAbuse - actually propitiate deities or prevent diseases. Thomas Szasz Syracuse, New York September 1, 1973 Appendix B: Addendum The following are a number of afterthoughtsthat were not included in the September 25, 1989 version of thepaper. 1) There are drugs that improve one's interestin things. Why not encourage our apathetic students to take thesedrugs provided the risk were acceptably low? 2) Probably, without drugs to aid ourimaginations, we cannot emerge from the social abyss into whichwe have descended. When the world is a better place, with fewermind-deadening institutions, we will not need drugs as much. 3) Another circumstance often mistaken foraddiction: Drugs anesthetize one from the pain of awareness ofthe world. The more sensitive one is, the greater the likelihoodof using drugs, all else being equal (and it never is). Somepeople would take drugs habitually whether chemical dependenceexisted or not; they simply cannot stand the world. Some of thesepeople are recognized geniuses. Vahn Lewis, a professor at U. ofT., Austin, asked me if there was a correlation between talentand drug-taking among jazz musicians in the 50s and 60s. Ithought for a minute and then replied, "Yes, the better theywere, the more drugs they took." Perhaps, they were too goodfor this world. (Undoubtedly some people take drugs because theyare not "good" enough.) 4) Some of the points made in my paper can beclarified by the ideas of Andrew Weil [5]. He supplied a generalprinciple to account for a number of phenomena that I accountedfor separately. The principle was lurking in my"subconscious" (unarticulated or preverbal thoughts),but Weil put it in words beautifully. The general idea is that itmay not be drugs at all that get you "high". 5) Corroboration of Weil's theories: Sometimesthe less you take the higher you get. Some people who have nofaith in drugs are not affected even by a large dose. 6) Frequently the spiritual rewards of takingdrugs far outweigh the harm and risk. 7) On the constitutional point again: Drugs arelegal. I wish someone would offer a constitutional defense. TheDPF should offer to pay for such a defense for people like thosemiddle-class farmers who grew pot out of economic necessity. 8) I have not emphasized sufficiently that wewill never accept laws against drugs or sex or food or guns oranything that is our personal business. Even the seat-belt lawsare wrong, though seat-belts are essential. Some people preferdrugs to sex. How would you like it if sex were prohibited! Thiswar can end up in terrorist attacks or all-out civil war.Although I personally am against violence, it wouldn't be hard toconvince some people that violence is the only answer. Eventuallythe religionists must be defeated, so there is no possibility ofpeace any time soon. 9) The following paragraph is from my paper"Introduction to Dematerialism" [6]: The point of my paper "Toward AxiomaticMorality" [7] is that it might be possible to get nearlyeveryone to agree to a few basic morals (or moral axioms) fromwhich all other morals [and laws] could be derived. By basicmorals, I do not mean religious superstition or sexual andpharmacological prudery. I am referring to respect for thefreedom of others (and their posterity), respect for theenvironment, and respect for truth. The fundamental principle ofmorality, which allows one to be free to do anything one pleasesso long as the freedom of others is not abridged, is theprehistoric basis for society, giving everyone his or her ownshare and space. I believe that respect for the freedom of othersimplies equal distribution of material wealth, since excesswealth can be used to abridge the freedom of the other, in onecase by purchasing excess political power, in another by biddingup the price of land and acquiring unfair exclusive access topart of the earth's surface, in another by holding a strongernegotiating position in an economic transaction, which might bethe employment of one person by another, a practice that isrevolting to many thoughtful people. The violation of thesemorals causes all of our troubles and creates all of our logicalconflicts and inconsistencies. 10) The following statement might be able to beunderstood by most intellectuals: "The notion of controllingthe possession of a substance is absurd. One may possessplutonium if one desires. The conflict arises out of theunreasonableness of society not out of the unreasonableness ofpossessing plutonium." These final statements may soundsilly to all but the most astute philosophers: "Everyone hasforbidden substances inside his or her body with a nonzeroprobability due to quantum effects." "Substance is avariation in the geometry of space, therefore the notion ofpossession of a substance is absurd." 11) A woman suffering from arthritiscomplained, in a letter to a Houston newspaper, that, due toanti-drug hysteria, she has difficulty obtaining prescriptionsfor Tylenol 3, which contains codeine, a drug the research forwhich was supported by her tax dollars. 12) The proponents of prohibition indulge in anumber of fallacies and one way to undo their mischief might beto point out their fallacies. Bennett, lately, has been indulgingin ad hominem arguments. Also, when he refers always tothe use of drugs as abuse, he is indulging in the fallacy of theexcluded middle. Almost all prohibitionists indulge in Bentham'sdyslogistic and eulogistic fallacies, which consist in applying aterm of either denigration or praise to an item that is logicallyneutral. An example is calling drugs "poison" or"horrible mind-bending chemicals" [Carl Rowan]. Clearlydrugs are good if they are used to remedy an unpleasant conditionor cure a disease; but, for the sake of argument, they could beconsidered neutral, i.e., their goodness or badness depends onhow they are used. Referring to drugs as poison is a clear caseof the dyslogistic fallacy. Another use of the dyslogistic fallacy isreference to the spread of drugs as an epidemic, whereas takingdrugs is not even a disease. Also, users of drugs are referred toas slaves even though they act more independently than theaverage employee of the average American corporation. Actually,the average Christian, who accepts Christian dogma withoutreservation is more of a slave than is the most hooked addict,i.e., the religionist's soul is entirely subjugated whereas thebody only of the addict is under the control of the addictingdrug, as evidenced by the fact that his will remains free to wishto be free of the addiction. Even this analysis is granting toomuch to the use of the word slave. How can one become the slaveof an inanimate substance, which has no will! An example of theeulogistic fallacy is the praise of the narcs as the good guys,when in fact they are no better and no worse than anyone elseincluding the dealers. This ignores the fundamental facts ofman's existence. 13) I recently heard an ex-addict make thefollowing statements more or less (I do not remember his exactwords): "I used drugs for about 30 years so I know what I'mtalking about when I talk about drugs. Some of these guys who aremaking these outrageous attacks on drugs ought to try drugsbefore they shoot off their mouths. Anyway, I quit taking drugsabout 10 years ago. Why? I guess they didn't fit into my plansanymore. I changed careers and the new career didn't require theuse of drugs. To be fair, I should say that the new career reallydidn't tolerate drugs either. Maybe I just outgrew drugs. I knowa lot of people to whom that happened. One day drugs no longerinterested them. They put up with all kinds of drug treatmentsand it didn't mean a thing, then one day they just stopped. Ithappens all the time, especially to older folks. So you canforget that hooked-for-life nonsense. "On the other hand, although I do not wishto argue that I am not better off now that I have stopped takingdrugs or that the next older person who stops taking drugs won'tbe better off, it's worth considering that, if you stop takingdrugs, you may lose the ability to take drugs! That's true. Youmay wish to take drugs again to get high, but your body may losethe ability to tolerate them after a certain age. This could leadto serious regrets. At least, it's worth thinking about. Peopleare accustomed to thinking that the decision to take drugs isirrevocable, but they do not consider the possibility that thedecision to stop taking drugs might be irrevocable. "But, I want to make a couple ofadditional comments about taking drugs: First, the laws againstdrugs caused me to take more drugs and to take them more oftenand for a very understandable reason. I took as much as I couldbecause I was afraid I wouldn't be able to get any more. Even ifI didn't feel like getting high and I had the opportunity to gethigh, I got high because I was afraid it might be my last chance.The law was always there with the threat of interrupting thesupply. One had to make hay while the sun shone. "Also, I want you to know that I was neverharmed by drugs, but I was harmed a number of times by the lawsagainst drugs. Once because I used an infected needle, which Iwould not have used had needles been available in the drugstore.A number of times I took bad drugs. If they were legal, I wouldhave used desoxyn or isotonic solution of methamphetaminehydrochloride for a stimulant, dilaudid (or pharmaceuticalheroin) for a narcotic, hashish (orally, in cookies) for ahypnotic (trance inducer or meditation enhancer), and valium fora tranquilizer and/or a soporific. By the way, it was a dark dayfor America when the ampules of isotonic solution ofmethamphetamine hydrochloride were removed from the market. Theeffect of that stuff, when injected, was like turning on thelights in a room that had been darkened with a dimmer switch.Perhaps it did a little harm, but the damage must have beennegligible compared to the benefits. Also, American civilization(such as it is) took a giant step backward when heroin wasremoved from the pharmacopoeia. "I know I can't sue the law enforcementcommunity and Congress, but those people owe me plenty. SometimesI hope there really will be a judgment day so that those guyswill get the punishment they deserve. But, what the hell, theyare just ignorant slobs like the rest of us. No one is perfect.If they were in the john when the brains were being passed out,is it their fault! "Finally, I want to say a word about drugsand sex. I enjoyed sex before I took drugs, but after I startedhaving sex while I was high I wondered why I thought it was sogreat when I was not high. I mean it was a thousand times better.So, go ahead. Abstain from drugs. (Probably you should nowadays.Maybe it's no longer safe. If so, too bad.) Maybe you'll livelonger. Maybe you'll never go to jail. Maybe you'll be a bigsuccess in business. So what! You'll miss out on one of the twoor three greatest things on this earth. Maybe I wouldn't thinkthat were true if society hadn't destroyed most of the naturalpleasures of life by perverting the way we live, but I can'timagine a life that wouldn't be enhanced by drugs. Some peoplethink Jesus lived a perfect life and he took drugs. Put that inyour pipe and smoke it." 14) The most important hidden assumption in thethinking of Bennett and other prohibitionists is that theindividual serves some higher purpose than himself, usually theneeds of the economy. In a paper, "Drug Abuse in theWorkplace", by Walsh and Gust of the NIDA [8], this tacitassumption stands behind every conclusion. It is interesting thatthey viewed as an intolerable circumstance surrounding drug usethe discovered fact that "marijuana and cocaine users`skipped work' two to three times as often as nonusers, simplybecause they 'didn't want to be there'. [Shuster C.R., TestimonyBefore the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control,May 7, 1986.] Walsh and Gust were unable to recognize that drugsmight have helped users realize their true feelings and that thedifficulty might lie with the workplace rather than with drugs. 15) Someone said, "I broke my toe and thedoctor gave me some nasty little codeine substitute. I needed apill for pain, but not a pill that makes me wish I hadn't takenit. Heroin would be fine. What's that you say? Heroin is toostrong? Fine, I'll take less. Also, I could use a Sabbatical fromthis nasty little world we live in. I could have killed two birdswith one stone, killed the pain and had a holiday, for the priceof the same harm to my body, if there would have been any harm.But this codeine substitute feels so much worse than heroin thatnobody will ever be able to convince me that it doesn't do moreharm as well. My body isn't stupid you know!" 16) "If I were a young man, I would go toany lengths to avoid living in a drug-free society. I would findan island refuge and grow and manufacture my own drugs or I wouldlive on the high seas as a pirate. Forcing a person to go withoutdrugs is intolerable repression. Some of the greatest moments ofmy life, physically and spiritually, have occurred while I washigh on legal and illegal drugs. Unfortunately, I am too old todo what I would have to do to re-create those moments." 17) The choice between taking drugs and nottaking drugs is a little like the choice between a plannedeconomy and a laissez-faire economy. Actually it is like areligious choice if not precisely a religious choice. MostAmericans think that planned economies have been discredited, butthat is not the case. It is easier to argue that laissez-faireeconomies have created the more undesirable circumstances. In anycase, to regulate one's own body chemistry or not is clearly apersonal decision. Nearly everyone chooses to regulate to someextent. 18) In Brave New World, Aldous Huxley depicts anation enslaved with the aid of drugs, free sex, and freedom fromreligion. It appears that Huxley has the situation reversed.Nowadays one sees that the forces of repression favor drugprohibition, restrained sex, and the spread of religious dogma. 19) Banning of all drugs, even for children,might be compared to banning masturbation. While masturbation isadmittedly a poor succedaneum for true erotic sex, our publicschool system has not sufficiently prepared manythirteen-year-old children for responsible, meaningful sexualrelations. For the time being, then, masturbation is theinevitable alternative. When society is sufficiently advancedthat no one feels the need for the artificiality of drugs,coercion will no longer be required to discourage the use ofdrugs. Until that time, no amount of coercion will suffice. Thus,it appears that, as usual, we have the cart before the horse. Theproblem isn't drugs at all; it is a badly organized society. References 5. Weil, Andrew, "The Only Solution to TheDrug Problem", The Truth Seeker, 1, No.5 (1989). 6. Wayburn, T. L., "Introduction toDematerialism", Preprint available from author (1990). 7. Wayburn, T. L., "Toward AxiomaticMorality", Preprint available from author (1990). 8. Walsh, J. Michael and Steven W. Gust,"Drug Abuse in the Workplace", Seminars in OccupationalMedicine, 1, No.4 (1986). Thomas L. Wayburn Houston, Texas April 2, 1990 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-87IA031-000651-B022-254http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dpf90l.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123647 text/html 40303HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:36:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:15 GMTContent-length: 40085 Fallacies and Unstated Assumptions in Prevention andTreatment Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate FALLACIES AND UNSTATED ASSUMPTIONS INPREVENTION AND TREATMENT by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD Everything We Need to Know We Learned in Kindergarten. We think we know almost everything; what weactually know is almost nothing - and most of that is false. Themost pernicious type of ignorance is belief in falsehood. We areignorant, but our minds are filled with something. In thebeginning, our minds begin to be filled by words, which representideas. That's why I shall place so much emphasis on the abuse ofwords. Next, our minds begin to be filled with notions, i.e.,unexamined assumptions, promulgated or inculcated by parents,teachers, government, business, etc. Some of these notions wehear repeated every day, but others are buried so deeply that weare never aware of their existence. In either case they areprejudices; they have been assimilated without the exercise ofour judgment or our reason. Some are true, but most are false.Social institutions are willing to go to great lengths to preventfalsehood from being exposed. Heterodox views are everywhererepressed. The world stands on the brink of the Orwellian abyss. People who are unwilling to examine theirprejudices are said to be closed-minded. The notion that allfundamental philosophical questions have been answered is theultimate mind closer. The world is filled with closed-mindedpeople and we may never be able to influence most of them by anappeal to reason, but that does not excuse any one of us as anindividual from being willing to drag out and examine under thecold light of reason even our most cherished prejudices. Theworld may not be ready to give up its myths, but there is no lawof the universe that says we cannot understand something merelybecause our ability to make a living depends on our notunderstanding it. As soon as one of our assumptions is questionedor its opposite averred by even one solitary soul, it becomesincumbent upon us to drop the contested claim as an assumptionand provide for it, instead, a proof. If the claim ismetaphysical, it must be supported by the twin pillars ofreasonableness (aesthetics) and utility. That's what I believe.None of us is completely open-minded. I am curious to know,however, why there is such a great disparity between what one cansay to an individual and what one can say to the general public. Currently, we are moving from a law-enforcementapproach to a prevention-treatment approach to drugs. This changeis resisted by government to whom it represents a loss of power,but it is supported by business, education, medicine, and otherinstitutions that stand to gain. The unstated assumption is that,since prevention and treatment are less repressive than lawenforcement, they are not at all repressive. This is thefallacy of false consolation, an appeal to peace (ad quietem).Both law-enforcement and prevention-treatment are characterizedby the notion that one person has a right to regulate thebehavior of another. The prevention-treatment approach puts drugsunder the auspices of the health establishment. People who haverun afoul of both the criminal-justice system and themental-health system know that between the two there is not muchto choose. Both enjoy pretty gruesome reputations. The days ofshock therapy, pre-frontal lobotomies, and "One Flew Overthe Cuckoos Nest" are not far behind us, if they arebehind us. The Supreme Court ruled recently that mental healthinstitutions may force patients to take drugs against their will.Man's inhumanity to man continues apace. The decriminalized"addict" may wonder whether he has jumped out of thefrying pan directly into the flame. The jailer knows damn well heis punishing someone for nonstandard behavior, in which he mayindulge himself. The therapist may be running around with hishead full of what is very likely to turn out to be mush. The assumption that some people have a right tohave power over other people is usually justified on the basisthat the dominant people know what's best. Even if we dispose ofthe notion that drugs represent a public-health problem, we willhave to contend with those who have the most to gain from thepoint of view that drugs represent a spiritual problem, namely,the clergy. As Bertrand Russell [1] said, "It is possiblethat mankind is on the threshold of a golden age; but, if so, itwill be necessary first to slay the dragon that guards the door,and this dragon is religion." (I would have said "organizedreligion".) Eventually we will realize that we have apolitical problem resulting from spiritual corruption. Thatproblem has nothing to do with drugs. An example of spiritualcorruption, in my opinion, is the notion that one should receivesomething in return for what one gives. This is supportedindirectly by the so-called Protestant work ethic, which has beenadopted by Catholics and which is accepted in Asia. Only by acomplete change of heart will we be able to recognize the typesof political change required, but we should not look forward tothe assistance of any professional politician alive in this worldtoday. Enlightenment will come exceedingly slowly and iscontingent upon the survival of the human race. In the meantime,we must struggle to be allowed to teach our view of things incontradistinction to the conventional wisdom. Exposing fallaciesand stating unstated assumptions might be helpful. A Drug-Free Society is Desirable. Whether stated or unstated, this represents aserious fallacy backed up by dozens of other fallacies. In myprevious paper [2], I said what I thought of the idea. It isbased in part on the notion that drugs are what get us high. Thisassumption, taken to be so obvious as to require no mention, isquestioned by Andrew Weil [3]. What if we show people how to gethigh without drugs, but the subsequent behavior and otherconsequences of getting high were the same as they are now withdrugs. Would that be acceptable to prohibitionists? Some of thembelieve that pleasure itself is evil. The idea that a drug-freesociety is desirable depends, too, on the assumption that genuinedevotees of drugs will submit to tyranny. Frequently, we are told that taking drugs isimmoral. This is the vague-generalities fallacy, another fallacyof confusion and an example of ad judicium (to judgment).Some morals are good, others bad. The proponent implies that thenature of good morals is understood and that, if we violate hismorals, we are against Morality. Drugs may be bad for the bodybut good for the soul. Perhaps the body and the soul are at warfor possession of the will. In Brave New World, Aldous Huxleypictured a dreadful totalitarian society, supported by atheism,free sex, and free drugs. Huxley's fears are well founded, but,in my opinion, he has precisely reversed the instruments ofrepression, perhaps purposely to suggest what he could notespouse publicly. A drug-free society would expedite therepression of independent thought. Drug users have been in thevanguard of the anti-war and other progressive movements,including the movements for civil rights, women's rights, and gayrights. Some believe that LSD and marijuana weresymptoms of "the movement", but it is easy to make agood case that they were the prime cause. Whatever else onethinks of Uspenski, it is difficult to argue against his theorythat drugs provide a conscious shock that enables one to breakthrough the walls of prejudice that bind us, especially in asociety where we are immersed in propaganda. In any case, thosewho use drugs are in a better position than those who don't tojudge the validity of the argument. Finally, many people believethat drugs themselves are the cause of the drug problem. Thisassumption is highly suspect. Apparently, outside of context,drugs are neutral. Almost all prohibitionists indulge in Bentham's[4] dyslogistic and eulogistic fallacies, which consist inapplying a term of either denigration or praise to an item thatis logically neutral. An example is calling drugs"poison" or "horrible mind-bending chemicals"[Carl Rowan]. Clearly drugs are good if they are used to remedyan unpleasant condition or cure a disease; but, for the sake ofargument, they could be considered neutral; i.e., their goodnessor badness depends on how they are used. Referring to drugs as"poison" is a clear case of the dyslogistic fallacy.Potassium cyanide is poison! William Bennett, lately, has beenindulging in ad hominem arguments. Users of drugs are referred to as"slaves" even though they act more independently thanthe average employee of the average American corporation.Actually, the average religionist, who accepts religious dogmawithout reservation is more of a slave than is the most hookedaddict; i.e., the religionist's soul is entirely subjugatedwhereas the body only of the addict is under the control of theaddicting drug, as evidenced by the fact that his will remainsfree to wish to be free of the addiction. Even this analysis isgranting too much to the use of the word slave. How can onebecome the slave of an inanimate substance, which has no will! Similarly, we are told that drug enforcers arethe "good guys" and users and dealers are the "badguys". This ignores the fundamental facts of humanexistence. Needless to say, the mere taking of drugs does notautomatically elevate people to an elite class of individualscapable of discerning right from wrong and able to see throughall the illusions and myths perpetuated by society. On the otherhand, many people who are waging the war on drugs employ deviousand underhanded tactics, not the least dishonorable of which isarranging a highly contrived purchase of drugs near the WhiteHouse and then implying, for rhetorical purposes, that thepurchase was routine. Thus, it is not at all clear that those whoare trying to prevent people from taking drugs are the "goodguys" and those who are using drugs are the "badguys" as the establishment would have us believe. Fallacies and Lies Can Be Used to Prevent Drug Use. Recently I attended a class given by theHouston Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse (HCADA) for people whowill speak to students in the Houston Independent School District(HISD) to prevent them from taking drugs. I attended anotherclass (to be discussed below) for children referred by the courtand their parents. I will not apologize to the reader forattending only two classes or for assuming that these classeswere typical. No one is better able to judge than some of myaudience whether the fallacies discussed in the sequel apply ornot. The assumption that falsehood and fallacious reasoning are aproper means to the end of preventing children from taking drugsis not specifically stated by the HCADA nor do they acknowledgeit; but, if it is not behind their program, they are very badlydeceived. Under these circumstances, this is theend-justifies-the-means fallacy (ad judicium). "Charles Manson, for example, took drugs,therefore drugs are bad" is an example of an ad odium(to hatred) fallacy. It neglects the fact that William RowanHamilton, for example, took drugs. Counselors are advised to tellthe students that marijuana, nowadays, is 1000% more powerfulthan formerly rather than 10 times more powerful, despite thefact that percentages are applied normally only when they liebetween 0 and 100. Whether increase in strength is observed ornot (NORML says "not"), the deception that 1000% seemsmore than 10-times reinforces stupidity and is ad metum(to fear). Again, "the end justifies the means". TheHCADA neglects to mention that one might simply take 1/10th asmuch, which will reduce the trauma to the throat, very muchexaggerated by HCADA. The HCADA does not recommend ingestion byeating (in hash brownies, say) or the use of a water pipe, whichthey might do if they were truly interested in the student'swelfare. The HCADA says that marijuana is toxic. Thebest scientific data places its toxicity below that of potatoeson the LD-50 scale. Also, marijuana has a therapeutic ratioimmeasurably superior to that of aspirin, for example. HCADAclaims marijuana is often contaminated, sometimes by dried horsemanure. This is unjustified and ad metum. They describehorrible effects of smoking pot, which, in real life, are neverseen. They give data for exceptionally heavy smoking and fortests done on animals with absurdly heavy doses. They describe anisolated case as though it were common, failing to givestatistics. Ad metum, again and again. They showphotographs of damaged nerves in a videotape by AIMS Media of VanNuys, California, which refuses to supply literature citationsfor the purported research. Lester Grinspoon thinks it's faked.The AIMS tape features a narrator dressed in a white lab coatwith a stethoscope hanging around his neck. The more astutestudents will recognize that this man is not likely to need astethoscope during the narration of this tape. This is anappeal-to-authority fallacy, an example of ad verecundiam(to modesty). Reported side-effects of marijuana are listedin dyslogistic terms, whereas they might have been listed ineulogistic terms by a devotee of pot or in neutral terms by anunbiased reporter. Examples: "lethargic" (dyslogistic)instead of "meditative" (eulogistic), "loss ofinterest in school" instead of "able to see through thestupidity of the curriculum and the teachers","absenteeism" instead of "unwilling to toleratethe inhospitable atmosphere in which we work and learn","chaotic" thinking instead of "creative" (or"imaginative") thinking, and so on. In a perverse abuseof language, many anti-drug people try to detach the word"square" from non-users and attach it to users."Hip" and "square" are the words coined byusers to differentiate themselves from others. The HCADA employs the gateway fallacy.Epidemiological evidence seems to point to marijuana as a"gateway" to "harder" drugs. The evidence canbe explained by the behavior of individuals who cannot obtaintheir drug of choice due to the laws against drugs. TheHCADA employs a poster that indicates one might go to jail forsmoking pot without mentioning that many people believe that thelaws against smoking pot should be repealed. They claim thatsmoking marijuana impairs one's sense of time without mentioningthe great musicians who smoked marijuana when they played. It isintellectually dishonest to report only half of the story, butthat's what HCADA does at every point. They divide drugsimproperly into stimulants and depressants. Two charts were employed showing drugs that arenot abused and drugs of abuse. Nyquil, which can be abused, ifthe word is to have any meaning, was on the first chart, andalcohol and cigarets as well as the usual illegal drugs wereshown on the second chart. I asked if moderate use of alcohol orany of the illegal drugs constituted drug abuse. I was told thatany use whatsoever was considered abuse. This is theexcluded-middle fallacy and illustrates that the Houston Councilof Alcohol and Drug Abuse doesn't know the meaning of theword "abuse". I could go on and on, but I will finishby noting that the teacher commented in passing that, "withkids, honesty is best"! After the class, I reminded the teacher thatexaggerating the danger had been tried and failed. When I pointedout the factual and logical errors in her presentation, she"refuted" my objections on the basis that (i) she hadmany years experience in this field and I had very little (adverecundiam), (ii) her presentation was consistent with thelatest "scientific" research, and (iii) the HCADA was ahighly respected United-Way institution. These are fallaciousappeals to authority and the use of the term"scientific" is a vague generality. I pointed out thatit is intellectually dishonest not to present both sides. Evenwhen I reminded her that it was not I who was disseminatingquestionable facts in the public schools, she insisted that theburden of proof was on me. Students don't have to prove we arelying, they need only know it, after which they discounteverything we have said even though some of it may be true."Falsehood is so unexacting, [it] needs so little help tomake itself manifest!" [Proust] If I wished, I was told, Icould bring my argument to the director, but the director refusedto meet with me and review the evidence I had assembled. So muchfor truth in the public schools of Houston. My letters to theschool board and the United Way are still in my head. They willbe written but probably to no avail. Drug Abuse and Drug Addiction Are Diseases. The effect of this assumption, whether statedor unstated, is to bring "drug abuse" and "drugaddiction" under the purview of the medical profession. Wewish to investigate under what circumstances this may be donelegitimately. Peele [5], Schaler [6], and others make anexcellent case that it cannot be done at all. But, placing drugtreatment under the auspices of the medical professionconstitutes an appeal to respect for authority and to fear.Leading authorities support prevention and treatment, therefore,if we are against prevention and treatment, we are againstScience. In the preface of Ceremonial Chemistry [7], Szaszstates, essentially, that "everyone" is against drugs,but different drugs depending on era and culture. The use ofacceptable drugs is a popular pastime, while the use ofunacceptable drugs is considered "drug abuse" and"drug addiction." "Drug abuse is not a regrettablemedical disease but a repudiated religious observance.Accordingly, our options with respect to the 'problem' of drugsare the same as our options with respect to the 'problem' ofreligions: that is, we can practice various degrees of toleranceand intolerance toward those whose religions - whether theocraticor therapeutic - differ from our own." I believe that terms such as"disease", "epidemic", "treatment",and "recovering" in the context of drug (mis)useoriginated in metaphor but continue to be used to confuse thepublic because it is advantageous to the health professions to doso, in which case the use of these terms is the impostor-termsfallacy (ad judicium), a fallacy of confusion. Even theuse of the word "illness" in the phrase "mentalillness" probably originated as a metaphor but becameconfused with actual illness almost immediately. In any case, itis not at all clear that mental illness exists in the sense thatthe health profession would like us to believe it exists. Szasz[8] thinks not. Behind the disease model of conflicts in livingis the unstated assumption that "social intercourse would beharmonious, satisfying, and the secure basis of a good life wereit not for the disrupting influences of mental illness." The Random House Dictionary of the EnglishLanguage [9] defines disease as (i) a condition of the bodyin which there is incorrect function resulting from the effect ofheredity, infection, diet, or environment and (ii) any derangedor depraved condition, as of the mind, society, etc. Thedefinition in The Mosby Medical Encyclopedia [10] agreeswith (i) but doesn't include (ii). Health professionals canremove people from environment or society temporarily at somecost, but they, the people, must return eventually to anenvironment or society about which the health profession can donothing. Therefore, we may dismiss society and environment fromthe discussion for the time being. We must then inquire as to themeaning of "deranged" and "depraved" andwhether they might not be dyslogistic terms for behavior of whichwe do not approve, behavior that might just as well be describedin eulogistic terms, such as "divinely inspired" or"impelled by a vision", or neutral terms such as"nonstandard". The effect of infection can be ruled out; thereare no germs, viruses, etc. If we may consider drugs part of ourdiets, we recognize that some discomfort due to having takendrugs might be considered disease, but we wonder if that is whatis being treated by physicians and other members of the healthprofessions. The effects of heredity have been discussed inconnection with alcohol. Many researchers still believe in a genefor alcoholism; but, as shown by Peele [5], undesirable responsesto alcohol can be explained in other ways. In any case, we hoperesearchers identify the gene for drug addiction soon, if itexists, so that those of us who don't carry it can use drugscasually without fear of becoming addicted! I have not encountered definitions of drugabuse or drug addiction. As discussed above, HCADA does notdistinguish between use and abuse. Mathre [11] dissociates casualusers and people "who choose to alter their state ofconsciousness through drugs" from abusers and addicts. Peele[5] states that "the administration's own statisticsdisprove the link between recreational drug use andaddiction". Mathre seems to exempt drug (or chemical)dependence from her disease model of addiction, but she does notsay what addiction is. I have compiled a short list of phenomena thatare sometimes referred to as (or mistaken for) drug addiction:(1) self-medication for chronic depression or chronic pain, (2)taking a drug that causes a symptom that can be relieved only bytaking more of the drug or by the passage of a few hours, (3)acute withdrawal symptoms that last several days, (4) dedicationto the repetition of a pleasurable experience regardless oflong-range consequences, (5) taking a drug to perform a task,which might have to be performed several times a week, perhaps tomake a living, (6) obligatory daily performance of a task thatcannot be performed during withdrawal from a drug, (7) usingdrugs to isolate oneself from the painful realities of life in abad world, (8) unwillingness to pass an opportunity to take drugsbecause the law may cut off one's supply, (9) the case of a drugthat, like valium or blood-pressure medication, poses a healthrisk if one forgets to take it in the absence of a craving that(blessedly) reminds one to take it. In Case 1, a physician mayprescribe another drug, Case 2 is normal and involves a consciouschoice between two alternatives on the part of the individual,Case 3 might require supervised tapering off or the prescriptionof other drugs, Cases 4-8 are behavioral choices in the face ofcircumstances that are beyond a therapist's control. I do notbelieve any of the cases correspond to what we normally call adisease. Case 9 is a normal medical situation and stretches themeaning of addiction seriously, but may not be omitted as itconstitutes a requirement to take the drug, which, in this caseand in this case alone, is strictly medical. Drug abuse usually refers to some type ofbehavior of which other people do not approve but which isconsistent with the goals of the user, who might be a criminal oronly an oddball. The term "denial" is a fallaciousappeal to the authority of the treatment community in a disputewith a user who is insufficiently articulate to defend his valuesand motives. The term "denial" is an impostor. When theuser himself disapproves of his own behavior, the term "drugabuse" might make sense, unless the user is a victim ofanti-drug propaganda. Many people who have tried to stop takingdrugs might benefit from the friendship and advice of other drugusers. As suggested by Henman [12], drug use must be looked atfrom the perspective of the user. Ex-Users and Non-Users Are Competent to Counsel. Occasionally a person who has never used drugsbut is possessed of great sensitivity and penetrating insightmight be able to offer useful advice to drug users, but normallya non-user simply does not know what's going on. Ex-users areusually failed users. If they didn't understand drugs when theywere using them, why should they be expected to understand themnow? In my many years of experience in the drugculture (1954-1963 and 1969-1980), I have observed very fewpeople whose drug taking was troublesome to themselves or otherusers. Ex-users were sometimes more troublesome within the drugcommunity than were users. If a member of the set was out ofline, the other members could usually bring social pressure tobear upon the transgressor and things would soon return tonormal. Many of the people with whom I associated during thoseyears have died short of their 70s, but there is much to be saidfor quality of life. Most people, when they are born, have noright to expect to live as interesting a life as some of myfriends have lived. The reader might protest that I was notliving in the inner-city ghetto of 1990. It is widely assumedthat the greatest problem in the inner city ghetto is drugs, butisn't it more likely that racism and the other institutions that createdthe ghetto are the central problem? We Can Predict Human Behavior. Only mathematics is unconditionally true.Physicists employ mathematics to provide provisional solutions toeasy problems. The difficult problems are referred to chemistsunless they involve the mystery of life, in which case they arereferred to biologists. Since World War II, social scientists,particularly economists, have tried to apply the techniques ofphysics to the behavior of people. Despite some successes, thelikelihood of continued progress in this direction is open todoubt, especially now that the phenomenon of chaos has beenobserved in systems as simple as a dripping water faucet! For thepurposes of treating drug users, it is insufficient to predictthe behavior of people in statistical aggregates and even that issuspect. The twentieth century has been distinguished byrevealing what can not be done by science. As one might expect from the name, The HoustonCouncil on Alcohol and Drug Abuse attempts to exploit theparallel between alcoholics and people who use drugs excessively(according to someone). In particular, they employ the word"sober" to mean "not high on drugs". This isan impostor term as many drugs, e.g., pot, make one abnormallysober. The comparison with alcohol breaks down because, whereasalcoholics might not avail themselves of other drugs tocounteract the effects of alcohol or to substitute for alcoholwhen alcohol is not indicated, free drug users could employ alarge slate of drugs, including alcohol, to adjust their bodychemistry appropriately under most circumstances; i.e., theymight use one drug to work, another to play, another to have sex,a fourth to drive home, and a fifth to go to sleep. With moreresearch, this might be accomplished safely. At the second class at the HCADA, referred toabove, the class leader claimed he could always recognize a kidfrom a dysfunctional family. According to Bertrand Russell [13],the family has been dysfunctional since men began to work awayfrom the homestead, and it has become less functional with eachchange in modern society. Why blame dysfunctionality on drugswhen both parents work? Also, why must it be assumed always thatthe behavioral choices of the drug user are incorrect? Often themembers of the family who are troubled by a person taking drugs,although convinced of the rectitude of their conduct, are notwell-behaved themselves, nor do they always have the best motivesfor wishing to restrict the user's activities. How many wives ofmusicians complain about the behavior of their husbands withoutunderstanding the importance of the musician's quest! We have aproblem of conflicting values, not a drug problem. The thrust of the class was an explication (asfact) of the victim-enabler-hero-scapegoat-loner-mascot theorywherein "volunteers" were asked to simulate the variousroles, holding up poster-size signs with lists of psychologicalattributes. Oversimplifications aside, it is clear that thistheory cannot predict. The class leader did not indicate that thetheory was conjectural and unproven. The term "victim"is clearly an impostor, used to signal the disease theory ofnonstandard behavior. The term "enabler" ignores theimpediments created by most spouses of alcoholics and drug users.Also, the theory totally ignores the possibility that the school,the workplace, or the political system in which we live is the"culprit". Political theory seems to be missing fromalmost all approaches to social problems in the United States.Since "substance abuse" seems to be a symptom of adeeper problem, why should we not expect abstinence to shift theproblem elsewhere? While watching the class, I could not help butbe struck by the wide disparity of backgrounds of those present.This must be reflected in a wide disparity in values. Assuggested by Szasz [8], why should a single approach fiteveryone? The self-esteem fad was very much in evidence,but why should people feel good about doing bad? Children haveonly to turn on the TV to realize how unimportant they are in asociety where only famous people count, an abuse perpetuated byourselves, today, in the conference for which this paper wasprepared. This business of applauding themselves and each otherat the tiniest provocation and standing up and saying "Hi,I'm Darrell" is brainwashing and gets the respect itdeserves among children. The group leader referred to God andquoted Proverbs (but not Proverbs 31:6,7) in violation of theFirst Amendment, as discussed by Luff [14]. The Tough Love theorywas introduced. Although there may be a little truth to the idea,truth suffers when one tries to turn tough love into a business.The unstated assumption is that one can package wisdom. Nevertheless, some people do stop takingdrugs. Does that mean treatment has been successful? This is the post-hoc-ergo-propter-hocfallacy (after this, therefore because of this). Perhaps subjectshave merely exchanged one form of deviance for another. Perhapssubjects have invested a great deal of money and don't want toadmit they have wasted it. (Charter Hospital of Sugarland, Texas,charges $825/day for 30 days and employs some pretty hard sell.)This is not a cure; it's self-deception. And this is the mainpoint: Do people who stop taking drugs and enter a lifelongabstinence program along the lines of Alcoholics Anonymous reallyimprove their lives? Are they not simply exchanging one bad habitfor another, or, perhaps, exhibiting the same character defect ina new way? Perhaps people in treatment "cults" aresaving the body at the expense of the soul. "I'd rather be adrunk than belong to AA." Perhaps, though, as in the case ofMarcel's friend Saint-Loup, who stopped taking cocaine to becomea war hero in Remembrance of Things Past, they have simplyfound something better to do. I believe that nearly anyone willstop using drugs if he has an opportunity to do somethingworthwhile with which drugs are incompatible. The Primary Function of a Human Being Is to Serve theEconomy. The most important unstated assumption in thethinking of William Bennett and other prohibitionists is that theindividual serves some higher purpose other than himself, usuallythe needs of the economy. In a paper, "Drug Abuse in theWorkplace", by Walsh and Gust of the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA) [15], this tacit assumption stands behind everyconclusion. It is interesting that they viewed as an intolerablecircumstance of drug use the discovered fact that "marijuanaand cocaine users 'skipped work' two to three times as often asnonusers, simply because they 'didn't want to be there'."[Shuster C.R., Testimony Before the House Select Committee onNarcotics Abuse and Control, May 7, 1986.] Walsh and Gust wereunable to recognize that drugs might have helped users realizetheir true feelings and that the difficulty might lie with theworkplace rather than with drugs. "The number one problem inthe workplace is drugs," they tell us. But, according toHusch [16], "Work is not the arena to which problems arebrought, rather work may be the forum within which problemsarise." Walsh and Gust assume obliquely that drug useleads to impairment, neglecting cases where it leads to improvedperformance. They refer to occupations "where it isessential that the individual be free of any and all effects ofall drugs at all times", without naming even one suchoccupation. I challenge. The assumption is that theindividual should adjust to the workplace rather than the otherway around. NIDA advocates Tough But Fair drug policies, but isit likely that business will be fair when faced with values thatconflict with its own? Why is it that, according to business,drugs are harmful but pesticides are not? Houston, Texas September 19, 1990 References 1. Russell, Bertrand, "Has Religion MadeUseful Contributions to Civilization?" in Why I Am Not aChristian and Other Essays, Paul Edwards, Editor, Simon andShuster, New York (1957) 2. Wayburn, Thomas L., "No One Has a RightTo Impose an Arbitrary System of Morals on Others" in DrugPolicy 1889-1990, A Reformer's Catalogue (Abbreviatedas DPFC), Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B. Zeese, Eds., The DrugPolicy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1989). 3. Weil, Andrew, "The Only Solution to theDrug Problem," The Truth Seeker, 116, No. 5(1989). 4. Bentham, Jeremy, Bentham's Handbook ofPolitical Fallacies, Ed. Harold A. Larrabee, Johns HopkinsPress, Baltimore (1952). 5. Peele, Stanton, "Does Addiction ExcuseThieves and Killers from Criminal Responsibility" in DPFC(See Ref. 1) 6. Schaler, Jeffrey A., "Truth, Traynorand McKelvey: Politics and the Alcoholism Controversy"in DPFC. 7. Szasz, Thomas, Ceremonial Chemistry,Anchor Press/Doubleday, Garden City, N.Y. (1975). (Now availablefrom Lassez-Faire Books, New York.) 8. Szasz, Thomas, "The Myth of MentalIllness" in Ideology and Sanity, Doubleday Anchor,Garden City, NY (1970). 9. The Random House Dictionary of theEnglish Language, Lawrence Urdang, Editor in Chief, RandomHouse, New York (1968). 10. The Mosby Medical Encyclopedia, Eds.Walter D. Glanze, Kenneth N. Anderson, and Lois E. Anderson, NewAmerican Library, New York (1985). 11. Mathre, Mary Lynn, "New TreatmentOptions after Repeal: Variety and Availability of Treatment forClients" in DPFC. 12. Henman, Anthony Richard, "Coca: AnAlternative to Cocaine," in DPFC. 13. Russell, Bertrand, "The newGeneration" in Why I Am Not a Christian and Other Essays,Paul Edwards, Editor, Simon and Shuster, New York (1957) 14. Luff, Ellen, "The First Amendment andDrug Alcohol Treatment Programs" in DPFC. 15. Walsh, J. Michael and Steven W. Gust,"Drug Abuse in the Workplace", Seminars in OccupationalMedicine, 1, No.4 (1986). 16. Husch, Jerri, "Of Work and Drugs:Notes on Prevention" in DPFC. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-88IA031-000651-B022-272http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dpf90rev.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123656 text/html 31351HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:36:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:06 GMTContent-length: 31133 A Review of the 1990 Drug Policy Foundation Conference Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate A REVIEW OF THE 1990 DRUG POLICY FOUNDATIONCONFERENCE by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD The Plenary Sessions The plenary sessions are elitist. Moreover, Ididn't hear anything new or insightful in the plenary sessionsthat I attended. This is to be expected from elitism. The idea ofeffecting social change by influencing important people who willthen make their influence felt is not a good idea, in my opinion.It always seems to involve the institutionalization of at least alittle falsehood because important people got to be important byembracing falsehood, usually, at least the falsehood, asdistinguished by me according to my philosophy, that it is validfor one person to enjoy more importance than another. Perhaps, inorder to practice what I preach, I ought to write anonymously. Anice precedent for that is N. Bourbaki, which is the pseudonymfor a group of (highly elite (!)) mathematicians who wrote anentire collection of math books covering almost all of basicadvanced math in a French that is accessible to nearly everyone.One of the plenary speakers actually addressed the problem of thelimits of what a political person can say publicly. I would haveliked to ask, "Are these talks, then, to be taken as true orfalse? I mean, do you people really believe what you're saying orare you saying what is merely politically expedient?" I believe (and I think Bruce Alexander saidthis too) that the important thing is to produce a body ofstatements that have meaning and to approach the truth (thecongruence of statements with events) as closely as possible.This, then, will be disseminated into the collectiveconsciousness of humanity and affect the way people think andact. When enough people think and act appropriately, appropriatechange will be inevitable. We must always refer to an ideal toknow what to think and do. It doesn't help to create a politicswith no basis. Being "realistic" is just an excuse forbeing wrong. We need to understand without worrying about what is"acceptable" and what is not. Then, we need to find afelicitous way to speak the truth recognizing that we arefallible. If money, for example, is a harmful andunnecessary institution, it will not help to say otherwise, butit might be helpful to admit that my proof (and I do have aproof) is based on assumptions that may not be correct and thatwe ought not to dispense with money suddenly but rather favormeasures that lead to its eventual disappearance. So, instead ofsaying we will accept the monopoly of the control of drugs by themedical profession, we should say we will never accept such astate of affairs and would rather see nothing done (other thanthe speaking of the truth) until that eventuality is swept out ofthe collective mind. We, on the other hand, can lend our ownpersonal aid to those who are the most abused in the most acuteways by the status quo, whether our help lies inside or outsidethe law. Presumably, what some members of the ACLU are doingrenders aid within the law as far as it can be rendered in case aperson's liberty be violated. The view that law enforcementshould be replaced by prevention and treatment was fairly welldiscredited in the workshops I attended. I shall discuss theworkshops next. National Drug Strategy Network Someone explained the network and handed outcopies of the newsletter, which apparently has some goodlate-breaking information. We need reasoning more than we neednews however. The Hemp Tour representative, a young woman,complained about elitism and certain barriers at the meeting they(the Hemp Tour) had difficulty dealing with, but, actually, sheheld the floor longer than anyone. Health and Science Committee Lester Grinspoon stated that Kevin Zeese hadasked him to confine our mission to (i) a public-health plan and(ii) information. Grinspoon and the co-chair, a person whose nameescapes me, thought we ought to forget about the public-healthplan for now and only Jeffrey Schaler was not content to confineour mission to information. We began with a tremendous amount ofconfusion, though, because everyone had a different idea aboutwho our target should be and what sort of information wasrelevant. Someone said we should address ourselves to otherscientists first and I seconded that reminding the room that thatwould provide a natural filter for unscientific information. Ineglected (or was afraid) to ask how many of us were"real" scientists, i.e., people who apply mathematicsto the analysis of models of nature (mathematicians, physicists,physical chemists, and engineering scientists). (Oh heck, maybebiologists, psychologists, and some MDs are scientists after all,but the "real" progress in science has come fromphysicists and mathematicians. The Salk vaccine is not to becompared to the quantum theory or functional analysis.) Timidly Isuggested that if there was a body of valid scientificinformation we ought to identify it and protect it from theinfiltration of scientific drivel. Robert Goodman suggested thatwe eschew generalities and embrace specifics and I agree thatthat's the only way it can be done. We agreed that a letter would be writtenrefuting a recent article in Science and people gottogether afterward to arrange to do that. (The more signatures byfamous people, the greater the chance of publication,regrettably.) Art Leccese wants to get together with me to try tostart a truth squad. I know how to do that in a valid way,although it sounds scary on the face of it. Actually, Lester wasthe one that suggested that one be formed, although, clearly,that was the import of my suggestion. So from great confusion asort of consensus was formed, but it is unclear how our consensuswill have a practical effect. I think if Art and I (and Robert ifhe's willing) get together and start a drug literature abstractsservice with thorough specific discrediting of invalid research,we will have done a great deal. Obviously, we could only survey asmall fraction of the scientific literature at first until we gotinstitutional help. We might restrict ourselves to pharmacologyand toxicology, omitting epidemiology, and also restrictourselves to the journals with the widest circulation. We need anexpert statistician to help us, because "figures don't lie,but liars figure". Why Marijuana Should Be Treated Separately I think they are right about one thing atleast. Marijuana will be treated separately. Dale Gieringerbetrayed a genuine bias against other drugs. "Our drug iscool, but your drug is bad." I talked about that in my firstdrug paper. Also, Don Fiedler said "other drugs" twicebut "harder drugs" once, without saying in what sense"harder". I would never agree to separate treatment formarijuana, but, if they want to treat marijuana separately, theymust announce that this is a compromise. If they do not, I willfight them just hard as I would fight someone who wants to treatalcohol separately. Gieringer used a specious argument aboutmarijuana having a constituency and, since heroin addicts don'tdemand rights, they are not entitled to any. Richard Cowan, thelibertarian, claiming to speak the absolute truth, spoke what isalmost certainly an untruth, namely, that marijuana is the leastdangerous drug. Now, there are millions, perhaps an infinitenumber if we count the undiscovered drugs, so the probabilitythat marijuana is the least harmful is nearly zero. I suggestedyohimbine (an aphrodisiac discussed in The Naked Lunch) asa better candidate. Mary Lynn Mathre said that the persistence ofmarijuana in the urine might induce some users to switch tococaine, say, and, I must admit, I never thought of that. Also,she defined an addict as anyone who says he (or she) is. Ialready commented that this definition is easy to apply but,perhaps, not too useful, as many people are swayed by theirimaginations. (Maybe this is a good time to interject theChristian Science interpretation, which, I believe, isunfalsifiable and, therefore, may not be introduced intoscientific discussion, but it still deserves our attention. (Tobe falsifiable means that an experiment or a chain of reasoningcould prove it false if it were false.) Maybe it really is all inour heads or in the heads of others. In Christian Science, thereason infants get ill is that they are influenced by thethinking of those around them. This is what Christian Scientistscall "malpractice". It is not clear that the infantexperiences the disease or only the adults who observe it do.) Alternative Models for Reform Christina Johns said that no one has addressedthe underlying social causes, but she didn't read last year'sCatalog. I addressed them. She said she would reference me nexttime, but she ought to reference Ellen Luff's paper given thisyear too. We'll see. I'm going to describe Wasserman's veryinteresting paper, which, by the way, contains the firstreference I have ever seen to the work of Joel Feinberg, my AuntMildred's brother. Wasserman points out a number ofinconsistencies and other legal difficulties arising fromhalf-way measures like excusing the buyer and prosecuting theseller, non-enforcement, and under-enforcement. Then he gets intoa hot topic - culpability for crimes committed under theinfluence. He makes an ambiguous statement, namely, "It isundisputed that a high proportion of violent crimes are committedunder the influence of alcohol and other drugs." Does hemeans that the drugs influenced the commission of the crime orthat some other aspect of the criminals state or behavior wasinfluenced by the drug? If the latter, the answer is "Sowhat". If the former, the answer is "How would youknow?" All we can do is identify the coincidence of theevents committed, namely, a violent crime and having taken adrug. No inference about cause and effect can be drawn, nor willit ever be able to be drawn - in my opinion. Then, he questionsthe validity of DWI laws. I have questioned them orally, but thisis the first time I have seen them questioned in print. Good forhim. Potsdam State College (part of SUNY) did an experiment. Theyhad a bunch of drivers take a skills test sober, then get drunkand repeat the test. Most subjects did much worse, but the guywho scored highest sober also scored higher drunk than anyoneelse scored sober. True, he hit one pylon when he was drunk, buthe still drove better than any sober person - in the test.Wasserman likes the Fletcher model whereby the intoxicateddefendant is treated like an accomplice to his own misconduct. Heseems to find fault with other models. But my (ideal) approachadds this. If the perpetrator does not buy into the moral basisfor the law she (or he) has broken, she cannot be regarded ashaving committed a crime. She is a prisoner of war and must beaccorded all the rights and privileges of a captive sovereignhead of state. In particular, if a poor person steals from a richperson or even commits a violent act upon her (or him), it isn'ta crime if the crime followed naturally from the difference inwealth, according to my theory. This is war! Todd Mikuriya discussed the idea of a drugcooperative. I don't think it is tenable and the audience wasn'ttoo receptive either, noting its elitist character. Art Hilgart,though, thinks more like Luff, Johns, and I (do). He discussedanomie, the incompatibility of social norms and the incapacity tomeet them. He advocated a public health policy for certain drugs,but I haven't read his paper. I don't see why we can't makeepidemiological data available to everyone (graphically for thoseincapable of dealing with abstractions) and take care of the sickregardless of how they got sick, given that no one really knows,except in the most trivial cases (you hit a man over the headwith a hammer ). Hilgart dared to bring up the declining power ofthe unions as a possible cause of anomie. Good for him. ClarkHosmer is not a bad man. (You know I'm going to find fault,right?) BUT, he wants us to study physiology and to create morejobs without recognizing what a drag jobs are under thecapitalist system. He makes a nice point, though, aboutbenefit/cost ratio, but it probably won't wash quantitatively.It's nice to see a retired army officer espouse a liberal view.Horst Senger is pushing Say's Law (Say is a competitor of Smith,Keynes, and Marx). He got hooted down somewhat, mainly because hejust wants to stop people from taking drugs. His advice: let thegovernment provide them free. But, which drugs? how much? etc. Toconclude, I don't know if the audience was moving toward (i)let's fix society and (ii) no half-way measures. Maybe. Preventing Drug Abuse with Education This was better than I thought it would be.Sandy Burbank, whom I got to know much better, just wants to tellthe truth and Mary Lynn Mathre just wants to heal the sick, nevermind how they got sick (I think), but I haven't read the paperfor bias and falsehood. Alex Stuart wants to re-instill moralvalues but couldn't name one. He got put down hard by a youngHarvard student. I felt sorry for him, but I didn't show mercyeither. I stepped out to the john and got back in time for thediscussion. Paul Kelly exercised his prerogative as a Black tospeak at length, which he did at every workshop that we bothattended, while I rushed through my three sentences with my heartbeating wildly because I was unable to distinguish my "rightto be heard" or expected to be treated like a madman. TheNarconon guy was there, but I believe he didn't mention the badpart about what they are doing. I don't remember what Robertssaid, if I even heard him. New Issues in Drug Treatment Ray Jeffery was thoroughly rejected as wasPatricia Ritter. Ronald Farrell saved himself by expressingserious doubts about what he is doing, but, if you read hispaper, you hear some ominous terms, cf., conformity, behaviormodification, deviance. After the workshop I commended Jeffereyon the importance of identifying the harm done by heavy metals,but the appropriate course of action is to prevent - not to"tag" the victims. I think, by rejecting all the thingsthat are not permissible, I set up Luff's call for politicalaction, if I am not jumping too far ahead. The Cult of Ibogainewas a little disruptive (this is discussed in my contribution tothe 1991 papers) and a young man named Dana thought that it washypocritical for people who wear suits and ties to try to changesociety when, presumably, only he can change society, but Isensed a move toward rejecting the disease theory and behaviormodification and recognizing that we need political change. Ofcourse, as I said, once we get the quacks off our backs, we willstill have to contend with the clergy. Even if there weresupernatural events involved, which, if you read Chapter 3(available on request) of my book Beyond Competitionism(working title for work in progress), doesn't make much sense (inmy opinion), the mainstream and fundamentalist clergy aren'tgoing to be helpful. So, the "new issues" were either(i) it won't work or shouldn't be done except for ibogaine, IFibogaine works and (ii) we can't ignore the politicalimplications. If Luff's paper, and mine too, are not referencednext year, it will tell us that something is wrong. [My hope foribogaine has cooled considerably since I wrote this.] Addiction: Is It a Disease? As we all know, this session was in troublebefore it started as "addiction" is undefined and wasnever defined, so the use of the word at all begs the question.Poor Henry Blansfield meant well, but, like us poor sexists, herevealed his biases by the inadvertent use of one word ratherthan another or by the use of a give-away term, cf.,"unfortunate people". It reminds me of the Sidney Lumetfilm "The Pawnbroker", wherein the pawnbroker referredto the black derelict as a "poor creature", which,admittedly, is worse. "Don't pity me. Sometimes I wish Iweren't me, but I sure as hell am glad I'm not you." As Ipointed out, even if it were a disease, and it's not at all clearthat it is, the etiology might belong to medicine, but thetreatment not, particularly if there is none, due to theirreversible nature of the damage. On the other hand, if medicinecan supply us with a work-around drug, i.e., a drug that providesa new mechanism for the body to achieve whatever it could notpreviously achieve because of the irreversible damage, we willtake it, but first let's see the drug. Medicine wants hegemonyover the resolution of all conflicts in living because it's agood business. As Shaw said, "Every profession is aconspiracy against the laity." I said that any doctor whoclaimed to be reversing an irreversible condition, i.e., curing"drug addiction" would be a quack and I offered ascorroboration the fact that Houston's Dr. George S. Glassrelegates his "patients" to non-medical personnel. I agree with Jeffrey Schaler. I didn't hear himsay anything that I think is wrong. Jonas sketched a reasonablepicture of the public health model and made me regret my use ofthe term to describe the treatment industry in my paper. As Isaid above, they should patch up any bad effects of drugs and,perhaps, advise when advice is requested without losing sight ofthe fact that there are many things in this life worth a littleharm to the health. Bruce Alexander's discussion was very helpfulto me, but I think, when he says there are three choices, he isleaving out a multitude of other options. But, I would like toquote his statement "There is nothing more practical thanstraight thought." Reworded it could have been the title ofmy paper. These dialectical distinctions are not mere quibbling.We could end up providing an acceptable life for a few thousandmiserable people now and end up with a totalitariantherapeutocracy in a thousand years. I liked Robert Goodman'stalk, but I didn't completely understand his paper. Also, hisexperiment with the purple triangle is silly. Once it beginswhistling "Dixie", it is no longer a triangle, so youcan't imagine it. But, the point is well taken. We can't imaginehunger when we are full. So, that promise to quit tomorrow ismeaningless today. I think we have seen the disease theory prettywell discredited even if there is some physiological changes dueto taking drugs. People are going to have to develop a betterdialectic and, finally, the public health model is acceptable aslong as it doesn't get mixed up with values and decisions. Ithink that was the consensus I saw being formed. Paul Kelly was outrageous and Steve Jonas'saction in assuming that he could be the representative of everyblack person who wasn't there but should have been there equallyoutrageous. Why, then, wasn't I permitted to speak for everyspeed and heroin devotee, as opposed to former devotee, whocouldn't be there? [The initial remarks that were in thisparagraph are confidential, but the concluding remarks concerningthe validity of spiritual intuition may be worth passing on -even out of context.] Chemical and spiritual transformationsoccur and may be dual to one another without invoking thesupernatural. The spirit is part of nature too, is it not? Mymain point, I guess, is that a person's intuitive feelings aboutwhat happened to him or her cannot be introduced into publicpolicy because they are not verifiable. Strangely, we want topick science's pocket for all the little doodads that are in it,but we are unwilling to accept the scientific philosophy inconducting our affairs. That seems a little hypocritical. Racism in the War on Drugs The talks by Siegel, De Vidts, and Aldrich wereinformative. Myers brought the focus over to economics, where Ithink it belongs, and the moderator, Raymond Brown, mentioned"all those shiny towers" (skyscrapers) or somethinglike that. I mentioned to him afterward that, in America, weimagine that we can have a high standard of living withoutproducing anything. We are supposed to have an informationeconomy, which means that we will live by business alone. Take alook at the section on the work ethic in my separation paper,"The Separation of the State from the Christian Church"[1], to see what I think of that. Blacks can produce things thatwe need to live, but they are being excluded from the informationeconomy, because it's based on membership in a club or class ofpeople who have IT. Meanwhile, the residual minimum-wage orless-than-living-wage jobs are growing in number and are open toanyone. I, personally, would not accept a job that required me totake orders from someone I did not recognize as qualified. Thetruth is very nearly this: No one is qualified. As William Morrissaid, "No one is qualified to be someone else's boss."I reject bosses and I certainly don't blame anyone who elects alife of crime in preference to taking orders from an unqualifiedboss - for peanuts. Paul Kelly was there to complain about all theBlacks who are dying and the under-representation of Blacks atthe conference. I have a hard time accepting the idea that thesituation is different for me and for a black user, but, if youforce me to make the distinction, I have to say that this is aconference to legalize drugs for white middle-class users.Perhaps, Blacks should have their own conference, especially ifthey are not for full legalization, i.e., government off ourbacks. They are pissed off that so many black men are in jail,but they don't want to legalize. It's up to the bright blackpeople to show their communities that the laws against drugs area problem for them too and that getting rid of the laws willimprove things - at least in the long run. They had better getthe "reverends" out of their politics too. I think thesmart black people know that they have an economic and politicalproblem and the sooner they realize that a few blackmillionaires, whether they became millionaires from drugtrafficking or the usual capitalist crimes, are not going to helpthem. It won't help to be exploited by a black man. Black bossesand business tycoons may be more cruel than whites, since theyhave less guilt to bear. That's what I think; I don't know whatthe audience thinks. I know we get pretty foggy-brained when itcomes to thinking about Blacks. We imagine that a differentsystem of logic applies. Summary of the Conference Paul Kelly returned my call after theconference and we talked for about a half an hour on his"nickel". I told him all the bad things I said abouthim (above). Despite that, I think we ended up as friends. Ipointed out the inconsistency of resenting the large number ofblack prisoners and still not wanting legalization. He said therewas nothing for them to do even if they weren't in jail. Ipointed out that I had many friends who had done time and it wasvery unpleasant in some ways but not because you couldn't getdrugs. Apparently, one can get used to homosexual activitieseasily too without becoming "abnormal", although Ididn't mention this to Paul as it is not relevant. I attacked thetwelve-step plans and he defended them mainly by reminding methat I didn't know much about them. We agreed that it was wrongto force someone into a plan, but he wasn't so sure that offeringit as an alternative to prison constituted force. It was awell-organized and constructive dialogue in which I was able tointerject a little of my political position and, also, to soundonce again the warning about possible future genocide if it isnot already too late. We ended by agreeing that he would call mewhen he comes to Houston later this year or early next year and Iwould try to audit a twelve-step meeting to get a better idea ofhow they work. I did say I was anti-Christian but not an atheist. So, to summarize, a drug network bulletin isuseful and a drug science abstract and truth squad service wouldbe useful. The marijuana devotees probably have a better chanceto get their drug of choice legalized sooner because they feelbetter about their drug than users of other drugs feel abouttheirs, correctly or incorrectly. We recognize the usualintolerance of behavior that is not congruent with our own. Thepublic health model seems to be replacing the disease model, butmany disease-model therapists and God-squad therapists willcontinue to masquerade as public health defenders. The political,social, and economic causes of people taking more drugs than aregood for them are beginning to be recognized and I think we shallsoon begin questioning the onerousness of most jobs. I saw a news(?) item on TV where an American factory worker was saying thathis biggest problem is boredom on the job. Of course, thepharmacological, toxicological, and other physiological aspectsof drugs should continue to be investigated by people who havenothing to do with the treatment industry. Also, the harmfuleffects of heavy metals and other toxic chemicals should bestudied and steps should be taken to contain them and keep themout of the food chain. Meanwhile, the jurisprudentialdifficulties of dealing with people who break laws after takingalcohol or drugs, or, for that matter, take alcohol or drugs togive themselves the false courage, badly-termed "Dutchcourage" by one contributor (!), to commit crimes (or actsof war against the establishment), will continue to be debatedfor some time without anyone recognizing that the legal systemhas no moral standing as it itself, as a character in a moviesaid, is "out of order". The prevention racket will continue to bepervaded by lies despite Sandy Burbank and MAMA, but aninteresting breakthrough was noted in the news: the Dutch havedecriminalized sex among twelve- to sixteen-year-olds. I daresayyou get the connection. The aforementioned "truthsquad" could make itself felt on the education scene, butI'm not sure how. This is hooked up with the efforts to preventschool prayer and the infiltration of religion into the schoolsin other ways. Also, we would like to identify (most) forms ofpatriotism as irrational quasi-religion. Last night I was askedto call in on an American Atheists (AA) radio program on thelocal Pacifica Radio station here. I'm not sure I said anythinguseful, but AA might be able to mount a small effort to get truthin to ( and falsehood out of) the schools. I think one has to dothis through the courts as there is no public consensus for it. I think most of the participants at theconference are against 1984-style behavior modification and wouldbe willing to try to keep the medical profession in its place. Ido not believe the supernatural may be introduced into publicpolicy, but, clearly, many people still think that somethingsupernatural plays a role in the process of changing one'sbehavior with respect to drugs. I think that, if it does, itshould get re-classified as natural. I mentioned theinconsistency in the viewpoint of most of the black community,but I think that many black intellectuals are ready to reject thestupid dichotomy between Capitalism that is not capitalism andCommunism that is not communism. Hopefully, all Americans will beopen to new ideas soon. Houston, Texas May 28, 1991 Reference Wayburn, Thomas L., "On the Separation of the State from the Christian Church", Truth Seeker Supplement, 117, Nos. 2,4,6 (1990). Remainder of paper available from author on request. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-89IA031-000651-B022-289http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/dpf91.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123705 text/html 16829HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:36:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:57 GMTContent-length: 16611 My Seven-Point Plan for Post-Prohibition Drug Policy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate A SEVEN-POINT POST-PROHIBITION DRUG POLICY by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD Summary of My 1989 Paper and Some Retractions SUMMARY OF THE 1989 PAPER In Chapter 6 of Drug Policy 1989-1990(1), I made two important points: (1) according to strict logic,drugs are already legal; i.e., the laws against drugs areunconstitutional, and (2) prohibited drugs have many valid usesand do not constitute a threat to society. The laws against drugsviolate the rights to liberty and the pursuit of happiness asretained by the people in accordance with the Ninth Amendment andthey violate the freedom of religion clause in the FirstAmendment because: (i) taking or not taking drugs is a moralchoice and moral choices are religious choices and (ii) takingdrugs can be construed to be a religious ritual. The idea thatthe illegal drugs have no legitimate uses and are a threat tosociety is an unstated assumption of prevention and treatmentproponents. Even if it is stated, it is incorrect and invalidatesarguments based upon it, as shown in my 1990 paper (2). In the 1989 paper, I impugned the motives ofsome of the anti-drug crowd, I enumerated some of the lies toldby drug prevention people, and I expressed skepticism oftreatment programs. I pointed out that psychiatrists, psychiatricassistants, psychologists, social workers, counselors,therapists, etc. have a great deal to lose if the drug problemgoes away. SOME RETRACTIONS But, some of my ideas on the drug problem haveevolved over the past years. I no longer believe that thegovernment should be entrusted with the task of disseminatinginformation or educating the public on drugs. Look whatgovernment has done with the public schools, where teachers andprevention specialists tell terrible lies about drugs andpromulgate biased political, economic, and metaphysical views oflife (2). The job of informing can be handled adequately byprivate groups of drug users who are in a position to teach theresponsible, safe, and rewarding uses of drugs, to warn of thedangers of drugs, and to counteract the propaganda of otherprivate organizations who wish to limit freedom. Also, whereas Isaid that the repeal of prohibition "would return manytalented people to the workplace", I am now convinced thatthe workplace will have to change substantially, creatingopportunities for all kinds of people rather than exclusively forclones of the "ideal worker", before talented peoplepossessed of genuine individuality will return. In 1989, I said that people must be allowed totake drugs "in the privacy of their own homes or in otherplaces set aside for that purpose". Many people labor underthe incorrect assumption that people use drugs merely to gethigh, whereas, in many cases, they use drugs to achieve animportant goal. I now believe the using of drugs must befacilitated nearly everywhere (so long as the rights ofnonsmokers are protected), particularly in workplaces, schools,concert halls, museums, etc. Isn't it a little hypocritical toenjoy, in a place where drugs are prohibited, the works of peoplewho took drugs to produce art! The Defeat of Prevention and TreatmentProponents at the 1990 Meeting of the Drug Policy Foundation Alex Stuart (3) wants to re-instill moralvalues but couldn't name one. His arguments that drugs aremorally wrong were refuted soundly by a young Harvard student.Christina Johns (4), Raymond Brown (5), Jerri Husch (6), andEllen Luff (7) pointed out, independently, that most preventionand treatment efforts divert much needed attention from festeringsocial problems that result in anomie, as Art Hilgart (8) termedit. (Anomie is the breakdown of social norms due to theincapacity of people to meet them.) This view was supported to acertain extent by Clark Hosmer (9) as well. Rufus King declared"drug abuse" to be a "nonproblem". Behavior modification and other authoritarianmethods advocated by Ray Jeffery (10), Patricia Ritter (11), andRonald Farrell (11) were not accepted by the audience, whereasthe papers by Wayburn (2) and Luff (7) could not be refuted.Farrell himself expressed serious doubts about what he is doing.The "cult of ibogaine" as represented by Howard Lotsof(12) is discussed below. One of Lotsof's "cured""drug addicts" interrupted the meeting repeatedly toprotest that the "cure" had been found and all furtherdiscussion was unwarranted. I didn't get a chance to tell herthat not everyone wants to be "cured". The cult-likebehavior of the "cured" person probably harmed Lotsof'scase more than it helped it. The public-health model gained some credibilityfrom the independent remarks of Steve Jonas and Mary Lynn Mathre(13), but it is clear that many disease theorists intend to poseas public-health workers. Henry Blansfield (14) claimed thatthere is some scientific evidence that the use of drugs causesirreversible physiological changes. I pointed out that, even if"drug abuse" were a disease, and it's not at all clearthat it is, the etiology might belong to medicine, but thetreatment not, particularly if there is none, due to theirreversible nature of the damage. On the other hand, if sciencecan supply us with a work-around drug, i.e., a drug that providesa new mechanism for the body to achieve whatever it could notpreviously achieve because of the irreversible damage, we willtake it, but first let's see the drug. In the meantime, anydoctor who claimed to be reversing an irreversible condition,i.e., curing "drug addiction", was a quack. The political-economic-social system of theU.S. creates ghastly conflicts in living. Every quack, grifter,and flim-flam artist wants a piece of the action. Granted, a fewsincere and generous souls, free of the desire for private gain,wish to help, but political problems don't have long-rangepersonal or psychological solutions. Of course, those who areable to ignore the general suffering might improve their own lotmarginally. Bruce Alexander (15) and Jeffrey Schaler (16)completed the rout of the disease theory of "drugaddiction", while Robert Goodman (17) called into questionthe concept of "addiction" itself. If there is a genefor "drug addiction", let's find it quickly so thatthose of us who don't carry it can use drugs without worryingabout "getting hooked". Thus, in the 1990 meeting of the Drug PolicyFoundation (DPF), advocates of prevention by authoritarian meansrather than by transforming society and advocates of treatmentwere fairly well defeated in debate by those who don't accept thepopular notion that drug use is a problem that needs to beprevented or an illness that needs to be treated. Therefore, theDPF should abandon its policy of advocating prevention andtreatment as an alternative to law enforcement. One of theplenary speakers actually addressed the problem of the limits ofwhat a political person can say publicly. I would have liked toask, "Are these talks (the plenary talks), then, to be takenas true or false? I mean, do you people really believe whatyou're saying or are you saying what is merely politicallyexpedient?" I believe that the important thing is toproduce a body of statements that have meaning and to approachthe truth (the congruence of statements with events) as closelyas possible. This, then, will be disseminated into the collectiveconsciousness of humanity and affect the way people think andact. When enough people think and act appropriately, appropriatechange will be inevitable. We must always refer to an ideal toknow what to think and do. It doesn't help to create a politicswith no philosophical basis. Being "realistic" is justan excuse for being wrong. We need to understand without worryingabout what is "acceptable" and what is not. Then, weneed to find a felicitous way to speak the truth recognizing thatwe are fallible. Instead of accepting the monopoly of thecontrol of drugs by the medical profession, we should say we willnever accept such a state of affairs and would rather see nochange in national policy until that eventuality is swept out ofthe collective mind. In the meantime, we can lend our ownpersonal aid to those who are the most abused in the most acuteways by the status quo, whether our help lies inside or outsidethe law. Presumably, what some members of the ACLU are doingrenders aid within the law as far as it can be rendered in case aperson's liberty be violated. My Seven-Point Plan My new plan for post-prohibition societyconsists of the following: (1) an equal-rights amendment for drugusers, (2) teaching people how to live with drugs, to choose themwisely, and to use them properly (to get the most out of them andto prevent accidents, disease, and unpleasant side-effects), (3)new opportunities for drug users, heteroclites, and other peoplewho are "different" to make contributions to society inappropriate nonstandard settings including settings where one canwork while using drugs, (4) during the transition, reparationsfor victims of the laws against drugs amounting to whatever theyneed to live abundantly, and (5) free informal counseling fortroubled or troublesome drug users by drug users. Since, it must be admitted, some people who aretaking drugs might like to stop - even in a normalized society, Ipropose two additional "points": (6) institutions likecommercial hotels that cost no more than hotels and that have allthe amenities of hotels and more, e.g, VCRs and videotapelibraries and books, except that the (voluntary) guest may notleave for a fixed period of time agreed upon in advance (by theguest) nor indulge in certain drugs beyond agreed upon limits,which might be monotonically decreasing. Rural locations mightprovide better settings with lower real estate costs offset byhigher transportation costs. Only one "medical""professional" per shift would be needed, namely, todispense medicine. I can say truthfully that I would trust anydrug dealer I have known to perform that job - except for one,who was generous to a fault. Vouchers could be provided for thosewho can't pay. And, finally, (7) new drugs that preventwithdrawal symptoms and cravings may be used (voluntarily), ifthey exist. Such claims have been made lately for the drugibogaine (12), but, unless the costs are reduced or borne by thestate, it will not be widely used. Also, the claims may not betrue - or not true in an acceptable mode; i.e., the effectivenessof ibogaine may depend on "religious" faith, whichmight diminish the humanity of the patient. Moreover, those whohave been "cured" by ibogaine may have merelytransferred their allegiance to a new drug, which, in the case ofibogaine, is long lasting (six months or longer) - at first, butwhich, after repeated doses, might "need" to be usedmore frequently. Lately, similar effects have been ascribed tothe South American drug yage or one of its derivatives. Actually,the possibility of switching to a new drug is included underpoints (2) and (5) above. Houston, Texas May 28, 1991 References 1. Wayburn, Thomas L., "No One Has a RightTo Impose an Arbitrary System of Morals on Others" in DrugPolicy 1889-1990, A Reformer's Catalogue, Arnold S. Trebachand Kevin B. Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington,D.C. (1989). (Abbreviated DPFC) 2. Wayburn, Thomas L., "Fallacies andUnstated Assumptions in Prevention and Treatment" in TheGreat Issues of Drug Policy, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B.Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1990).(Abbreviated GIDP) 3. Stuart, A. J., "Character and DrugPolicy," Paper read at 1990 DPF Conference, Preprintavailable from National Character Laboratory, Inc., 4635 LeedsAve., El Paso, TX 79903. 4. Johns, Christina Jacqueline,"Legalization at any Cost" in GIDP. 5. Brown, Ray M., "The Black Community andthe "War on Drugs"" in GIDP. 6. Husch, Jerri, "Of Work and Drugs: Noteson Prevention" in DPFC. 7. Luff, Ellen, "Political Implications ofDrug/Alcohol Treatment Program Ideologies" in GIDP. 8. Hilgart, Art, "The Real Drug Menace IsGeorge Bush" in GIDP. 9. Hosmer, Clark, "Does Calling IllegalDrugs Evil Become a Trap" in GIDP. 10. Jeffery, C. Ray, "A Research Programfor the Early Identification and Treatment of Drug/AlcoholAddiction" in GIDP. 11. Farrell, Ronald A., Patricia Ritter, andRandall G. Shelden, "Notes on a Proposed Substance AbusePrevention Program for High-Risk Youth" in GIDP. 12. Lotsof, Howard, "Ibogaine: An OpenLetter," Truth Seeker, Vol.117, No.5 (1990). 13. Mathre, Mary Lynn, "New TreatmentOptions after Repeal: Variety and Availability of Treatment forClients" in DPFC. 14. Blansfield, Henry N. and Jane M.,"Addiction: Crime or Disease" in GIDP. 15. Alexander, B. K., and L. S. Wong,"Adverse Effects of Cocaine on the Heart: A CriticalReview" in GIDP. 16. Schaler, Jeffrey, "Drugs and FreeWill," Accepted for publication in Society. Goodman, Robert, "Addiction?" in GIDP. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-90IA031-000651-B022-318http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/oped6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123718 text/html 7846HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:37:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:47 GMTContent-length: 7629 Can the State Teach That Drugs Are Wrong and Harmful? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CAN THE STATE TEACH THAT DRUGS ARE WRONG ANDHARMFUL? by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD Chemical engineering consultantand writer Recently Congress enacted a law that requiresevery public school in the nation to teach students that"the use of illicit drugs and the unlawful possession anduse of alcohol is (sic) wrong and harmful". This reminds meof the story, whether true or false, that the Illinois StateLegislature once changed the value of pi, the ratio of thecircumference to the diameter of a circle in the Euclidean plane,to 3.0. The difference this time is that only what may be taughtis mandated rather than what is true. What remains the same, ifwe neglect the question of harmfulness for a moment, is that bothjudgments are transcendental and may not be legislated by man. From a utilitarian viewpoint, "wrong"and "harmful" amount to the same thing, but it is notclear that the viewpoint of this law is entirely utilitarian. Noris it clear whether the law means that drugs are entirelyharmful, in which case no one would use them, or that the harmmerely outweighs the good. The question of harmfulness (unlessmoral harmfulness is meant) presumably belongs to medicine, whichis an inexact science and cannot supply answers to all suchquestions. One school of medical researchers claims to haveevidence that marijuana, for example, is harmful; another schoolrefutes this evidence and presents contrary evidence thatmarijuana is exceptionally safe. When the truth has beendiscovered scientifically, such disputes tend to disappear. It isdifficult to see how government or the schools can supply answersthat science cannot supply. How is this dilemma to be hidden frominquisitive students? Regarding right and wrong, two importantquestions are at stake here and neither of them is trivial: (1)May the state legislate right and wrong in the absence of aconsensus? and (2) May the state legislate what is to be taughtconcerning right and wrong? It is not clear whether the subjectof right and wrong belongs to ethics or to morality, if ethicsand morality are at all different. In my lexicon, ethics pertainspreponderantly to respect for truth and morality pertains tobehavior. Most moral decisions are religious decisions, thereforethe legislation of morality is usually a violation of separationof church and state. Many may object that the state legislates rightand wrong all the time. For example, the state forbids murder.Without getting into all of the philosophical considerations thatobtain in the banning of murder, I may safely say that mostpeople who commit it allow that it is wrong. On the other hand,we have about twenty-five million Americans who use illegal drugsand a sizable percentage of them do not allow that it is wrong.On the contrary, many insist that it is wrong for the state torepress their natural inclinations and, in some cases, what theyclaim are God-given rights and, yes, even duties. Regarding teaching that using drugs is wrongand harmful, one must distinguish between teaching both sides ofan open question, i.e., a question under dispute, and teachingwhich side is correct. When the state legislates which side of anopen question is to be taught, either it is legislating what istrue, which is totalitarian, or it is denying the necessity ofteaching truth, which is unethical. Perhaps ethics may belegislated without violating separation of church and state, butthe state may not legislate bad ethics, i.e., an ethic that doesviolence to truth. If drugs are wrong independently of context,teachers must show why they are wrong or students will askquestions that cannot be answered without gross distortions oftruth. For example, if a brilliant artist used drugs to create amasterpiece, the students must be told that the importance ofcreating a masterpiece is overwhelmed by the importance of thedamage to the artist's health, however slight, and the importanceof the artist breaking a law. This will be especially difficultto do if the artist, who may have been Picasso, lived a long lifeor lived in a country where - or at a time when - the substanceswere legal. If the students are discouraged from askingquestions, the schools will be reinforcing stupidity. If taking marijuana to treat glaucoma is legal,then taking marijuana under other circumstances may be wrong onlybecause it is illegal. Also, the law seems to say that drinkingalcohol (in moderation?) is wrong only when it is unlawful.Paraphrasing Bertrand Russell: To appeal to the law to invalidatean act that otherwise would be good is to impute evil to the law. But, the law has proved to be evil on numerousoccasions. The law once required the return of runaway slaves.Nowadays, the law requires an innocent family to be turned out ofits home if a visitor is found with illegal drugs. Therefore, toask a student to believe that the use of a drug is wrong simplybecause it is illegal is asking too much. Whether one desires a drug-free society or not,one ought to deplore this law and take appropriate action to haveit repealed. It is guaranteed to have no effect on many, tostultify the education of many more, to drive the astute furtherinto rebellion, to provide additional justification for takingdrugs, to discredit further the educational process, and todiminish what little respect the law still enjoys. Houston, Texas November 27, 1990 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-91IA031-000651-B022-342http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/oped93b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123727 text/html 9876HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:37:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:43 GMTContent-length: 9659 Despite Recent Flurry of Anti-Drug Propaganda, DrugProhibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DESPITE RECENT FLURRY OF ANTI-DRUG PROPAGANDA,DRUG PROHIBITION IS INDEFENSIBLE. by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD Executive Director of theAmerican Policy Institute, Inc. Recently, a number of anti-drug editorials andOp-Ed pieces have appeared in the Houston Post disparaging drugs,drug users, drug merchants, and those who espouse druglegalization; but, today, December 13, 1993, was a record low forsheer volume of misguided opinion, misinformation, and incorrectbad reasoning - mostly as a response to the surgeon general'sinnocent off-hand reply to a questioner. An interview with John Lucas, the coach of theSan Antonio Spurs and a failed drug user, appeared on page one.The headline was: 'There are no benefits at all' to legalizingdrugs in the U.S. Deborah Mathis on the Op-Ed page claims,"Proponents [of legalization], who come from all walks, haveonly one argument: It would reduce the violence tied todrugs." Both of these statements are patently false. Inmy 1989 paper ["No One Has a Right To Impose an ArbitrarySystem of Morals on Others" in Drug Policy 1889-1990, AReformer's Catalogue, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B. Zeese,Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1989)], Ilisted twelve practical benefits of legalization. Mathis, atleast, should be acquainted with my paper, which appeared in themainstream of anti-prohibition literature. The twelve practical benefits may be enumeratedbriefly (and incompletely) as follows: (1) remove the economicincentive, (2) eliminate the need to steal, (3) eliminate theviolence, (4) take profits from criminals, (5) remove the thrill,(6) end the suffering and death caused by unmetered doses,impurities, dirty paraphernalia, cf. AIDS, substitutes, andsubstances that have only a short history of use, e.g., designerdrugs, (7) provide more alternatives for users to select best orleast harmful drug, (8) eliminate the "drug life", (9)restore many to useful endeavor, (10) permit people to treatsimple ailments thus reducing health-care costs, (11) eliminateinvasion of privacy, (12) eliminate pharmaceutical McCarthyism. But, much more important is the one compellingethical reason for legalizing drugs, namely, that any rational, non-politicizedSupreme Court would find the laws against drugs unconstitutionalbecause they violate the rights to liberty and the pursuit ofhappiness as retained by the people in accordance with the NinthAmendment and they violate the freedom of religion clausein the First Amendment because: (i) taking or not taking drugs isa moral choice and moral choices are religious choices and (ii)taking drugs can be construed to be a religious ritual. It isinconceivable that the framers of the Constitution (1789) couldhave forgotten the Declaration of Independence. Any argumentbased on the "compelling interests of the State" wouldfail because the compelling interests of the State would be tolegalize drugs to achieve the benefits enumerated above exceptinsofar as the State should be interested to support theprevailing religious superstitions of the masses, which would bea violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. In the paper, I present many other argumentsand answer all the objections of Mathis, Charles Rangel, andothers. In fact, I make a complete case. Today's Post reminded me that David Robinson,one of John Lucas' players, libeled all drug users as a classin a paid endorsement. Also, in an editorial about River Phoenix(11-18-93), The Houston Post wrote, "Every person who abusesdrugs ... is directly responsible for the death anddestruction caused by those drugs. It matters little whether hisis a casual or serious use". [Italics mine] To qualify as libel, a statement must be (i)untrue, (ii) malicious, and (iii) harmful. In the case of DavidRobinson, we all know what "scum" is. The greatphysicist William Rowan Hamilton was not scum, Charlie Parker wasnot scum, Lawrence Taylor is not scum. No human being can betruthfully said to be scum. In the case of the Houston Post, thestatement is completely wrong, but the use of the word directlyis easiest to refute. Obviously, the direct cause was the bullet,the impurities in the drug, or the excessive size of the dose,which was not standardized. As I showed in my 1989 paper, onemight more properly blame the laws against drugs. While the tone of Robinson's voice convicts himof malice, in the case of the Houston Post, the argument is moresubtle - but more informative: It is difficult to reconcilelogically the inclusion of "casual" use under"abuse", moreover abuse is not defined. Under"serious" use the author of the editorial has rashlyfailed to consider religious uses and artistic uses, which areclearly serious. The illogic of his verbiage indicates anemotionally charged state. Further consideration suggests thatthe operative emotion must have been malice. It is obvious thatdrug users suffer from this invective. If it does not lower theirown self-esteem, it surely reduces their esteem in the eyes of atleast some bigots. Thus, all the requirements of a class-actionlibel suit against David Robinson and the Houston Post have beenmet. Juan Palomo's column of December 13 urgesrespect for Joycelyn Elder's suggestion. Paradoxically, he doesnot escape my criticism. He says we need "effectivetreatment programs". In my 1990 paper ["Fallacies andUnstated Assumptions in Prevention and Treatment" in TheGreat Issues of Drug Policy, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B.Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C.(1990)], I denounced drug treatment. One may call the Drug PolicyFoundation at (202) 537-5005 to obtain copies of thesepublications. In some cases I will supply copies of my papersupon request. In present day America, however, I would notexpect many people to be swayed by my reasoning. Three hundredyears ago, in his famous Essay Concerning Human Understanding [Oxford:Clarendon Press, New York (1979)], John Locke wrote "[H]owcan we imagine that [anyone] should renounce those tenets whichtime and custom have so settled in his mind that he thinks themself-evident, and of unquestionable certainty; or which he takesto be impressions he has received from God himself, or from mensent by Him? How can we expect, I say, that opinions thus settledshould be given up to the arguments ... of a stranger oradversary?" Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky discuss howthe modern totalitarian state works in their book ManufacturingConsent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media[Pantheon Books, New York (1988)]. In America, the multi-nationalcorporations and their servants - the State and the Church -impress the weak-minded. Strangely, the talking heads on TV areperceived as men sent by God himself - even though many peopleclaim to hate them. John Lucas got at least one thing right."The war on drugs has not been a failure." The war ondrugs has managed to create an irrational bias against drugs inmany people who are capable of fairly reasonable decisions whenit comes to taking care of their automobiles - for example. Thewar on drugs has been successful in promoting falsehood andtyranny. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT01-B33-92IA031-000651-B023-16http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/rebutdea.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123742 text/html 148077HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:37:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:18:18 GMTContent-length: 147858 Two Crucial Issues in the Argument for Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate TWO CRUCIAL ISSUES IN THEARGUMENT FOR DRUG LEGALIZATION Dr. Thomas L Wayburn, ExecutiveDirector American Policy Institute, Inc. 2638 Yorktown Apt.294 Houston, TX 77056-4873 713-963-8944 TWayburn@aol.com ELee@uh.edu 'It's opium, Dearie. Neither more nor less. Andit's like a human creetur so far, that you always hear what canbe said against it, but seldom what can be said in its praise.' -Charles Dickens, The Mystery of Edwin Drood. Introduction I claim that, if one does NOT insist that (i)drugs are essentially neutral - having good or bad effectsdepending upon circumstances only - and that (ii) one has a moraland legal right to take the drugs of his (or her) choice withoutgovernment regulation, control, or interference, that: (1) theDrug Enforcement Agency (DEA) position can be defendedeffectively by a non-governmental person (unconstrained byseparation of Church and State) and (2) the pro-legalizationposition can be defeated in debate as Charles Rangel defeatedWilliam Buckley in the "Firing Line" debate on thePublic Broadcasting System. (The letter I sent Buckley subsequentto that debate is in Appendix A.) The argument recommended byCliff Schaffer in his paper, "Persuasive Strategies"and Schaffer's point-by point rebuttal to the DEA position isconvenient to employ as the (imaginary) argument to be defeatedby the (imaginary) civilian apologist for the War on Drugs. By"civilian", I mean someone unconstrained by separationof Church and State and for whom a prohibitionist position doesnot represent a conflict of interest, e.g., someone who is notemployed by the DEA. On the other hand, if one insists upon theaforementioned (provable) conditions, the DEA can be defeated, aswill be shown in the second part of this paper. Armed with the philosophically andpharmacologically correct positions on the two crucial issues, Ican defeat an imaginary "civilian" apologist for theDEA, i.e., a supporter of the War of Drugs. First (1), I show whythe laws against drugs are immoral and illegal(unconstitutional). Next (2), I attack the morals, motives, andmethods of the drug warriors, thus my argumentation must besqueaky clean even if I have to admit weak links in my chain ofreasoning (I am generous and give my opponent all the ammunitionhe is ever likely to find to use against me; of course, my armorplating has been designed to withstand this very ammunition).Then (3), I give arguments for legalization avoiding nearly allof the arguments discussed in the unnumbered book DrugLegalization: Myths and Misconceptions; these are thearguments for which my opponent is not likely to be prepared. Ifhe can't prepare an argument on the spot, he will be in seriousintellectual trouble. (Cliff Schaffer points out that the reasonthis book has no document number or control number or anyreference number whatsoever is that the government didn't want topublish or admit to publishing this book. I believe he is right.)Finally (4), I demolish most of the arguments the DEA gives inthe book avoiding the two or three points that I am willing toconcede as I don't believe any of us knows very much about them,viz., alcohol prohibition in the U.S., the experiences of foreigngovernments, and environmental uses. However, I do point out theunfair tactics used by the DEA. The DEA employs fallacies even inthe very few cases where an honest argument would have sufficed.I shall omit Step 3 in this presentation as it is coveredadequately in my earlier essays, which shall be made available tointerested parties (Actually, this, my latest essay on drugpolicy, may be part of a complete collection if it can bearranged.) Partial Rebuttal of Cliff Schaffer's Argumentby an Imaginary "Civilian" Apologist for the DrugEnforcement Agency (DEA) Assume that drugs are unmitigated evil and thatno one has a moral or legal right to use them. As an example of adefense of the DEA position let us attempt to rebut CliffSchaffer's argument - not line by line at this time, although Ihave annotated his argument against the DEA essentially line byline, but this results in too much repetition. Rather, I willgive a few samples of rebuttals that will suffice for one or moreof his arguments. This half of my thesis is less important andwill receive considerably less space, since, like Cliff, I aminterested to defeat the DEA. We differ only in which approach tothe common goal we prefer. 1) A DEA apologist might say, "Youmisunderstand the aims of our strategy, which have been fulfilledto a remarkable degree for the present generation. We must pushforward to benefit future generations similarly. To ask for adrug-free America is asking too much. However, we have made itmuch harder for the productive members of society to get drugsand, in contrast with the sixties and early seventies, almost noone approves of drugs. Even artists no longer use drugs to anygreat extent, which you can tell by the lack of deep feeling intheir work. In the inner city, the drugs are so weak that it isdifficult for people to become addicted - even to heroin.Conceivably, most heroin habits are largely imaginary. Jail is anessential part of our strategy. "Mr. Schaffer is either being dishonest orfacetious when he asks us if jail makes people more productive.We never said (and Mr. Schaffer knows that we don't mean toimply) that people who go to jail are more productive than theywould be otherwise (they probably were not very productive tobegin with), however many people abstain from drugs ordrastically curtail their drug use to avoid or reduce the risk ofjail and they are the ones we expect to be more productive.Certainly, Mr. Schaffer knows this. The deterrent effect of jailis greater in the white population because whites do less well injail and jail is more of a disgrace for them, whereas many blackmen take jail in stride. Some even feel more at home in jail thaton the street. It's good that they are in jail as they areprovided for and they do not set a bad example in the populationat large." (From now on I drop the quotes. Also, I shallabandon the effort of the speaker to emphasize that he is notpart of the DEA, but the reader is to understand he is notanyway. Therefore, his community standards argument can be ratherreligious in nature, which will be harmful to Mr. Schaffer'slikeability - as he, Mr. Schaffer, appears to be going againstGod! It is doubtful that Mr. Schaffer holds a degree as high asthe PhD as he puts his SAT scores in English up as evidence ofhis entitlement to criticize his interlocutor for using"big" words. Twice he refers to big words assequipedalianistic, which, of course, is an old joke, apparentlynot understood by Mr. Schaffer as jokes are not usually toldtwice. This is ad hominem and not part of the argument.) 2) Mr. Schaffer continues to preface hisremarks with "Every major study shows ..." How did hebecome qualified to determine which are major studies and whichare not? How does he know that he is familiar with every study?This is indeed remarkable. I have here the tables of contents ofthe latest issues of the five leading refereed journals dealingwith this subject. Would he be willing to state the results ofeach study as I state the journal and authors' names? Thethrowing around of names of authoritative studies is an exampleof what Jeremy Bentham calls the ad verecundiam fallacy,i.e., an appeal to the natural modesty of the interlocutor. Thisis a form of sophistry designed to make us seem inferior whenthere is no good reason why we should. Undoubtedly, Mr. Schafferis not familiar with the results of most of the best science donein this area although he would like us to imagine that he is.Also, Mr. Schaffer is cavalier with expressions such as "Noone believes ....", "Everyone knows ... ". Theseare sweeping statements and rather dubious to say the least.Could it be that Mr. Schaffer plays fast and loose with thefacts? Since his remarks obviously are memorized, conceivably hehas read none of the studies, and receives his informationsecond-hand. A few simple test questions should determine if thisis the case. I have in this box photocopies of hundreds ofreviewed articles supporting our claims. Shall we see howfamiliar Mr. Schaffer is with these studies and which heconsiders major? Shall we plumb the depth of his knowledge of thestudy he last mentioned? 3) Mr. Schaffer refers frequently to historicalfacts that tend to support his thesis that drug laws were passedfor all the wrong reasons. Besides being irrelevant to thequestion of whether or not they are good laws, what gets writtenin history books tends to depend upon the biases of thehistorian. Much of this history was written during the longperiod, which has not yet ended, in which history departments atmost universities have been dominated by left-wing liberals whotend to denigrate the white male patriarchy regardless of whatactually occurred. This is part of being "politicallycorrect" and is only just now being recognized as just asunfair and biased as history in praise of chattel slavery. Thewhite male is inevitably cast in the role of demon and theminority or economically disadvantaged groups are portrayedalways as victims regardless of how many white males theyscalped. 4) Mr. Schaffer claims he wants sensible druglaws, but he doesn't say what is sensible nor does he give anexample of a sensible drug law. 5) On the contrary, if drug use is immoral itis certainly not sensible to tolerate it under the law. If wedid, the law would be incomplete and therefore flawed (containingsomething immoral but not illegal). (This is as bad as somethingmoral but illegal and imputes evil unto the law - if I mayparaphrase Bertrand Russell.) To be fair we should say "moreflawed than it already is". We are trying to reach an idealset of laws, which can be done only after an infinite period ofstruggle. We must never bring discredit to the law knowingly,though. The law does not enjoy much respect - even in themiddle-class. This does not promote the welfare of the State. 6) Arguments about the success or failure ofdrug legalization or prohibition in foreign countries can beskewed because drugs may not be despised as much abroad as here.We have done a better job of drug education, presumably. I don'tthink we should have too much confidence in anyone's ability toevaluate the success or failure of drug policies abroad,therefore I wouldn't make too much of Mr. Schaffer's defense ofso-called legalization programs abroad. Clearly, though,variations in punishment of drug use from place to place be itcontinent to continent or county to county are bound to engendersome migrancy. As we do not approve of unnecessary and wastefulmigrancy because of its environmental and social effects, weshould continue to insist upon a universal international attackon drugs all over the world to avoid providing safe havens formoral degenerates. 7) If adults can get drugs more easily,children will be able to get drugs more easily. Many adults arewilling to provide drugs for kids as they provided alcohol for mewhen I was a kid - either for monetary compensation or for otherreasons of their own (perhaps misguided goodness of heart). Inearly died driving a car after adults gave me so much liquorthat I had to be carried to my car and placed behind the wheelwhere my automatic pilot took over until I plowed into threeparked cars totaling all three and the brand new car I wasdriving and putting myself in the hospital. Some goodness ofheart. This could occur if drugs were legal and supplantedalcohol as the party enhancer of choice. 8) If multi-national corporations were free tomarket drugs, they could employ the media blitzes that have madeAdvil a household word in a very short time. If they were no morescrupulous in the sale of heroin or cocaine than they have beenwith Tylenol or Micatin - making extravagant and patently falseand/or deceptive claims, society might be even more threatenedthan it is now with dangerous patent medicines. A Tylenol OD isnot a pretty picture. Virtually every vital organ shuts down.These companies have no morals. It is not their business to havemorals. Profits feed the bulldog and we all know it. "A manwith a wife and children to support will do anything formoney." His justification is represented by the charmingfamily portrait on his desk next to his calendar. 9) If heroin were legal, it stands to reasonthat it would be more popular than alcohol. It's a much betterdrug and gives more pleasure to the user. Many people do notrealize they are hooked until they try to stop. They don't wantto stop because it's so enjoyable and, for awhile, they may beable to carry on their lives more effectively than they couldwithout it. Thus, they have a large window of opportunity tobecome addicted. Young people think they are invulnerable."Other people might get hooked but not me." The upshotis that, with such a seemingly superior product and a long periodof time before its drawbacks are perceived, we have circumstancesguaranteed to result in many more users than currently and quiteplausibly more users than alcohol has ever been able to attract. 10) The following is a very important point andthe simulator would like the reader to imagine that this speechis to be delivered with many embellishments and passionatereligious fervor. We cannot have laws in conflict with ourcommunity moral standards and our family values. We cannot allowthese degenerates and perverts to walk freely among us - possiblyinfecting our children with their vile condition. This is aGod-fearing Christian country and we will not let the devil haveour children. Blah, blah, blah. 11) Jail is more effective than treatment.People must be held accountable for the laws they break.Prevention works especially when backed up by the deterrent ofjail - both the physical inconvenience of jail especially towhites and the shame of going to jail particularly for whites.The black religious leaders must make blacks more ashamed of jailthan they are currently. They may employ the argument that theirown shame is shared by all blacks and that they have let downtheir brothers and sisters if they go to jail. One Black in jailis a disgrace to all Blacks. Consider the argument used byDickens with respect to the Jew in Our Mutual Friend. Heis a good man, so he leaves the money lending business, which hewas fronting for a gentile anyway, so as not to disgrace allJews. "When a Greek goes bad, they say, 'Well, there's somebad apples in every race', but when a Jew does something of whichsociety does not approve, they say, 'All Jews are bad.' "So, Riah leaves the money-lending business and goes to work in afactory operated by Jews that is a model enterprise for its daywith the best treatment of employees imaginable. This ends Part I, wherein I have played theDevil's advocate against an opponent not armed with moral outrageand faith in all the good uses of drugs. Rebuttal to the Arguments in the Book: DrugLegalization: Myths and Misconceptions, by Raymond J.McKinnon, Published by the Drug Enforcement Agency to TeachProhibitionists How to Argue with Pro-Legalization Advocates INTRODUCTION I now wish to refute the arguments of the DEAarmed with moral outrage and faith in all the good uses of drugs,which, according to the beliefs of this author, a benevolent andfar-seeing God included in His design of Nature so that men mightbe spiritually inspired by song, story, verse, and imagery todraw closer to Him. (The author's religious viewpoint towarddrugs explains, metaphorically, why he claims that virtually ALLgreat artists used and use drugs as do the greatest scientistswho share the worship of the infinite with artists as discussedby Whitehead, which makes them the only true scientists, theothers being more or less technicians, though not to be entirelydisparaged if that is all they are capable of. If they took drugsthey might be capable of much more; but, in many cases, theirlove of this earthly life, however fleeting and petty, farexceeds their love of the infinite in the sense of Whitehead -and Russell, too (writing independently). Therefore, they avoiddrugs because they believe, perhaps correctly, that drugs mightshorten their lives. The author has no intention to prove hisbelief, which is, after all, a religious belief. He asks merelyfor the same respect that other religious people ask for theirviews. Obviously, this view is protected by the Free Exerciseclause of the First Amendment, regardless of what anyone else,e.g., a Supreme Court justice, thinks. Thus, I have not proved this close connectionbetween art and science and drugs. Nevertheless, I am permittedto assume that such a connection exists in this exposition as anexample of a good use of drugs, which is assumed to exist; andthis positive use is as good as any and reasonably easy tobelieve. I do not believe it is fair to "out" livingartists and scientists, but many artists and scientists who aredeceased and have left adequate documentation of their drug useshould convince a fair-minded person that this connection exists.SeeAppendix B. The Declaration of Independence written ca.1776 gives man the unalienable rights of life liberty and thepursuit of happiness. Surely by 1789 the Founding Fathers had notforgotten this when they wrote the Ninth Amendment: "Theenumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not beconstrued to deny or disparage others retained by thepeople". [quoted loosely from memory] Among those otherrights must be liberty and the pursuit of happiness. They did notguarantee happiness - only its pursuit. Certainly, many menpursue happiness in no other way than by taking drugs. Youropinion of whether they are likely to find happiness in this waydoes not abrogate their right to pursue happiness in this way.Needless to say, a man is not free, i.e., possesses not liberty,unless he can take whatever drugs he wishes. Amazingly, the argument that drugs actuallyenslave the user has been advanced lately; so, apparently, it isnot "needless to say". This is very easily refuted. Apassage borrowed from another essay should suffice: [R. Emmitt] Tyrrell employs the term"enthralls" with two distinct meanings. This isequivocation, which is unfair in debate. Since we are enthralledby drugs as we would be by a great love, it is easy to agree thatthese wonderful, miraculous, divine drugs of antiquity have lostnone of their charm with age. It is as though our beloved weresnatched from our arms when the word is suddenly used to connoteslavery, which we detest. We are no more enslaved by our favoritedrugs than we are by our favorite foods - or, to bring home thesharp sword of truth, far less than the average employed Americanis enslaved by his job. The average drug user is free compared tothe average corporate employee. This is the beauty of JackNicholson's speech in the pot smoking scene in the film EasyRider when he tells the bikers that the townspeople fear thembecause they represent freedom. The druggies of the BeatGeneration and subsequently have been symbolic of man's quest forfreedom. From among us come the free spirits of the land. Onlythe oppressor's iron yoke can bow the heads of those who dare totread the paths of the liberated criminal saints of thefree-wheeling drug culture. The whole world knows this is true. This enslavement argument is extraordinarilyperverse as the whole point of the War of Drugs is to enslave theworld in the interests of the multi-national corporations, i.e.,the rulers of the world, and those who serve them. Drug users arenot good candidates for wage slaves and they are most likely tobreak the mental shackles forged by the massive indoctrination towhich ordinary people are subjected beginning even beforepre-school as their parents are very likely mental zombies andwhich continues throughout school and on the nightly news and inevery statement made by the government or big-business throughits massive advertising campaigns, which, lately, have taken todisseminating such philosophical gems as "Life is a sport;drink it up." Drugs serve as a conscious shock, in the senseof Uspenskii [1], which reorders rigid mental patterns by whichthe received wisdom of the church, the workplace, and the Statekeep us in line - docile servants of the agendas of the richwhose "vile maxim" is "everything for us andnothing for anyone else". Business (capitalism) requireslarge supplies of readily available, unthinking, docile workers,who may be employed when needed and laid off when not. They referto these unfortunate human beings as human resources, which issupposed to be a more advanced term than employee butwhich tends to corroborate our claim that business thinks ofpeople as so many tons of coal just like any other businessresource. Allow me to reprint my earlier remarks [2] onthis subject: Users of drugs are referred to as"slaves" even though they act more independently thanthe average employee of the average American corporation.Actually, the average religionist, who accepts religious dogmawithout reservation is more of a slave than is the most hookedaddict; i.e., the religionist's soul is entirely subjugatedwhereas the body only of the addict is under the control of theaddicting drug, as evidenced by the fact that his will remainsfree to wish to be free of the addiction. Even this analysis isgranting too much to the use of the word slave. How can onebecome the slave of an inanimate substance, which has no will! After we have cleared away the garbage-speakand the double-speak, we see that freedom to take drugs is amajor point. Many people rate taking drugs higher than sex. Wouldyou like to prohibit sex? Just try it. To many people, (taking)drugs is not just the best thing - it's the only thing. Drugtyranny is total tyranny. Then there is art, which, withoutdrugs, is gone. Naturally, the establishment wants to keep usfrom taking drugs. Taking one tip from Uspenskii, another cluefrom Aldous Huxley, and from personal observation, I havedetermined that drugs is the fastest route to political. social,and economic enlightenment - perhaps the only route. (A friend ofmine confessed that he had been a hidebound, right-wing Christianreactionary until he smoked one joint. The scales fell from hiseyes - instantly.) Cast off the shackles of your mind. "Turnon; tune in; and drop out." As Jack Nicholson's character,George, an open-minded lawyer and an alcoholic, in Easy Ridersays, "They're afraid of you because you represent freedomand freedom terrifies them." [quoted loosely] The Tenth Amendment may be violated as well,since, as we have shown, such laws may not be enacted by thefederal government. The only question is whether the Constitutionprohibits the States from enacting such laws. In any case, theTexas Constitution, for example, prohibits the passage of suchlaws because of their religious nature. (The Texas Constitutionseparates Church and State more definitely than does the U.S.Constitution.) I have alluded to the religious aspect of drugsabove. Drugs also entail normally a great deal of group ritualthat has every feature of a formal religious observation or rite,thus the Free-Exercise Clause of the First Amendment is violatedby any law that prohibits these rituals. Actually, the decisionto take drugs or not is a moral decision; moral decisions arereligious decisions; thus "Congress shall make no lawrespecting" [with respect to] them, which is theEstablishment Clause of the First Amendment. Moreover, thecontrolled substances act has no proper definition of"substance", which, according to Bertrand Russell [3],is a nonsense term, nor is the odd term "drug abuse"defined. (Does it mean that the user is harming the drug as inchild abuse or does it mean the drug is abusing the user? Tosatisfy the due-process clause of the Fifth Amendment, laws haveto make sense. The controlled substance law, employing undefinedterms, does not make sense, thus the drug laws violate dueprocess as well. Throw in a little illegal search and seizure andviolation of privacy (Fourth Amendment) and you have a nice messof constitution bashing all in the name of protecting us fromourselves. Not a pretty picture. What do you do when you live ina tyranny with unfair, illegal, and plain wicked laws? You breakthem and with a vengeance. If hard drug users would act up likeAct Up, the government would be reeling. I wish drug users wouldact up a little more. I believe some "dirty tricks" ala Abbie Hoffman are in order. A little polite ass kickingmight get some people's attention as well. You know, the place toget their attention is where they live. (I prefer massivegraffiti attacks, e.g., spray painting "liars","thieves" in huge black letters across the front of theDEA building in Washington or on the homes of prominent drugwarriors.) I have written voluminously on the positiveuses of drugs and the rights of drug users. This is as much as Ineed to repeat here, because I am going to assume the twocondition in my argument anyway. They don't have to be true forthis argument to be true. I wish only to illustrate the utilityof proving that they are true. I wish to show how much you canprove once you have these two simple principles at your disposal;namely, (i) the laws against drugs are illegal and immoral and(ii) drugs are inherently neutral such that the desirability ofdrug use depends upon circumstances. After I attack their arguments, I plan tointroduce arguments from my earlier papers that they areundoubtedly not prepared to rebut. If I am to go first, I wouldstudiously avoid every argument in their book! This should creategeneral confusion among poor debaters who cannot think forthemselves on their feet. I intend to approach their arguments intwo ways: (i) logically, i.e., without an appeal to questionabledata, and (ii) empirically, concentrating mainly on theirmisstatements. Finally and most importantly, one can statewith confidence that no valid scientific evidence exists toindicate that the use of drugs is more harmful than it isbeneficial or that it causes any type of impairment rather thanenhanced abilities as we claim. Actually, no satisfactoryexperiment can be performed to test the effects of drugs onhumans so long as we are living in a state of mass hysteria thatis guaranteed to skew the results. Nor will any such experimentbe performed before drugs are legal and drug use is normalized tothe point where a drug user is considered no more abnormal than areader of poetry, say. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES Fletcher's Doctrine: This comes fromlegal philosophy. It proposes that the drunken man is notresponsible for what he does when he is drunk, but the sober manhe was when he decided to become drunk and, then, performed theacts required to become drunk is responsible for what the drunkenman has done. This is fair because the person enabling thedrunkard presumably had good knowledge from personal experienceof how the drunken man might behave. No one gets away withanything. Dram shop laws: The Fletcher Doctrine,which is valid, is in sharp contrast with the dram shop laws,which punish individuals who may have no knowledge of theindividual whom they enable to become intoxicated, who are in thebusiness legally of so enabling him, and who have every right toassume his behavior will be rational and normal. Dram shop lawsare unfair and violate due process, probably, as they areunreasonable. Definition (Imaginary offense). Animaginary offense is an act that appears to violate the rights ofanother individual only because of how that individual conceivesof that act. But, with a different viewpoint on the part of theperson putatively offended would not violate any rightswhatsoever, in contradistinction with acts that violate therights of individuals regardless of what they think. An exampleis a mother who imagines that her son's homosexuality is ruiningher life, but would not be offended or inconvenienced if herattitude toward homosexuality were different. Many family membersof drug users imagine that they are disgraced by the behavior oftheir close relative who uses drugs, but this is because theyhave a bigoted and intolerant attitude toward drug use, in manycases inculcated by anti-drug propaganda and mass hysteria. Theproof of this is that in some families no one thinks anything ofit. If the rights of one family are not violated by the drug useof one of its members, then no family's rights are violatedbecause the verdict depends upon how the non-users think and iscompletely independent of the behavior of the drug user. If, onthe other hand, the drug user beats his wife when he is on drugs,the Fletcher Doctrine kicks in. Wayburn's Doctrine (unless a priorenunciator of the doctrine can be identified): One cannot beconvicted of a crime in the average. Crimes do not apply tostatistical averages, but to individuals only. A statisticalaverage cannot commit a crime. If an activity is harmless in somecases then it cannot be considered a crime. One must discoverwhat aspect of that activity is always harmful to identify thecrime. Thus, since using drugs is normally (or even sometimes)harmless, in which case it interferes with no one's rights andthe State has no compelling reason to prevent it, it cannot beconsidered a crime even if it is harmful in some particular caseinvolving some particular individual or individuals. One mustbase criminal law upon the combination of the activity and theharmfulness. If, due to societal conditions, harm is doneindependent of the user of the drugs and because of circumstancesthat are not of his making, the harm should be blamed on thesocial conditions operative and, since all of society is toblame, no criminal law can be construed. This is very muchrelated to the commonly known principle that a person may not bepunished for a crime until he commits it - certainly not becausepeople who share some characteristic with him have committed thecrime in the past. SOME GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE DEA ARGUMENT Dyslogistic and Eulogistic Fallacies(Respectively) These consist in using terms that have negativeor positive (respectively) connotations in situations that callfor neutral expressions, generally because they belong tostatements about which nothing has been proven, often statementsthat would be the conclusions of their logical developments, ifthey had resulted from logical developments rather than a jumpdirectly to the conclusion without evidence or logicaldevelopment of any type, usually appealing to nothing better thanpopular opinion or the "conventional wisdom", which insome cases has been "manufactured" by their ownpropaganda. A good example is the use of the conclusory terms"myths" and "misconceptions" in the title oftheir book, which, by the way, is in violation of their mandateand represents a clear-cut conflict of interest. Passing off unscientific work as scientific The literature cited by the DEA refers, in somecases, to "scientific" studies funded by organizationswith a vested interest in the outcome. Impartiality is anabsolute requirement for science. That work is disqualified. Inother cases, unrefereed journals such as the New York Timesare cited. This, too, cuts no ice. Only very few studies haveeven a chance of having been performed by scientists who aredisinterested in the outcome. Even university professors knowwhat side they are on before the study commences. Shifting the Purpose of the Drug War toAccommodate the Argument The DEA is not very specific as to the purposeof the War on Drugs. Obviously, the intent is to prevent peoplefrom taking drugs. But, why? Actually, a host of social ills areascribed to the manufacture, sale, and consumption of drugs.However, over the course of their (imaginary) rebuttal to theaffirmative of the question: Should Drugs Be Legalized? one illor the other is mentioned depending on the argument they pretendto be refuting. Occasionally, the great "evils" thatare supposed to arise due to legalization are inherently neutraland may actually be beneficial under important circumstances. Forexample, addiction is beneficial if it is in the best interestsof the "victim" of "addiction" not to forgetto take the drug in question regularly. If blood pressure pillswere addictive, we wouldn't forget to take them, would we! Sometimes the "bad effect" to beavoided actually favors one or more of the other goals of theWar. For example, early death by overdose of heroin certainlyreduces the share of the national health-care budget consumed bythe victim. Also, if the user can write his own prescriptions -for athlete's foot medication, as well as for sleepingmedication, if indicated - the doctor's time is saved and thehealth-care budget is reduced. Physicians, in particular, do notwant the health-care budget to be reduced. They wish to gathermore and more conflicts in living under their already sweepingpurview. For example, physicians want to take charge of thegang-warfare problem! The DEA is careful not to mention mitigatingcircumstances that do not favor their argument. Clearly, they areinterested in winning this debate by whatever means necessaryrather than arriving at a valid policy, which, unfortunately,would cost them their jobs. They have a definite bias, but so doI. I want a longer drug menu. Moreover, I wish to avoid going tojail. Actually, jail for me, even for five minutes, is absolutelyout of the question! It makes sense to look at the DEA rebuttal fromthe point of view of its goals, real or pretended, to determineif a goal is worth achieving or if a circumstance that interfereswith one goal achieves another. I shall employ an outline form inwhich the Roman numerals correspond roughly to chapter numbers.This section may serve as a brief summary of the remarks thatwill follow, although I will have much to say that will not berepeated. I. ADDICTION A. Biological The only difficulty with addiction occurs if it becomesnecessary to stop the addictive behavior. But, why would anyonewant to stop taking drugs unless an external influence wereoperative. (Occasionally, though, people just stop for noapparent reason, in which case the addiction has disappeared and,therefore, was not a serious problem - at least not the problemit was cracked up to be.) Normally, the external influence arisesbecause of the laws against drugs and the propaganda necessary to"sell" an inhuman and unnatural point of view tootherwise rational persons. Taking drugs is a natural trait of anatural person and has been since drugs were discovered inpre-history. No one has any evidence to the contrary, thus theposition need not be defended. If one disagrees, one merely holdsa different view and nothing more. This is insufficient reason toexercise tyranny. B. Psychological The psychological aspect of "addiction" is, in theview of Dr. Robert Goodman [4], a manifestation of the simplefact that we like to repeat pleasant experiences. It is simplyabsurd to try to turn that into a pathology. In Iran, whenopiates were legal, a large proportion of the population consumedthem. Is it reasonable to suppose that a large proportion of thepopulation of Iran was mentally ill! II. CRIME As will be shown, it is futile to claim that crime will be aserious consequence of drug legalization. Crime is caused by ourinsistence upon allowing human activity to center aroundcompetition for wealth and power - our refusal, in the face ofincontrovertible evidence, to abandon competition for wealth,power, and fame utterly! [5] III. PLACES WHERE LEGALIZATION FAILED A. Addiction increased. For every bad case of addiction they can find, I can find agood case. Addiction like drugs themselves, is neutral, i.e.,depending upon circumstances as to its desirability. One may notdemonize addiction any more than one may demonize drugs. Thedemons are imaginary. This view is just as good as any and mustbe respected until a valid scientific experiment provesotherwise. No such experiment has been made. Always drugs areplaced in a singularly disadvantageous position, thus ensuringthe results desired by the biased pseudo-scientists. (A truescientist must be absolutely fair if not completelydisinterested. It is practically impossible to find adisinterested scientist and, if he could be found, who would fundhis research?) B. Death rate of users increased. The true spiritual man is undaunted by this kind of talk. Itmeans nothing to him. But, his death, in any case, if, indeed,there is any rational reason to fear death from drugs in anormalized society where drugs are legal and drug users aretreated like everyone else or like an avid reader of goodliterature, for example, i.e., merely an anomaly, I say, hisdeath will normally be quick and inexpensive so that people whothink along such lines (sorry specimens of humanity in my view)needn't worry about having to support health care for someonethey don't like or have no interest in. (In Appendix C, I showthat the laws against drugs cause many more deaths than arecaused by drugs themselves. This provides a compelling reason forlegalization.) C. Crime increased. The evidence presented by the DEA seems to indicate that theonly crime that increased, at least in Great Britain, was theState-manufactured crime of taking drugs itself. D. Cost of law enforcement increased. If any crime other than the artificial crime of taking drugsitself increased it was caused by competition for wealth, powerincluding negotiable influence, i.e., influence that can beconverted to wealth or power, and negotiable fame. Drugs havenothing to do with our need for law enforcement. Perhaps, ifeverybody "turned on and tuned in", we wouldn't needlaw enforcement or, for that matter, armed forces. This view isas good (and better if one reads my book [5]) as any other viewuntil proven otherwise. I remain confident that no such proof isforthcoming as I have proved (in my book) the view supported bymyself as well as social theorems are ever proved (without theabsolute necessity to employ drugs to achieve the spiritualrevolution of which I have spoken). E. Addicts will burden welfare and the health-care sector. If, as we demand, drug users are given the same opportunitiesas everyone else, they will out-perform everybody. No experimentto disprove that has ever been attempted even though it is easyto design one. (Remember, the drug users must be free of anynegative expectations or social stigma or fear of socialretaliation or demonization or scapegoating during the trials oftheir effectiveness at tasks of their own choosing.) So much forwelfare. The health-care issue is settled. Prohibitionists can't haveit both ways. Either drugs will shorten lives or they won't. Ifthey don't, drug users are as likely or more likely to contributeto health care (by virtue of their genius) and less likely toburden the system as many will choose to doctor themselves. IV. CRACK BABIES Let's wait six months to a year. I can virtually guaranteethat, by then, so-called crack babies will prove to be yetanother myth surrounding drugs - in a category similar to"reefer madness". See below. V. MONEY As will be shown, the money is in prohibition. What will allthe quacks, charlatans, and parasites do when peace breaks out?The ineptness of drug users that is supposed to cause workplaceaccidents has no scientific basis as in the previous cases. VI. MORALS The American government and the Christian right are notqualified to comment upon morals. The moral position is held by usas will be made abundantly clear as the argument unfolds. VII. MEDICAL USES OF SO-CALLED ILLEGAL DRUGS The DEA opposes the medical use of certain drugs for their ownpolitical reasons only. This is criminal. They wish to pretendthat they can make certain drugs go away completely. The War onDrugs has been amazingly successful in demonizing drugs and drugusers. (I can hear Chomsky saying, "Goebbels would beimpressed", which is not something I would write.) However,in stopping the flow of drugs it has been a dismal"failure". I predicted [5] that we would see newhorrors and we have seen them. Too many people have too much tolose if drugs disappear. The DEA, itself, will never let thathappen! So, the typical pro-legalization cant that the War onDrugs has failed is only half right and by no means the besthalf. Personally, I think the DEA has achieved nearly every goalon its agenda. VIII. INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS The DEA claims that individual rights must bow to thepotential harm done by a few; however, it seems that thetrampling of human rights itself is the raison d'tre. Afree people do not permit the punishment of people before theycommit a crime and the prohibition of drugs is just that. Formany of us, it is a draconian punishment that we shall struggleagainst as we would struggle against the worst sort of tyranny -for which drug prohibition is a good candidate. No measuresshould be ruled out in a struggle for an essential element of ourhumanity, e.g., the ability to make our own decisions, which ispart of the definition of freedom, cf., The Random HouseDictionary [6]: Definition (Freedom).Freedom is the exemption from external control,interference, regulation, etc. It is the power of determiningone's own actions or making one's own decisions. IX. LEGAL ASPECTS The difficulties suggested by the DEA can beovercome easily. We still have Fletcher's Doctrine, so nobodygets away with anything. The Food and Drug Administration canadvise and we are certain to take its advice into account.However, desperate people may take desperate measures if theywish, e.g., those dying from AIDS. Pharmaceutical companies andother drug manufacturers must continue to bear responsibility forwhat they do - as do we all. Nothing new here. The Meaning of the Word Addiction Is Not MadeClear In Chapter 1, below, I have defined nine typesof addiction, which does not constitute an exhaustive list. Whenthe DEA compares the rates at which given substances addict,i.e., the fractions of people who having used at all becomeaddicted, they are comparing apples with oranges if the types ofaddiction are widely disparate. For example, comparing theaddiction rate of cocaine to that of nicotine is nonsense, as theshort-term addictive effect of cocaine is gone once one elects tosleep. On the other hand, nicotine withdrawal is normallyaccompanied by painful symptoms that make the victim unfit forhuman companionship in many cases. In real life in the fast laneof rock music, we rarely encounter severe cocaine withdrawalsymptoms. The psychological dependence is merely the regret oneexperiences when one must forego a gratifying and delightfulexperience. This kicks in when the physiological withdrawal isover and its unpleasantness depends entirely on the individualand not at all on the drug. If I wished to add an amusing tenth type ofaddiction to the list below, I would consider an entirelyseparate type of addiction that is added intentionally to amedication, such as blood pressure medication, that must be takendaily, but, by itself, provides no gratification that impels onetoward a healthful regularity in one's use. I wish the drugcompany would add something addictive to my Indiral so that Iwouldn't forget to take it. I have just given an example of anaddiction that is useful and wholesome. Evidently, thedemonization of addiction is irrational and those who useaddiction always in a dyslogistic sense have fallen into alogical trap. CHAPTER BY CHAPTER REBUTTAL The Introduction to the DEA Document The DEA expects us to prove that the benefitsof legalization outweigh its costs, however benefits and costsmay be noncomparable when a moral imperative is involved.Generally, the DEA will be concerned with length of life asopposed to quality of life. The notion that some suffering isworthwhile is lost on them. Their question about using drugaddiction as a defense in a trial is answered by the FletcherDoctrine above. Finally, they wish to dictate the terms of thedebate. Naturally we shall insist that the terms of the debate benegotiated between us and we shall have something to say aboutthem. Chapter One: Addiction Rates and DrugLegalization I don't use the argument that drug use will godown and, frankly, in some cases, I hope it goes up. We can makethe best drugs available and, quite naturally, users will choosethe better drugs over those with serious drawbacks. If powdercocaine and new syringes are readily available, the use of crackcocaine might well disappear. Further, legal research should turnup even better drugs with few, if any, drawbacks. Cocaine is said to be much more addictive thanalcohol and yet some experts [7] claim that cocaine is notaddictive at all. I have classified cocaine under Case 2 (below),short-term addiction, and Case 4, pseudo-addiction, you enjoy anexperience so you wish to repeat it. Years ago, no one consideredcocaine addictive, mainly because there are no withdrawalsymptoms. The "violent psychotic behavior" theyassociate with cocaine is almost never seen in practice. Makethem state incidence rates and how they were obtained. The reasonthat there is "no effective, permanent treatment" forcocaine use is simple. Cocaine use is not a disease! Naturally,some people want to medicalize everything. There's gold in themthar hills. For the record, I include my short list of types ofaddiction together with a brief analysis of how well they fit thedefinition of disease [8]. I have compiled a short list of phenomena thatare sometimes referred to as (or mistaken for) drug addiction:(1) self-medication for chronic depression or chronic pain, (2)taking a drug that causes a symptom that can be relieved only bytaking more of the drug or by the passage of a few hours, (3)acute withdrawal symptoms that last several days, (4) dedicationto the repetition of a pleasurable experience regardless oflong-range consequences, (5) taking a drug to perform a task,which might have to be performed several times a week, perhaps tomake a living, (6) obligatory daily performance of a task thatcannot be performed during withdrawal from a drug, (7) usingdrugs to isolate oneself from the painful realities of life in abad world, (8) unwillingness to pass an opportunity to take drugsbecause the law may cut off one's supply, (9) the case of a drugthat, like valium or blood-pressure medication, poses a healthrisk if one forgets to take it in the absence of a craving that(blessedly) reminds one to take it. In Case 1, a physician mayprescribe another drug, Case 2 is normal and involves a consciouschoice between two alternatives on the part of the individual,Case 3 might require supervised tapering off or the prescriptionof other drugs, Cases 4-8 are behavioral choices in the face ofcircumstances that are beyond a therapist's control. I do notbelieve any of the cases correspond to what we normally call adisease. Case 9 is a normal medical situation and stretches themeaning of addiction seriously, but may not be omitted as itconstitutes a requirement to take the drug, which, in this caseand in this case alone, is strictly medical. Drug abuse usually refers to some type ofbehavior of which other people do not approve but which isconsistent with the goals of the user, who might be a criminal oronly an oddball. The term "denial" is a fallaciousappeal to the authority of the treatment community in a disputewith a user who is insufficiently articulate to defend his valuesand motives. The term "denial" is an impostor term.When the user himself disapproves of his own behavior, the term"drug abuse" might make sense, unless the user is avictim of anti-drug propaganda. Many people who have tried tostop taking drugs might benefit from the friendship and advice ofother drug users. As suggested by Henman [9], drug use must belooked at from the perspective of the user. We are told marijuana is stronger nowadays. So,take less! Also, label it honestly. If anything, its strengthwill be exaggerated, by establishment growers. Especiallyby establishment growers! Also, remind people that you needn'tsmoke it. The THC can be extracted with butter and drunk withcoffee or even milk. (Never try to extract it with water, ofcourse. It's not soluble in water.) If they use the argument thatthe commercial product Marinol, which contains THC, listsnumerous side effects associated with THC. Just pull out theblurb that goes with a common prescription medicine that isnormally deemed safe and see how long the list is for it.I would choose Imitrex, which cures migraine headaches, the totalnumber of side effects listed is thirty-four, unless Imiscounted. Remember, any symptom that is reported by as many as1% of the test group and appeared at least as frequently as itdid in the placebo group must be listed. If they tell youmarijuana impairs sexual function, ask them if they are worriedabout low birth rates. That's the kind of shifting of prioritiesthat they are fond of doing when it suits them. Just what is itthey don't want to happen? Do they really care more about thehealth of junkies or about the property of the affluent? If theytell you drug use drives up medical costs, ask them how much theyspend on the indigent compared to the well-heeled. Of course,early death, if it really occurs, reduces consumption of scarceresources, e.g., gasoline. Obviously, the ill effects ofmarijuana are never seen in the real world - only in the labs ofover-zealous "scientists" anxious to ingratiatethemselves with funding agencies, who, it must be admitted, arerarely run by hippies. Finally, they use the term "commonsense" in a fallacious way and refer to "misery anddeath", which occurs only rarely among sensible users. It isworth noting that the increase in use foreseen by some is merespeculation at best as no one can predict the future in thiscase. They have no scientific theory upon which to base theirpredictions. Chapter Two. Crime and Drug Legalization Once again, at the beginning of this chapter,the DEA claims that some drugs, notably crack and PCP, causeviolent and anti-social behavior. First of all, ask with whatfrequency. This behavior is virtually never seen in the realworld. If pressed, I could indicate, from personal experience andthe experience of friends and acquaintances, how exceedingly rarethis behavior must be as it is never witnessed by me or anyone Iknow. Even if a few did exhibit such anti-social behavior,society may not punish everyone for the actions of a few - and Imean a very few. Alcohol is the drug that causes violent andanti-social behavior, particularly if the user has seen armedcombat. The DEA divides crime associated with drugsinto three categories: purchase-related crime, drug-inducedcrime, and black market crime, which I shall consider separatelyas they do. PURCHASE-RELATED CRIME They claim, at the outset, that drugs are cheapnow, which is far from the case - even for a middle-class user.They claim that prices might not go down, thereforepurchase-related crime (crimes committed to get the money to buythe drugs) would not decrease. However, establishment drug firmshave the technology to produce drugs cheaply and they might findthemselves in heavy competition as no patents can be held on thetraditional drugs. Moreover, they would have no research costs todefray. (Research on marijuana has already been done by theunderground - and done well, I might add. Tobacco growers wouldbenefit immediately from this knowledge.) First the DEA claims that purchase-relatedcrime would not decrease because prices would not go down. Next,they claim that, if prices go down, use would increase, sopurchase-related crime would rise proportionately. Possibly usewould increase, and I hope it would, as drug use improves peoplein my experience. But, the price should be sufficiently reducedthat the cost of the saturation dose would not be prohibitive topoor people even, who manage to find the price of a pack ofcigarettes. At one point in the argument, the DEA claims propertycrime goes up with drug use - essentially for no reason at all.This won't wash as all the conditions will have changed and nosuch general rule can be justified. Of course, if hard pressed, poor people willsteal just to live, but that's another problem, namely, povertyitself, which had better be solved and solved soon. But, nothingthe DEA recommends will solve poverty. People who cannot getdrugs do not have a better chance to get decent work than drugusers would in a normalized situation. The trouble is in theeconomy and has nothing to do with drugs. In fact, the drug warcan be explained as a tactic to draw attention away from realproblems. DRUG-INDUCED CRIME Drug testing of people arrested for putativecrime proves nothing about drugs causing crime. This is thewell-known post hoc ergo propter hoc (after this thereforebecause of this) fallacy. (The fallaceous assumption is thateverything that happens after some distinguished event is causedby it.) The DEA statement that, "Drugs changed theirbehavior, enabled, and encouraged them to act violently andirrationally," is completely unsupported and has beendismissed by my earlier remarks. The authors of the DEA argumentsare shameful in their use of deceptive and inflammatory rhetoric. They often bring up crack, a drug that I, forone, shall assiduously avoid; however, they neglect the role ofthe drug war in encouraging the invention of crack as a marketinggimmick. If Squibb would provide a wide menu of cocaine productsother than crack, the use of crack would probably disappear, asit is not a very good drug and users would choose better ones. Moreover, the research of Schamaet al. [10] will disprove the existence of crack babies - unlessI am very much mistaken. Drug-induced crime is largely a myth. The DEAhas no case here. The constitutional rights of (otherwise) lawabiding citizens may not be denied due to the behavior of a fewexceptional people who would probably commit crimes with orwithout drugs. No scientifically verified mechanistic link hasbeen established between taking drugs and committing crimes. The DEA says, "Drugs changed [drug users]behavior, enabled and encouraged them to act violently andirrationally." Presumably, this would not occur except inpsychotic individuals, however it is well known that psychoticpeople are incapable of coping with the exigencies of habitualdrug use with all its complicated business of obtaining money,copping, and dealing with diverse and complicated people. Thus,people who are likely to behave irrationally will not be able totake illegal drugs on a consistent basis such that the fearsretailed by the DEA would be at all realistic. Fear ofpeople going crazy on drugs is the only irrational behavior oneis likely to encounter in connection with drugs. It is no stretchof logic to claim that the DEA is driving Americans crazy byinducing mass hysteria and unjustified fear of drugs, dealers,and users. BLACK MARKET CRIME It is patently absurd toimagine the black market competing with Parke-Davis unlesspunitive taxes are levied, which would be unfair and unwise. It'snot likely that the Cali cartel has the muscle (or ruthlessness)to take on multi-national corporations, most of which can put acreditable army in the field if it serves their selfish intereststo do so. The Cali cartel is a midget compared to Squibb. This isthe DEA's silliest argument - so far; but, don't worry, they willtop themselves. Children are bound to get drugs from adultsunder any scenario unless they can be convinced not to - blackmarket or no. I believe the best an honest educator can do issteer kids to the better and less harmful drugs and teach themhow to use drugs effectively and safely. The schools presentlyare incapable of offering an educational alternative that cancompete with drugs with their power to attune our sensibilitiesto the best that our culture has to offer and make worthwhilesubjects intensely interesting. All that the schools offer islies, drudgery, boredom, and all the wrong stuff. Kids who takedrugs are much more likely to take an interest in scholarship andart than are squares. Personally, I don't want my kids attendingany school I can think of - not Harvard, not any of them - and Ihave taught in four universities and attended many more includingthe elite academies. Frankly, I don't see many importantdifferences among them. They are all bad. Chapter Three. The Experience of ForeignCountries and Drug Legalization I do not intend to use this argument, but Imust comment on some of the specious arguments in this chapter.The DEA claims that "legalization did not work" in anyforeign country. They neglect to say what they mean by"work". In some cases, it worked for me. In theparagraph on Great Britain, the DEA refers to the journal Lancet,but they don't give us a reference directly to Lancet.Rather, they refer to a letter, which, we, of course, would notbe able to find in our library. This simply makes it impossibleto determine if they have quoted Lancet correctly - ifthey have evaluated the conclusions of the Lancet articlefairly. From experience, acquired in this booklet, we know betterthan to trust the DEA. They are dishonest and must be watchedcarefully in everything they say and do. In fact, every singlereference at the end of this chapter is clearly biased in favorof their position. This is typical of the references, as I havesaid before. Even references to university studies are tainted,as the sponsors and/or the directors of the institute doing thestudy are far from disinterested - to the everlasting shame ofall who profess science as their field of endeavor. Science: oncesacred, is now a tool of the wickedest people on earth. Later in the section on Great Britain, we aretold that only 20% of the "addicts" participate inmethadone programs. They conclude that the reason for this isthat heroin is a better drug. Almost certainly, street heroin isa much worse drug. The true answer undoubtedly is thedehumanization one experiences in any drug "program"or, for that matter, any government program of any type. That iswhy this author will never submit to a decriminalization planwith controls of any kind. This is why anti-prohibitionists whoadvise against asking for complete legalization and decontrol(and, perforce, rejecting any halfway measure) are part of theproblem not part of the solution. We have a moral imperative.There shall be no compromise - even if it means all-out war. Next, we are told that, while the clinicalheroin experiment in Great Britain was going on, the death rateof heroin addicts was twenty-six times the average for thepopulation. Firstly, I don't believe them (the reference is aletter that refers to an article in The New Republic,which is not a refereed scientific journal); and,secondly, why would they care, as they are obviously against drugaddicts. Undoubtedly, a considerable portion of whatever excessdeath rate the addicts do enjoy is caused by the lawsagainst drugs, which is proved in Appendix C. This is typical ofthe way in which this booklet switches objectives whenever theauthors find that a new objective is useful to make a point. If Iprove that result A will be achieved by legalization, theysuddenly abandon A as an objective and look for a new objectivethat will be met less well by legalization than by a bad law. Weare told that when the British "programs" were inoperation Scotland Yard had to double its narcotics division"to cope with the increased crime rate". [emphasismine] It appears, then, that the crime they are concerned aboutis taking drugs itself, which, of course, would not be a crime ifthey had not made it a crime artificially. The DEA equates success with less drugsconsumed and fewer users. But, clearly, they are not concerned atall with the quality of life of users, which they do everythingthey can do to diminish. In the Netherlands, they are concernedabout an increase in property crime, but one wonders what lawswere passed in the Netherlands, or anywhere, making it illegal torefuse employment to a person merely because he or she usesdrugs, regardless of his effectiveness. I, for example, can donearly anything better stoned than anyone else can do it notstoned - to put it modestly. I claim that nearly anyone can finda drug or combination of drugs that will enhance his performance.That's why so many athletes take drugs when they play, or,rather, used to before the systematic persecution and invasion ofprivacy of drug users (through testing) forced its nastytentacles deep into sports. I shall not go into the experiences of othercountries or cities with partial decriminalization, mainlybecause it is nearly impossible to find out what really happenedand, furthermore, it's irrelevant. Whatever the DEA says, weshall have to check it carefully as they are so dishonest. Afterall, they are fighting to protect lucrative jobs with virtuallyunlimited opportunities for corrupt practices. In the summary of Chapter 3, we read, "InIran and Thailand, countries where drugs are readily available,the prevalence of addiction has been and continues to beexceptionally high." Why don't they tell us how high? Thelast two sentences are as follows: 1.) Both the Single Convention on NarcoticDrugs of 1961 and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of1971 (both signed by the U.S.) insist that drugs should not belegalized. ["Issues and Comments to respond to Legalizationof Illegal Drugs." Drug Enforcement Administration, May1988]. 2.) The International Narcotics Control Boardof the United Nations concluded that "legalization advocateshave not yet presented a sufficiently comprehensive, coherent orviable alternative to the present system of internationaldrug-abuse control." ["Report of the InternationalControl Board for 1992," United Nations Publication]. Undoubtedly, these are true statements and Ithink they deserve a comment. They are indicative of the greatcontrol exercised by the United States in international politics,including the United Nations, which has become little more than atool of U.S. aggression and imperialism. We have become theall-time world's greatest bully - a nation of puritanicalhypocrites willing to impose intolerance and bigotry wherever itsuits our "interests", namely, the continued predationof the largely U.S.-based multi-national corporations. It isn'tjust drugs of which we are intolerant; it's any form ofself-determination among the weaker nations and any form ofdemocracy, be it capitalist or communist. Of course, since theonly path to true democracy lies through some type of communism,every democratic movement arising from the people will beinterpreted as communism, perhaps rightly. I don't have to saymuch to support this picture of the world as it really is. Thishas been done for me by Noam Chomsky with hundreds of detailspainstakingly documented [11,12,13, ... ]. The War on Drugs isonly the tip of a gigantic iceberg. Chapter Four: The Economics of DrugLegalization I do not use the argument that druglegalization will provide tax revenue. Drugs should not be taxedas they are a necessity of life. Food is taxed in Utah. Shame!Normally, the necessities of life are not taxed. In civilizedjurisdictions, they are never taxed. But, I must comment on thefalsity employed by the DEA - even in this pointless argument. Again, we see a reference to so-called crackbabies. When the Emory University studies [10] are finallypublished, and the detractors have been silenced, this myth willbe put to rest for all time. I shall rewrite this section at thattime. The DEA is again concerned about lostproductivity even though they have done nothing to ensure thatdrug users have jobs if they want them. Again, they make theunsupported claim that drug use is responsible for workplaceaccidents. The fact that Conrail train operators had usedmarijuana may have had nothing to do with the accident that theyconstantly harp on. I pointed out that just because eventscoincide does not prove that one is the cause of the other. Thisis a logical fallacy. In the chemical industry, which I know bestand where the accidents are of apocalyptic proportions,management pays lip service only to the prevention of accidents.Certainly, measures are taken, but the main cause of accidents isnot addressed, namely, the hiring of contract workers to avoidpaying benefits. Many of these workers do not read the languagein which the safety and operating manuals are written. Until thisoutrage is corrected, all bets are off concerning workplaceaccidents. I wish to express a sentiment peculiar tomyself to close my comments on economics. As far as I amconcerned drug users ought to be able to occupy themselvesexclusively with art if they so desire. Even fifty million drugusers supported by the rest of the work force does not seemexcessive to me. We have too many people working. The economy istoo large to be in harmony with nature. It is destroying theenvironment. For those of you who feel you should not have tosupport drug users, let me remind you that we haven't evenaddressed the slight matter of reparations for the inconveniencewe have suffered due to unconstitutional and immoral laws againstdrugs. I, personally, would be satisfied with $100,000 per yearfor the life of myself and my wife, however many will want muchmore - perhaps a one-time payment of fifty million 1996 U.S.dollars? Chapter Five: The Lessons of Prohibition andDrug Legalization In a recent talk, Jerry Epstein of the DrugPolicy Forum of Texas pointed out that the difficulty we areencountering in ending drug prohibition exceeds the difficultyencountered in ending alcohol prohibition simply because thepeople who remember what it was like before drug prohibition areall dead, whereas the people who repealed alcohol prohibitionremembered the period before Prohibition vividly. If the vastmajority of the body politic remembered that drugs were not aserious problem when they were legal, we would have an easy timerepealing the laws against drugs. By the way, they would rememberwhy the drug laws were enacted and they would realize, now thatracism has fallen into bad repute, that the drugs were enactedfor all the wrong reasons. Furthermore, it took a constitutionalamendment to prohibit alcohol. Why did it not require aconstitutional amendment to prohibit drugs? Clearly, aconstitutional amendment was required but conveniently by-passed,as it would not have passed muster in any rational court. Other than these observations, I have nothingto say about the lessons of Prohibition. Thus, the DEA ispreparing to defend itself against an argument I will not make.Apparently, the DEA has availed itself of "recent historicalevidence". Why should new evidence about past eventsbe more reliable than whatever evidence has been available sincethe time of Prohibition! I am skeptical of all such evidencewhether it furthers my case or not. It is more useful to me to hang the DEA withits own arguments. They seem to think that the majority favorsdrug prohibition, which somehow justifies prohibition. On thecontrary, the tyranny of the majority must be rejected along withevery other form of tyranny. What I think, though, is that, notonly do the majority favor drug legalization, the majority usesillegal drugs. I think it is amusing to contemplate thepossibility that, if every user came out of the closet, the setof users might turn out to be everyone! Ha! In Appendix B, I shall place Bob Ramsey's listof great men and women (mostly men) who have used drugshabitually. This may interest those who imagine that thepersecution of drug users will have no unintended social effects.If all of our great men were put in jail, society would certainlysuffer - embarrassment at the very least. Chapter Six: The Role of Alcohol and Tobaccoin the Drug Legalization Debate I will add caffeine to that list. Can youimagine how office workers would react to a ban on caffeine! I amnot suggesting that these other drugs should be made illegal ordemonized. I am sympathetic with smokers, particularly those whobegan smoking before the general propaganda campaign todiscourage smoking began. However, one must really wonder aboutsmokers who are so stupid as to congregate near the doorways ofbuildings to smoke, since that is an area through which everyonewho enters or leaves the building must pass. Why would they wantto lose the few sympathizers they have among nonsmokers when itwould cost them only a minimal additional effort to walk a fewpaces away from the building entrances? I suppose it is unfair toremark that quitting smoking cost me no effort worth mentioning,I suppose I am immune to addiction. Actually, I can take any drugor leave it. Arguments that hinge upon addiction, crime, health,etc. don't apply to me; so, presumably, neither should the laws.Actually, I am uncomfortable with the laws against drunk drivingbecause of the large number of drivers who drive well - evenbetter - while intoxicated. This must be a very large class ofdrivers, extending perhaps, to everyone on the road aftermidnight every Saturday night / Sunday morning, otherwise howwould they get home from the bars? It seems to me that the lawshould not kick in until actual harm is done. I cite the FletcherDoctrine, stated above. The DEA seems unprepared for my claim that thelegality of alcohol, the blood of Christ, and the illegality ofpeyote, marijuana, etc. is a violation of the EstablishmentClause of the First Amendment. Other than that I remark only thatthe DEA argument is typically silly, but I do not wish to go intowhat is obvious. Let me list a few fallacious statements fromeach of the remaining chapters even though I do not use theargument with which the chapter deals. By now the reader can tellthe author what's wrong with these statements. Let's leave suchcriticism as exercises for the reader. "Cocaine debases the user's life."Is that what they think? If it does, it is only because they sayso. And, they are willing to say anything regardless of whetherit makes sense or not. I am not nor have I been guilty of the adhominem fallacy. The drug warriors really are wicked.The general public ought to see them for what they are. Theydiscredit their own arguments by employing dishonest and immoralmethods to promote their own selfish interests. If theirarguments were valid, they would not have to resort to suchtactics. "[T]obacco does not affect one'sintellectual processing or decision-making ability." Sowhat! It is not clear that these other drugs affect them exceptpossibly to improve them. In most cases, the most popular illegaldrugs definitely enhance the IQs of most users. Users for whomthis is not true usually haven't much intellectual ability tobegin with. Personally, I don't think such people should be usingdrugs, but I am not prepared to tell them they may not; and, fromtime to time, they will surprise me with an outstandingintellectual leap, which, probably, they could not have madewithout drugs. Nobody has any evidence that is worth citing in ascientific debate. As Professor [James Q.] Wilson explains [Noticethat what follows is in no way an explanation, which byitself makes the entire statement a flat-out lie.],"Tobacco shortens one's life, cocaine debases it.Nicotine alters one's habits, cocaine alters one's soul [whichProf. Wilson knows from measurements on his soul-o-meter]. Theheavy use of crack, unlike the heavy use of tobacco, corrodesthose natural sentiments of sympathy and duty that constitute ourhuman nature and make possible our social life." [When aman uses the word "duty" in this manner "stand noton the order of your leaving but leave immediately". Please,Prof. Wilson, spare me your society.] Professor Wilson's opinionis worthless. Quoting "authority" is the weakest typeof argument and may safely be dismissed. One can always findsomeone as stupid as oneself. See my article on academia [14], to understandwhy I don't think college professors deserve the respect ofordinary people. During the last few decades, they seem to havebecome incorrigibly stupid. I have deliberately dissociatedmyself from all but a few with whom I remain on civil terms.These few are cynical enough concerning the intellectualabilities of the rest. I have been attending seminars at RiceUniversity, lately, to correct all the stupid things that aresaid - except in mathematics, where profound stupidity has notyet carried the day. But, more and more, I despair of beingunderstood. Occasionally, one or two receptive minds can befound, but only on rare occasions. The drivel one hears is beyondwhat anyone could imagine only a few short years ago, butacademia has succumbed to the cesspool mentality almostcompletely. The college students, even in the prestige academies,are pathetic, especially those who come from homes that allowtelevision viewing. (PBS, even, is an unmitigated intellectualdisaster.) I honestly see no point in being diplomatic inthis effort to change people's minds. No good will come fromadopting partial truths or downright falsehood as Madison Avenueand the mainstream culture have done. I should expound at greaterlength on this attitude of uncompromising truth regardless ofconsequences, that is, truth as we perceive it - recognizing thatwe are fallible. "And although cholesterol may kill you,it does not lead to the types of bizarre, destructive behaviorthat is associated with most illegal drugs." Refute thisas an exercise. (Why should not the reader get a chance toparticipate in the slaying of monsters of falsehood?) "[W]e should compare the risks of alcoholand tobacco [don't forget caffeine] with those of legalizedcocaine and marijuana." [Fair enough] "Likely, wewould find that the latter are much more dangerous than theformer." False; say why as an exercise. "[A]lcohol, while admittedly,dangerous, is much less addictive than presently illegal drugsand also is easier to quit once addicted." Criticize asan exercise. Hint: Add what we said about the definition(s) ofaddiction to the other falsehoods in this sentence. Chapter Seven: Medical Uses of PresentlyIllegal Drugs Criticize this chapter as an exercise unlessyou find its illogical point of view and other faults tooobvious. Hints: (1) They call what we say"propaganda". We admit to that, but wonder if theythink that what they say is "education". (2) One can drinkmarijuana. (3) Appeal to authority is the fallacy known as adverecundiam, i.e., toward modesty - your modesty. Chapter Eight: Individual Rights and theLegalization of Drugs I do not refer to John Stuart Mill, so it's nogood pawning his remarks off on me. I have made an irrefutableconstitutional argument. It remains only to examine the majorityand minority opinions in the case law that reached the SupremeCourt of which, I would venture to say, very little exists;however, I may be in for a surprise, a surprise I can handle. Themajority opinions that ruled against my positions must involveunconscionable assaults on logic. These can easily be refutedwith whatever slight aid I expect from the minority opinions. No,Your Honors, "I'm not trying to show contempt for thiscourt, I'm doing my best to hide it." My contempt knows nobounds, thus it's impossible to hide it. What will they arrest mefor, contempt of word processor - to take a page from Tom Wolfe.I have no fear that the Supreme Court will defeat my argument inthe higher court of unfettered reason. They will try to establish compelling reasonswhy these violations of the Constitution are essential to thecommonwealth of the United States. We shall not allow that thegovernment has a right to regulate the health and personal safetyof its citizens against their will. We can raise an army in notime that will put down that heresy. (Obviously, such armies arealready out there in force - although they are rarely informed bythe highest principles.) Other sections of this paper willdisqualify nearly every compelling reason they are likely to comeup with. If they pull something new, it will be just as speciousas the rest and I can refute it on my feet under as much pressureas they wish to put to bear. One must realize that, although theywield immense raw force, they are basically little people -barely more than children and they have not had a valid thoughtin years. They are almost nobody - in the existential sense. Weshould not fear them, rather, we should get busy and get them outof there. We can certainly contrive to arrange that if weapply our minds and exercise a little moral resolution. They have repeated my argument in their"little book". They claim our freedom doesinterfere with the freedom and well-being of others. (They usethe weak phrase "affect other people" to which we mightrespond: So what! But, for the sake of argument, we shall grantthat they mean that the effect is to interfere with the freedomof other people, and we shall use this concept in the widestpossible sense giving them every opportunity to make a validcase, which they cannot do.) In my philosophical papers, I haveshown how to disqualify imaginary offenses, i.e., offenses thatwould not occur if the mental outlook of the victim weredifferent. For example, a mother is distraught because she haslearned that her son is homosexual. Her pain is caused by herintolerance and misunderstanding of the situation. It cannot besaid that he is interfering with her freedom or "hurtingher" in a way from which she can be protected by the State.I will take their arguments one at a time and finish with themost common situation of all, namely, the case of the wife whoclaims to be suffering because her husband gets high. CRIME Earlier, I have shown that the argument thatdrug use increases crime is invalid. Even if drug use didlead to crime on occasion, the Wayburn Doctrine invalidatespunishing every drug user for the behavior of a few. DAMAGE TO THE UNBORN The epidemiological data suffers from thewell-known fallacy post hoc ergo propter hoc. But, mostcompelling, the study by Schama et al. [10], which is mechanistic(rather than epidemiological), has good controls, employs morethan adequate variation in conditions, subjects the young monkeysto a wide range of accepted psychological tests, and is beingperformed using the strictest scientific procedures to avoid anembarrassment when it is subjected to (expected) harsh scrutinyby drug warriors subsequent to publication, this study, I say,pretty much shows that there is no such thing as crack babies.I have known this for years from vast personal, albeit anecdotal,experience, namely, nearly daily observation of the pregnantmothers throughout their pregnancies - observations that the drugwarriors never have at their disposal. The plain truth about muchscience funded by the public is that it can be replaced withoutloss by introspection and casual observation. This is especiallytrue of the so-called social sciences and a large part of medicalresearch even. I do not intend to tar everyone with the samebrush. Notable and laudable exceptions exist. However, researchthat is sponsored by government agencies or other parties withvested interest in the outcome, e.g., a study of the carcinogeniceffects of chemicals sponsored by Dow and DuPont, is notscience! CHILD ABUSE This, again, is the fallacy of post hoc ergopropter hoc. Drug users almost never abuse children. Povertyabuses children. Capitalism abuses children. Instances of childabuse by drug users must be so rare that to punish every druguser for their crimes is an outrageous abuse of law. Punish childabusers when they abuse children - if the government has theremotest idea what constitutes child abuse, which I doubt. This,by the way, is an equivocal way of using the term abuse in abooklet that employs the term drug abuse. What do they mean, thenby drug abuse? Striking a pill with a blunt instrument or merelyyelling at a bag of cocaine? These people are such terrible liarsand morons. They deserve our utmost contempt. (This paper is notcalculated to make friends among them. To the drug warriors, asW.C. Fields would say, "I hate you!") The horror stories can be attributed one-by-oneto the War on Drugs and, of course, Capitalism, itself, which isbehind the War. I suppose the rich old men are afraid that younghip drug users might refuse once more to dress up in soldiersuits and go out and be killed (and kill those with whom theyshare the same old men as enemies) to make the old men and theirfamilies richer still at the expense of themselves and their ownfamilies. I find it ironic that, in the case of our armedaggression against the people of Viet Nam, our boys went out assquares and came back hip junkies, knowing the score even if itcost them a limb or two, unless, of course, they were killed -or, rather, murdered by the same company that brings you, now,The Drug War, in living color. AUTO ACCIDENTS The DEA paragraph on this topic begins byasserting that a large percentage (how large?) of automobileaccidents in the U.S. is caused by marijuana. They think theyknow this - or, perhaps, they think they can convince us of this- by doing drug testing after the accident. This is posthoc ergo propter hoc, which proves nothing; it doesn't evengive us a clue. What percentage of drivers who didn't get inaccidents were high on grass? I'll tell you what: I'll put mybunch of vipers, higher than kites, in a driving contest againsta random bunch of squares. I'm not going to let you employ thePenske team, naturally, that's why I say random. It is easy todesign a fair experiment to determine if drug use causesimpairment of driving skills, for example; however, no suchexperiment will be conducted. The authorities will not provideimmunity, remove the stigma, the social expectations, and pastdemonization and scapegoating of drugs and drug users. Contrary to the DEA claim, the Conrail accidentprobably had nothing to do with pot. I say this with confidence.No one has even remotely proved that it did. Would you like todiscuss the evidence? No unbiased scientific experiment has everbeen carried out to study the effects of drugs! Nor is it likelythat such an experiment can or will be carried out until drugsare legalized and drug use is normalized. The last statement in the (DEA) paragraph underconsideration is just plain ludicrous on the face of it. That'swhy we know these drug warriors are plain old-fashioned liars -desperately trying to hold on to their lucrative (very lucrative,I opine) jobs that are not and never were needed. Can you sayparasite? Here's the statement: "Furthermore, a studyconducted by Stanford University found that twenty-four hoursafter smoking one joint, pilots could not safely land aplane." The reference is the Drug Awareness InformationNewsletter, undoubtedly another bunch of liars, but certainlynot a reviewed scientific journal. Now, after making asensational claim like this, why wouldn't they give us areference to the actual study? Twenty-four hours after smoking ajoint, hardly anyone can distinguish a difference from the way hefelt before he smoked the joint. Given this indisputable everydayfact, why should we ever get in a plane knowing that the pilot isunable to discern by feelings alone whether he is capable oflanding it? How did they get permission to carry out this testlegally? Who would carry it out illegally? I know thepresident of Stanford might divert research funds to luxuries forhis personal use, but illegally fly planes ... ? This is thedumbest thing in the book! (The only reason I am bothering withpeople whose only logic is bullets is that I promised someone Iwould do it.) The people who wrote this book are dishonest. Goahead sue me for libel. It ain't libel if it's true. (Anysuggested advocacy anywhere in this paper - or in any other paperby this author - of illegal acts by the author or others is to beconstrued as humor, naturally.) MONEY Lost Productivity The DEA claims that drugs cost the nation moneydue to lost productivity. This reveals, already, an unclearconcept of economics, but the reader must read my other papers tolearn economics. (If you learned economics from Samuelson, youdon't know economics.) But, I'll leave economics out of it.Proponents of the American economic system (quasi-Capitalism)don't seem to understand that the lives of working people have noextrinsic purpose. People are not here to be exploited byentrepreneurs, to designate employers as charitably as I can.People belong to themselves. We better ask ourselves why peoplewho take drugs often lose all interest in their employers'agendas. Isn't it clear that the fault lies with the work, theworkplaces, and the bosses, not with drugs! Further, the remarksabove concerning the lack of any scientific evidence continue toapply to performance in the workplace. Higher Taxes The DEA is not clear how these higher taxescome about. I shall argue in a moment that it is unlikely thatthe higher taxes are needed to benefit drug users. I hope I havemade it abundantly clear that the purpose of a human life is notto be of the greatest possible service to the State, which mightinclude paying taxes. I shall have to await a cogent argumentfrom the DEA (or one of its pawns) before I can say what I thinkof it. Increased Health Costs Including IncreasedInsurance Premiums Since we have no decent scientific evidencethat links workplace accidents to drug use, we shall rule outthat factor. (Certainly, the most dangerous corporate policy inthe chemical industry, with which I am familiar, is hiringcontract workers who cannot read the language in which the safetyand operating manuals are written. This has resulted in manyhorrible catastrophes. Probably, chemical plants need to be muchsmaller to lessen the scope of the harm done by mishaps.Currently, plants are large enough to wipe out entire cities,cf., Bhopal.) If we are to believe the DEA, many drug userswill not be receiving health insurance benefits due to their ownchoice, but we Americans have not enacted equal opportunitylegislation to prevent unfair and unconstitutional employmentdiscrimination against drug users who are as competent as anyonewhether they are stoned at work or not. Drugs enhanceperformance. That's why most major-league baseball players useddrugs before the country returned to the Dark Ages, cf., JimBouton [15]. Also, if the DEA wants to claim that drug users haveshorter life spans, they must admit as well that they willrequire health care for a shorter period. Also, many drug usersdon't avail themselves of the medical establishment at all. Afterall, they are into self-medication, are they not? To carry thatpoint further still, if people could write their ownprescriptions, medical costs and, concomitantly, the incomes ofphysicians would be reduced. For my first paper on drugs [2], Iinterviewed a drug user who wishes to boycott doctors. In thatpaper, I make practically the complete case for completelegalization and decontrol of all drugs. If you had read it, asyou should have, we might not need to have this discussion somany years later as there would be nothing to discuss.Nevertheless, I am pleased to record my latest thinking on thesubject for my own personal records. Suppose, for example, that aperson is willing to sign an affidavit that he will never availhimself of the health-care system, except for the pharmaceuticalsector (and of course the textbook publishing and salesbusiness). In that case, would the DEA (or Congress) be willingto permit him to prescribe for himself? Finally, in the unlikelyevent that drugs kill a user, the death is swift, normally, and,therefore, inexpensive! The DEA's Last Word on Personal Freedom "In short, few people use the IndividualAutonomy argument any more because it is painfully obvious thatdrug use affects not only the individual user, but also theuser's family, innocent third parties, and society as awhole." We shall need many more words than this to establishour rebuttal, but not only because the DEA expects the Americanpeople to be incredibly stupid and, of course, they will not bedisappointed. In America, independent thought has been wiped outby insidious propaganda techniques learned from Madison Avenuewith the full force of the academic social science establishmentin the vanguard. (How do professors shave themselves in themorning? After only a few years, I became so ashamed of my(academic) calling that I could not go on, even though I thoughtthat I needed the money.) The Sufis, an amusing littlefree-thinking off-shoot of Islam, ask, "Are people really asstupid as we say they are?" Absolutely, as they demonstratepersuasively. I first wish to comment on the gratuitous useof the expression "painfully obvious". This is simplyinfuriating, as no valid evidence has been given. Not only is itnot obvious, it is not even true. In mathematics, we would callthis handwaving. It's what you do when you have forgotten theproof or no proof exists. To use this argument to suspendconstitutional guarantees, one would have to show that this"effect" occurs in every case, and that the effect isbad, and that the drug user is somehow in the wrong to createthis effect. I wish to discuss the effect on the family first. We may safely disregard the possibility thatthe effect involves violence as we have no evidence that drug useis responsible for violence with a non-negligible frequency ofoccurrence. On the contrary, drug users are more gentle,sensitive, and caring than the public at large. I have drawn up alist of complaints made by the wife of a friend of mine. Ishall pretend that I am he. When I say "my wife", Imean "his wife". I shall suppose that my children wouldnot come up with complaints substantially different from these. Idistinguish between imaginary offenses, such that the"victim" would not be inconvenienced if her attitudewere at least different if not more correct, and actual offenses,such that the state of mind of the victim has no bearing on the"abuse" she must suffer. I have used the analogy of themother whose son is homosexual, in which her suffering dependsentirely on her state of mind and has nothing to do withhis behavior. My Wife's Concerns 1. Fear for my health. Not really validas she refuses to respect my dietary needs, which have animmediate and permanent effect on my health. 2. She objects to what she perceives asunattractive and bizarre behavior manifested when I'm stoned andwhich she finds embarrassing. Sounds pretty subjective to me.When I get stoned, I become preoccupied with art, literature,mathematics, and, music. I look distracted, particularly when Iam interrupted. I am at work and, therefore, my long and enduringfaithful devotion to my wife, although always strong andsustaining, is, perforce, in the background. Interruptions,therefore, cause me confusion, which might be mistaken for idiocyby a person who has never experienced an obsession. I have noidea what I look like, but it probably bears comparison to thecrazy artist or mad scientist stereotyped unfavorably in ourcommercial movies. Of course, even geniuses don't get the respectdue them from their wives - or their valets. How can that fatslob who belches at the dinner table be in a class with Einsteinor Beethoven? I wonder what Bach's wife called him when thechildren weren't around, which, come to think of it, must havebeen infrequently in his case. Mrs. Bach - "Hey, [ironically] maestro,you left the lid up on the toilet seat again. Honestly, I don'tknow why I married you; you can't do one single thing right. Mrs.Handel's husband just bought her a new dish washer, but what do Iget from you - another grosse fugue, you bum." Bach - "Yes, dear, you're perfectly right,dear, I'm listening to every word you say, dear; I'll get to itthe first thing in the morning; but, if you'll give me half asec, I'll put the finishing touches on this cantata and thentake out the garbage. [sotto voce] What the hell is she talkingabout now? Goddam alto clef, let's see - F-A-C-E-G. [loudly] Yes,dear, right away, dear. [sotto voce] No respect! And I thinkshe's pregnant again. That little bastard Carl [his son, CarlPhilipp Emanuel Bach] ate all my morphine suppositories, again.Why me! [loudly] No, dear, you do not smell pot." 3. Maybe taking drugs is immoral. Well,that's what the DEA, other authoritarians, and the liquor andcigarette lobby are spending a fortune to induce her to think,but I don't think she's that stupid. No, that's not a problem forus. In any case, I've gone to a lot of trouble to show thattaking drugs is not immoral [5]. What is immoral is trying tostop someone from taking drugs! My wife would not be in aposition to criticize my morals as she puts meat products on myplate, rarely but sometimes, even though I have expressed mymoral outrage at the killing of animals for food, not to mentionthe horrible treatment of many animals prior to slaughter, cf.,large chicken "plants". Eating meat really is immoral,however I have not forcibly prevented anyone from doing it norhave I exacted punishment from those who do. If this drug warcontinues, that will undoubtedly change, although not because ofany direct action on my part. 4. What will the neighbors, her parents, heremployers, and co-workers think? Well, that's the sameproblem as above, but why should she care what people think! 5. Danger from the police. Well, yes,that's what we're trying to fix. 6. Danger in the Third Ward, a Black ghetto.Ditto. 7. I earn less money when I take drugs.I don't earn any money in any case. But, to tell the truth, Iusually don't take drugs when I am employed. It's really toocomplicated and, since I can take them or leave them according tomy inclinations and the circumstances, I choose not to take themwhen engaged in certain activities, but I have never said I wouldnot ever take them again. I have never repudiated drugs. Thatwould be dreadful. 8. I am less productive on drugs.Absolutely and categorically false. While, it is true that Idon't design chemical plants on drugs, I could if I wanted to,provided I worked at home, the way things are nowadays, which weare trying to fix. I don't watch professional football or junkmovies when I'm using drugs, but I get more done by orders ofmagnitude and my work is far superior to anything I can dowithout drugs. That includes mathematics, any type of problemsolving, philosophy (old-fashioned "big philosophy" -original philosophy, music theory and practice, craftsmanship,housework and home repairs, writing, study, financialtransactions (yes, I do financial transactions, just likeordinary folks and I do live in the world), driving a car(long-distance travel), photography, graphic arts (modeling), andsex (if sex may be called work). I'm sure I've forgotten a fewthings. But, basically, I can do anything on drugs. 9. I don't eat well when I'm stoned. Oh,that it were true! I gained four pounds over a two-day period thelast time I got high. Heroin improves my appetite tremendouslyand cocaine does not attenuate it. Sometimes I may get absorbedin my work and skip lunch, but I always sit down with my wife forthe (obligatory) family evening meal. I may eat differently as Iam trying very hard to avoid meat. My wife cannot seem tounderstand that I object to killing animals for food on moralgrounds. 10. She likes to have things her way, whichincludes me. I have been subjected to a remodeling agendafrom the beginning; and, believe it or not, I have changedconsiderably to accommodate my wife's design. I think many womencommit to men under the assumption that, although men are notsatisfactory as they are found in nature, it won't take long tochange them into whatever the women want! I believe this is aproverb. 11. She likes me better when I'm not high.This is a matter of taste and tolerance for what does notcorrespond to what we would wish for. I was high when she met meand it was some time before she saw me when I was not high. If Ididn't suit her tastes, that was the time to do something aboutit, However, in those days I did not object to sacred pledges andwe pledged ourselves to each other without any conditions. 12. Drugs are too expensive. Amen. Icould synthesize or grow any drug I need to take. I do notbelieve taking legalized drugs would be a financial burden,especially if I could make some for my friends. 13. I could lose the car if I am arrestedfor drugs while I'm using it. This is unfair,unconstitutional (due process violation), and must be changed. 14. When I take drugs, our family is notlike the TV family we are indoctrinated to want to emulate,presumably, to support the environmentally catastrophic consumerculture. Thank God for drugs, because, if I did not takedrugs, there, but for the grace of God, go we. 15. When I am high on drugs, I frequentlyget wrapped up in my arts, viz., music and literature. Atlast, we come to what I believe is the real reason my wifedoesn't want me to take drugs. Music and literature take me awayfrom her, at least temporarily. Women fear these rivals more thanthey fear other women. As Duke Ellington put it musically,"A drum is a woman." W. Somerset Maugham claims thatwomen hate art [16]. Mark Hecker, the guitarist and graphicartist, once quipped, "I have never been in a situationwhere music was being played, women were present, and they didnot do everything in their power to destroy (stop) themusic." I think we have arrived at the sad and unfortunatetruth. Thus, it is the drug taker whose freedom is beingabrogated by his wife. This is classic. And, as usual, theauthoritarians (read Conservatives if you wish) turn the truthinto its opposite. This book by the DEA is a handbook of lies.[It's worse than the Bible, which I always thought was theepitome of falsehood. Moses spoke to God. Oh, sure.] Chapter Nine: Legal Issues Surrounding theLegalization of Drugs The DEA points are easy to answer. Use theFletcher Doctrine described earlier. Remember that we insist thatpeople may not be punished for doing harm until they actually doharm. This does not remove the element of prevention, whichremains education - not propaganda but education. Read thedefinition of "education" in a good dictionary such asthe Random House [6]. Condemn Dram Shop Laws. The function of theFDA (Food and Drug Administration) is to advise not control.Thus, hopelessly ill people could try anything with a fullknowledge of the risks. The DEA does not present difficultproblems in this chapter. Chapter Ten: Environmental Issues and theLegalization of Drugs I do not use this argument. Nevertheless, as anexercise, the reader may look for errors in the DEA logic. Chapter Eleven: "Anything Is Better ThanWhat We Are Doing Now" Hopelessness, Drug Control, andPotential Solution Again, I do not use this argument. Be carefulhere, though, because, if the purpose of the DEA is to demonizedrugs, drug users, and drug dealers, they are very successful. Ofcourse, they can never stop the flow of drugs, but they may notclaim that that is their objective. They are making it plentytough for many users, which, of course, we view as immoral,wicked, and, indeed, illegal. Threaten them with class-actionlibel if you wish. If they think about it, they may be worried.David Robinson in his sneaker ad was definitely guilty of libeland would have lost in a fair trial. Nowadays, one never knowswho the jury may be and any verdict is possible! This is animportant point and the tyranny better start worrying about it. Iconclude with my seven-point post-prohibition plan. Obviously, mymajor thrust was the constitutional and moral issue, which theyhave said nobody uses anymore! That's only the main issue.Next comes terrorism and selective assassinations if the tyrannypersists. That Pablo Escabar sure knew how to treat authoritarianpublic officials. Well, we have to get their attention. Ofcourse, we do not condone violence and we will repeat that asoften as necessary. Any allusions to violence are in the natureof humor or, at their most drastic, represent dire predictions ofevents we would do anything to prevent. Insist on this. We neverdiscuss anything more drastic than an occasional dirty trick thatwe would never play on anyone. We only mention these tactics toexpress our good-natured joviality, as we are the last people onearth who will lose their sense of humor. My Seven-Point Plan for Post Prohibition My new plan for post-prohibition societyconsists of the following: (1) an equal-rights amendment for drugusers, (2) teaching people how to live with drugs, to choose themwisely, and to use them properly (to get the most out of them andto prevent accidents, disease, and unpleasant side-effects), (3)new opportunities for drug users, heteroclites, and other peoplewho are "different" to make contributions to society inappropriate nonstandard settings including settings where one canwork while using drugs, (4) during the transition, reparationsfor victims of the laws against drugs amounting to whatever theyneed to live abundantly, and (5) free informal counseling fortroubled or troublesome drug users by drug users. Since, it must be admitted, some people who aretaking drugs might like to stop - even in a normalized society, Ipropose two additional "points": (6) institutions likecommercial hotels that cost no more than hotels and that have allthe amenities of hotels and more, e.g., VCRs and videotapelibraries and books, except that the (voluntary) guest may notleave for a fixed period of time agreed upon in advance (by theguest) nor indulge in certain drugs beyond agreed upon limits,which might be monotonically decreasing. Rural locations mightprovide better settings with lower real estate costs offset byhigher transportation costs. Only one "medical""professional" per shift would be needed, namely, todispense medicine. I can say truthfully that I would trust anydrug dealer I have known to perform that job - except for one,who was generous to a fault. Vouchers could be provided for thosewho can't pay. And, finally, (7) new drugs that preventwithdrawal symptoms and cravings may be used (voluntarily), ifthey exist. Such claims have been made lately for the drugibogaine (17), but, unless the costs are reduced or borne by thestate, it will not be widely used. Also, the claims may not betrue - or not true in an acceptable mode; i.e., the effectivenessof ibogaine may depend on "religious" faith, whichmight diminish the humanity of the patient. Moreover, those whohave been "cured" by ibogaine may have merelytransferred their allegiance to a new drug, which, in the case ofibogaine, is long lasting (six months or longer) - at first, butwhich, after repeated doses, might "need" to be usedmore frequently. Lately, similar effects have been ascribed tothe South American drug yage or one of its derivatives. Actually,the possibility of switching to a new drug is included underpoints (2) and (5) above. References 1. Uspenskii, P. D., In Search of theMiraculous, Harcourt-Brace, New York (1949). 2. Wayburn, Thomas L, "The Case For DrugLegalization And Decontrol In The United States", AmericanPolicy Institute, Houston (1990). 3. Russell, Bertrand, "A History ofWestern Philosophy", Simon and Schuster, New York (1972). 4. Goodman, Robert, "Addiction?", in TheGreat Issues of Drug Policy, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B.Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1990). 5. Wayburn, Thomas L, On the Preservation ofSpecies, American Policy Institute, Houston (Work inprogress, 1996). 6. The Random House Dictionary of theEnglish Language, Lawrence Urdang, Editor in Chief, RandomHouse, New York (1968). 7. Akers, Ronald L., "Addiction: TheTroublesome Concept", The J. of Drug Issues, 21,No.4, p.777 (1991). 8. Wayburn, Thomas L., "Fallacies andUnstated Assumptions in Prevention and Treatment," in TheGreat Issues of Drug Policy, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B.Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1990). 9. Henman, Anthony Richard, "Coca: AnAlternative to Cocaine," in Drug Policy 1889-1990, AReformer's Catalogue, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B. Zeese,Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1989). 10. Schama, Kevin F. et al., "PostnatalGrowth of Rhesus Monkeys Exposed Prenatally to Cocaine",Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American PsychologicalAssociation, New York, NY, August, 1995. 11. Chomsky, Noam, World Orders, Old and New,Columbia University Press, New York (1994). 12. Chomsky, Noam, What Uncle Sam ReallyWants, Odonian Press, Berkeley (1992). 13. Chomsky, Noam, Deterring Democracy,Verso, New York (1991). 14. Wayburn, Thomas L, "American Myths andHigher Education", American Policy Institute, Houston(1990). 15. Bouton, Jim, Ball Four and Ball Five,Edited by Leonard Shecter, Stein and Day, New York (1981). 16. Maugham, W. Somerset, Ashdenen: or theSecret Service, Doubleday Doran, Garden City, NY (1941). 17. Lotsof, Howard, "Ibogaine: An OpenLetter," Truth Seeker, Vol.117, No.5 (1990). Appendix A. Letter to William Buckley After HeLost Debate to Charles Rangel March 28, 1990 William Buckley "Firing Line" P. O. Box 5966 Columbia, SC 29250 Dear Mr. Buckley, I suspect that many great and famous men do notget to see the mail addressed to them. In case this is being readby someone who is considering not letting Mr. Buckley see it, letme caution against that idea. Whether I receive a reply or not, Iwill assume that Mr. Buckley is aware of the arguments expressedin this letter and in the enclosed paper, "The Case for DrugLegalization and Decontrol in the United States." Any futuredeeds or words by Mr. Buckley in connection with this debate willbe construed in the light of this. Whereas it would be aninjustice to Mr. Buckley to assume that he had ignored convincingarguments if his staff had not permitted him to see them, theblame would reside with his staff. I wish I knew how to say thatbetter in fewer words, then I could begin all letters to the highand mighty with a stock paragraph - like the warning on a packageof cigarettes. That said, I would like to comment on thespecial edition of "Firing Line" with the debate ondrug legalization, although I tuned in a little late and had toturn it off 15 minutes early to go to bed. It seems that none ofthe pro-legal team could answer Rangel's point that we should tryprevention and treatment before legalization. Also, hisobservation that we have not addressed the social causes ofimproper drug use, e.g., poverty, was detrimental to thepro-legal side. So, when I tuned out, the prohibitionists had wonthe debate. The pro-legal side deserved to lose becausethey did not produce the most important arguments forlegalization, the points covered in my paper, the addendum, andmy letters to the Drug Policy Foundation (DPF), which might makesense to someone who had read the DPF Newsletter (in particular,one of them destroys Judge Sweet's position). Since I coveredbasically everything, let me single out the crucial points,namely, those that destroy Rangel's position. Also, before Iforget, why in the world wasn't the anti-prohibition sideadequately represented? Didn't you consult Arnold Trebach? If youdid, why didn't Arnold get someone who supports the followingpoints (not me, I can't appear on television; however, I amwilling to debate anyone, anytime, anywhere in the print media,including you): 1. The laws against drugs are unconstitutionalon the basis of (i) the First Amendment (the laws are essentiallyof a religious nature), (ii) the Ninth Amendment (proceeding fromrights to liberty and the pursuit of happiness), and (iii)violation of due process ("abuse" is undefined, aspointed out by Dr. Robert Goodman). 2. Prevention and treatment are based onfallacies and unstated assumptions, namely, (i) drugs are bad foreveryone, (ii) drug abuse is a disease, not is like adisease but is a disease, to name only two. 3. Prevention and treatment won't work, mainlyfor the reasons stated in (2). You continued to emphasize thatprevention and treatment won't get the criminals out of the drugtrade, which is one of your main concerns, and certainly a validconcern, but the thrust of the argument fails because no onecould prove that Rangel's plan wouldn't dry up the demand. I am interested in obtaining a transcript ofthe debate; but, by the time you have read this, I will havespoken to "Firing Line" and obtained my copy if it isat all possible. I am preparing another paper for the DPF. (Partof the enclosed paper is in Drug Policy 1989-1990, AReformer's Catalogue, Chapter 6 [1].) The new paper is to beentitled "Unstated Assumptions and Fallacies in Preventionand Treatment." [2] Perhaps you would like a copy? Sincerely, Thomas L. Wayburn Note to the reader (4-30-96): Buckley did notrequest a copy of Reference 2; however, he did read Reference 1,at least as much of it "as he had time for". Heaccepted my position in that paper but without excessiveenthusiasm. Nowadays, one no longer expects famous men and womenwho dabble in essay writing to exclaim, "My Heavens, this isthe greatest essay I have ever read, at least the best I haveread lately. Why is this writer not recognized? I shall dowhatever I can to bring this great talent to the attention of thereading public." I don't believe anyone (save myself alone)would do that even for his own son. Hey, it's a jungle out there. References 1. Wayburn, Thomas L., "No One Has a RightTo Impose an Arbitrary System of Morals on Others," in DrugPolicy 1889-1990, A Reformer's Catalogue, Arnold S. Trebachand Kevin B. Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington,D.C. (1989). 2. Wayburn, Thomas L., "Fallacies andUnstated Assumptions in Prevention and Treatment," in TheGreat Issues of Drug Policy, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B.Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1990). Appendix B. Great Men Who Have Used Drugs William Rowan Hamilton, physicist Richard Feynman, physicist Sigmund Freud, social scientist Samuel Taylor Coleridge, poet and critic William Halsted, physician and educator, founder of Johns HopkinsMedical School Edgar Allen Poe, writer Louis Armstrong, musician Charlie Parker, musician John Coltrane, musician nearly every jazz musician of the seminal period of jazz LaMont Young, conceptual artist, musician Vincent Van Gogh, painter Paul Gauguin, painter Benjamin Franklin, statesman and physicist Babur, the first of the great Moguls and conqueror of India William Burroughs, writer Jack Kerouac, writer John Fitzgerald Kennedy, politician Robin Williams, comedian and actor Aldous Huxley, writer Oliver Wendell Holmes, physician, poet, writer William James, psychologist and philosopher Cary Grant, actor Steve Jobs, entrepreneur Kerry Mullis, chemist Allen Ginsberg, poet William Kunstler, lawyer Paul Krassner, comedian, writer, publisher Gertrude Stein, intellectual Andy Warhol, cinematographer, artist Appendix B. Great Men Who Have Used Drugs William RowanHamilton, physicist Richard Feynman, physicist Sigmund Freud,social scientist Samuel Taylor Coleridge, poet and critic WilliamHalsted, physician and educator, founder of Johns Hopkins MedicalSchool Edgar Allen Poe, writer Louis Armstrong, musician CharlieParker, musician John Coltrane, musician nearly every jazzmusician of the seminal period of jazz LaMont Young, conceptualartist, musician Vincent Van Gogh, painter Paul Gauguin, painterBenjamin Franklin, statesman and physicist Babur, the first ofthe great Moguls and conqueror of India APPENDIX C. THE LAWS AGAINST DRUGS AND THE WAR ON DRUGS RATHERTHAN THE USE OF DRUGS PER SE ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR MOST (ALMOSTALL) DEATHS ASSOCIATED WITH DRUGS. Classification of DeathsInvolving Drugs We may place deaths associated with drugs incategories, which should be nearly exhaustive. If someone takesexception to the proposition that forms the title of this sectionand names a category not on my list, I am prepared to deal withthat category at any time the detractor wishes. (I am prepared todefend my viewpoint against all comers at any time and any placeprovided the debate be fair; e.g., I must be allowed as much timeas I need to make my points or my rebuttals to my opponentspoints regardless of the exigencies of television or otherbroadcast medium. Nothing could be more outrageous than placingtime limits on a debate of this importance. I don't care ifregular programming has to be suspended for a year. The airwavesare a public trust and must serve the needs of the people and thepeople desperately need rational debate on public issues.] Thecategories are as follows: Accidental deaths Murders perpetratedby debtors and creditors in the drug trade Murders associatedwith the battle for market share Deaths due to marketing ingeneral and advertising in particular Deaths due to conspiraciesor the ultimate conspiracy, a monopoly on the sale of a specificdrug Deaths due to overdoses, substituted chemicals, impurities,and unexpected effects Crimes of passion of which people whodon't take drugs are incapable Deaths due to physical impairment Analysis of Each Category ACCIDENTS OCCURRING DURING THE MANUFACTURE OF DRUGS These arerare and, in any case, are of much smaller scope, than accidentsoccurring in the commercial pharmaceutical business. Thus,legality might increase the number of such deaths, but in thesame way that the manufacture of a cure for cancer would. Wewould not be against a cure for cancer just because, in thenormal course of operations, accidents do occur whereverchemicals are present. MURDERS PERPETRATED BY DEBTORS ANDCREDITORS IN THE DRUG TRADE The murder of a creditor to avoidpayment with a child caught in the crossfire On December 12,1995, an article about a three-year old child who was killed inthe crossfire associated with the an unpayable drug debt appearedin The Houston Chronicle. Undoubtedly, the intention of thearticle was to demonize drug users and sellers further; but thefact is that, due to the illegality of drugs, creditors anddebtors do not have access to the normal legal proceduresassociated with debt. Thus, the laws against drugs are theculprit. Sellers of legal drugs do not in general extend credit.When drugs are legal no premium is added to compensate the dealerfor additional risk. Further, in the case of the most popularillegal drugs research costs are virtually nonexistence becauseof thousands of years of experience available at no cost toanyone. Thus, manufacturers do not have to add a premium torecoup the cost of research as must be done in the case ofZantac, for example. The low price justifies drug stores inrefusing to extend credit for a bottle of aspirins, say.Therefore, it is the laws against drugs that allow debt andcredit with its concomitant disputation into the picture.Creditors in legal trades have recourse to the courts - whateverthat's worth. Whereas, it must be admitted that the civil courtsare not a realistic remedy for most people who are involved inbusiness disputes, including the great number that arise due todebt, such recourse as they do afford is a slight deterrent toviolence. We all know that a broken knee cap is a much moreeffective expedient in the case where one feels he has beenunjustly treated or, if one retains bourgeois values, a punch inthe nose. Debtors in legal trade have recourse to bankruptcy and,in any case Deaths due to marketing in general and advertising inparticular Deaths due to conspiracies or the ultimate conspiracy,a monopoly on the sale of a specific drug Deaths due tooverdoses, substituted chemicals, impurities, and unexpectedeffects Crimes of passion of which people who don't take drugsare incapable Deaths due to physical impairment Analysis of EachCategory ACCIDENTS OCCURRING DURING THE MANUFACTURE OF DRUGSThese are rare and, in any case, are of much smaller scope, thanaccidents occurring in the commercial pharmaceutical business.Thus, legality might increase the number of such deaths, but inthe same way that the manufacture of a cure for cancer would. Wewould not be against a cure for cancer just because, in thenormal course of operations, accidents do occur whereverchemicals are present. MURDERS PERPETRATED BY DEBTORS ANDCREDITORS IN THE DRUG TRADE The murder of a creditor to avoidpayment with a child caught in the crossfire On December 12,1995, an article about a three-year old child who was killed inthe crossfire associated with the an unpayable drug debt appearedin The Houston Chronicle. Undoubtedly, the intention of thearticle was to demonize drug users and sellers further; but thefact is that, due to the illegality of drugs, creditors anddebtors do not have access to the normal legal proceduresassociated with debt. Thus, the laws against drugs are theculprit. Sellers of legal drugs do not in general extend credit.When drugs are legal no premium is added to compensate the dealerfor additional risk. Further, in the case of the most popularillegal drugs research costs are virtually nonexistence becauseof thousands of years of experience available at no cost toanyone. Thus, manufacturers do not have to add a premium torecoup the cost of research as must be done in the case ofZantac, for example. The low price justifies drug stores inrefusing to extend credit for a bottle of aspirins, say.Therefore, it is the laws against drugs that allow debt andcredit with its concomitant disputation into the picture.Creditors in legal trades have recourse to the courts - whateverthat's worth. Whereas, it must be admitted that the civil courtsare not a realistic remedy for most people who are involved inbusiness disputes, including the great number that arise due todebt, such recourse as they do afford is a slight deterrent toviolence. We all know that a broken knee cap is a much moreeffective expedient in the case where one feels he has beenunjustly treated or, if one retains bourgeois values, a punch inthe nose. Debtors in legal trade have recourse to bankruptcy and,in any case , are rarely murdered by their creditors who have much toomuch at stake to risk everything to recover a single debt. It isbut a poor business indeed, whose solvency depends on theperformance of a single account, although, to be sure, suchsingle-client businesses do exist and, undoubtedly a ruinedtradesman has from time to time dispatched the perceived cause ofhis ruin in a fit of pique - if that is not too mild a word. Inthe normal case "legitimate" businessmen do not conducttheir affairs in the presence of children, upon whom they wish toimpose the delusion that not all decency in the world has beendispensed with in the life-and-death struggle for wealth andpower exemplified by our ever and abiding mercantile economy.'Nuff said. MURDERS ASSOCIATED WITH THE BATTLE FOR MARKET SHAREAs a Common Feature in the Conduct of All Business I believe thebattles for market share among the robber barons are sufficientlywell documented that no one need doubt that, if you did not sellyour upstart gas station to Standard Oil at the price theysuggested, it would be blown sky high regardless of who got hurt.In the "old" days, i.e., the days of John D.Rockefeller, who has living great-grandchildren if not livinggrandchildren, the establishment got established by playinghardball - no less hard than the drive-by shootings in the'hood'. If these were the old days, we might not expect to seethe violence surrounding the drug trade go down just because drugtraffickers were made "legit" by virtue of legislativefiat. But, these are not the "old days". As a VanishingTradition Displaced by Still More Insidious Methods That HappilyVisit Most of the Concomitant Misery Upon People Who Are of NoAccount, i.e., Not "Our" Type of People The above titleis an example of irony in its most bitter form. The very"highest" class of people in our country, the realplutocracy, do not in general tolerate competition from"upstarts". If a large drug company were manufacturingcocaine for the mass market and I should attempt to enter themarket by selling a purer, cleaner product by mail-order throughmy web site on the internet at no profit but at a lower cost thanthe big company, the big company would turn its lawyers on melike a pack of killer dogs. They might try to get me on"look-alike" charges; they might try to dig upsomething in my past that could be used against me; they mighttry to get me kicked off the internet; and I can't imagine whatelse they might do; but, and this is most important, theyprobably would not have me murdered like they used to do in theold days. Thus, violence associated with the struggle for marketshare would take a different form from the violence in theneighborhoods between rival street gangs who wish to sell"crack" in a city park. Marketing in general andAdvertising in Particular It is probably safe to say that allmarketers practice fraud to some extent and that everyadvertisement at the mass market level (not a child advertisingfor homes for some of his cat's kittens) is deceptive if it isnot in such incredibly bad taste that young children raised ontelevision can no longer tell the difference between fine art andmeaningless garbage. Conspiracies and Monopolies In a normalized,legal drug market, the people must take precautions againstconspiracies of all types, including total monopolies. But, drugproduction is not such an arcane art that people cannot manage tocarry it forward in their garages and basements even if they areproducing effectively for themselves alone. The danger ofindustrial monopolies is a political problem or, as the Unabomberwould put it, an industrial problem. Frankly, I don't see thedifference. People who get stoned are guaranteed to make betterpolitical decisions than those who don't, which is yet anotherpoint for legalization, which should reduce the violence normallyassociated with the formation and destruction of conspiracies andmonopolies. OVERDOSES, SUBSTITUTED CHEMICALS, IMPURITIES, ANDUNEXPECTED EFFECTS We must demand high-quality drugs, carefullyand truthfully labeled. This can be done, in the beginning by agovernment bureau; but, as the profit motive disappears,government regulation will gradually become unnecessary, as whowould perpetrate evil for no advantage to himself when therewards of virtue for its own sake are right before his eyes.Thus, most of the deaths caused by drugs will be eliminated byavoiding (i) overdoses that occur because the user is used toweak dope and accidentally gets some that has not been cut verymuch - either intentionally or by accident, (ii) drugs containingharmful impurities (information on how to produce high-qualitydrugs will be widely disseminated without governmentinterference), and (iii) drugs will not be mislabeled - neitherintentionally to defraud the consumer nor accidentally throughcarelessness and/or ignorance. These are the most important waysin which the laws against drugs kill. CRIMES OF PASSION OF WHICHPEOPLE WHO DON'T TAKE DRUGS ARE INCAPABLE For Those Who BelieveSuch Crimes Exist If a person takes a drug that enables him toexperience deep passion of which he is not capable otherwise, heis nowise more culpable than a naturally deeply passionate personwho exhibits the same behavior. The test of whether his behaviorqualifies as passion is the observation of the person on theidentical dosage of the identical drug but not exhibiting thepassion. If such a time comes, we know that the passion was notcaused by the drug but, rather, was triggered by an insult, asexual provocation, or some other external stimulus. The drug,then, merely permits an inhibited person to experience the depthof feeling that is his due as a sentient being and a child of God- a feeling that is experienced normally under the samecircumstances by a natural person. The tragedy of a sick societythat kills natural impulses in men and women is not something forwhich a person may be punished if he merely discards the bindingneurosis by means of a conscious shock. The man who is capable ofdeep feeling and correspondingly violent action is healthier thanthe man who is incapable of feeling deeply and takes no steps tofree himself from the shackles imposed by an insane society. Thisanalysis can be applied to nearly every form of violent crime.The criminal bears less guilt than all but the most spiritual ofsouls - actually the truly enlightened who can transcend theworld completely and must be a rare species indeed. But, theenlightenment of the spiritual sage is no substitute for thepolitical change needed to make society rational and just, suchthat people who are truly alive needn't be bound and gagged likeanimals by the oppressors and their willing dupes, who, ofcourse, are victims as well. Conservatives will recognize this asthe typical liberal notion that society is at fault for thebehavior of criminals. It is stated here without reservations,qualification, or, needless to say, apologies of any kind. It isthe plain truth and easy to prove, as I have done in Chapter 4 ofReference 1, my large work in progress, of which the first part,which includes Chapter 4, is available from the American PolicyInstitute, Inc. The Myth of Reefer Madness and its ContemporaryCounterparts As stated in my rebuttal of the DEA argument,drug-induced crime is largely a myth. The DEA has no case here.The constitutional rights of (otherwise) law abiding citizens maynot be denied due to the behavior of a few exceptional people whowould probably commit crimes with or without drugs. Noscientifically verified mechanistic link has been establishedbetween taking drugs and committing crimes. No such link may beas sumed until a valid scientific experiment proves itsexistence. No such experiment has been performed. Always drugsare placed in a singularly disadvantageous position, thusensuring the results desired by the biased pseudo-scientists. (Atrue scientist must be absolutely fair if not completelydisinterested. It is practically impossible to find adisinterested scientist and, if he could be found, who would fundhis research?) The above is merely a repetition of more completestatements made earlier. DEATHS DUE TO PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENTMythical Impairment Prohibitionists are fond of citing studiesthat demonstrate how inept we become when we take drugs. Thesestudies are normally conducted by people whose funding comes fromthose with a vested interest in positive results, i.e., showingthat impairment does indeed exist. By definition, these are notscientific studies as scientific studies are performed bydisinterested people who are just as willing to be proved wrongas right, nay, more willing - as the falsification of ascientific hypothesis is more likely to lead to new andinteresting results than a corroboration, e.g., Michelson-Morley.In a sense, every experiment is designed to prove a hypothesisfalse. But, those who accept funding from "interested"parties are already tainted and we should discount their findingsone hundred percent. (Personally, I advocate spitting in theirfaces and cutting them dead in public - "cutting", thatis, in the old-fashioned sense of high-class snobbery. Normally,I am as egalitarian as the next chap; but, in the case of thosewho drag our noblest institutions in the mud, I am willing tomake an exception - with the greatest of regrets, of course.) Letme give an example (from the main text) provided by the DrugEnforcement Agency: The last statement in the (DEA) paragraphunder consideration is just plain ludicrous on the face of it.That's why we know these drug warriors are plain old-fashionedliars - desperately trying to hold on to their lucrative (verylucrative, I opine) jobs that are not and never were needed. Canyou say parasite? Here's the statement: "Furthermore, astudy conducted by Stanford University found that twenty-fourhours after smoking one joint, pilots could not safely land aplane." The reference is the Drug Awareness InformationNewsletter, undoubtedly another bunch of liars, but certainly nota reviewed scientific journal. Now, after making a sensationalclaim like this, why wouldn't they give us a reference to theactual study? Twenty-four hours after smoking a joint, hardlyanyone can distinguish a difference from the way he felt beforehe smoked the joint. Given this indisputable everyday fact, whyshould we ever get in a plane knowing that the pilot is unable todiscern by feelings alone whether he is capable of landing it?How did they get permission to carry out this test legally? Whowould carry it out illegally? I know the president of Stanfordmight divert research funds to luxuries for his personal use, butillegally fly planes ... ? Genuine Impairment Of all the drugs,that which impairs physical and mental faculties to the maximumextent possible is, of course, alcohol, which is not underdiscussion. Average doses of a few drugs can really get thesubject whacked - notably Quaaludes, PCP, and most barbituratesunder fairly common circumstances if the subject be not confinedto bed. In the very first place, suppose that the menu ofavailable drugs contain the entire pharmacopoeia. My claim isthat the vast majority of users of these drugs will choose otherdrugs. (I can't imagine anyone choosing phenobarbital when heroinis available; heroin does not cause impairment in the greatpreponderance of cases - quite the contrary.) For the very fewwho do not choose better drugs, I give you the Fletcher Doctrine,which belongs to legal philosophy. The Fletcher Doctrine statesthat, while the person who does the damage due to lack ofself-possession under these drugs is not responsible for hisactions, the person who decided to use those drugs of impairmentis responsible for what his other self may have done. Is thatclear? Responsibility is properly assigned; no one gets away withanything; and, in all probability, no more harm is done than in asociety in which the only legal drug of impairment is alcohol.This should be an extremely rare class of unfortunate incidentswith which we shall have to contend as best we can. It is nothingnew and I don't think we may punish the user of a drug ofimpairment until he causes damage - in keeping with Fletcher.(Don't look now, but all those people who drove cars while theywere drunk and did not do any harm have been improperly contemned- according to this entirely reasonable view.) Conclusion We haveshown that in nearly all cases death would not have occurred ifdrugs were legal and freely available to everyone, provided, ofcourse, that they are of high quality and properly labeled as tostrength, recommended dosage, and with all information necessaryto the user correctly supplied. We have many deaths attributed toalcohol, which is legal, but we claim that alcohol is a very baddrug that no reasonable person ought to prefer when a widevariety of alternative drugs is available. The same commentapplies to many other inferior drugs and may even apply to crackcocaine. Thus, deaths due to drugs should be rare in anormalized, post-legalization society. We are left with an oddcase or two where the Fletcher Doctrine must be applied, but wehave satisfied our promise to prove the statement in the title;namely, the laws against drugs and the war on drugs rather thanthe use of drugs per se are responsible for most (almost all)deaths associated with drugs. Finally, although it is easy todesign a fair scientific experiment to test all of theseobservations, such an experiment cannot be performed until drugsare legal and normal and all of the stigma of drug taking hasdisappeared, at which time we shall have achieved our objectiveand the drug problem will be just another shameful chapter inhuman history. Reference 1. Wayburn, Thomas L, On thePreservation of Species, American Policy Institute, Houston (Workin progress, 1996). Houston, Texas May 7, 1996 to be continued Houston, Texas Begun: February 28, 1996 Finished: May 1, 1996. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate