WT01-B36-1IA031-000652-B038-271http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglis10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125714 text/html 52540HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:57:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:34:44 GMTContent-length: 52321 The Forbidden Game - Chapter 10 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 10 Prohibition THE EXPLOITATION OF DRUGS FOR PROFIT AND FOR REVENUE; the re-discovery of their vision-inducing qualities; and the impact of scientificadvances provided three separate, though sometimes inter-locking,strands during the nineteenth century. There was also a fourth,of a rather different nature; the mounting campaign to have alcoholcategorised as a dangerous drug, and banned from general consumption. The gin plague had compelled recognition of the dangers of 'ardentspirits' as they were commonly described, and though it had beenrealised that prohibition did not work, and licensing did, a widespreadbelief remained—particularly among the followers of Wesley,and in the Evangelical movement—that ways should be found toreduce consumption still further. As spirits were obviously anacquired taste, the simplest way to deal with them would be tocheck the process by which the taste was acquired; and it waswith this in mind that a campaign began against tobacco. The weed The arguments used were similar to those which had been employedagainst hashish in Moslem countries—and to those which wereto be employed against beer, and later against cannabis. Tobaccowas condemned on various grounds, as unhealthy and as anti-social;but the main ground of criticism was that, though smoking mightbe relatively harmless when indulged in moderation, it led oninexorably not merely to excess, and addiction, but also to theconsumption of 'hard' liquor. This was the theme of a treatisepublished in America in 1798: Observations upon the influenceof the habitual use of tobacco upon health, morals and property,by the formidable Dr. Benjamin Rush—one of the signatories tothe Declaration of Independence. Tobacco's influence on all three,Rush felt, was pernicious; and its most sinister feature was thatthe usual consequence of smoking or chewing was thirst. This thirst cannot be allayed by water, for no sedative or eveninsipid liquor will be relished after the mouth and throat havebeen exposed to the stimulus of the smoke, or juice, of tobacco.A desire of course is excited for strong drinks, which when takenbetween meals soon lead to intemperance and drunkenness. One ofthe greatest sots I ever knew acquired a love for ardent spiritsby swallowing cuds of tobacco, contrary to the commands of hisfather. He died of dropsy under my care. Rush's denunciation helped to promote an alliance between theanti-tobacco campaigners and the temperance movement, when itgot under way a quarter of a century later. 'Rum drinking willnot cease', the Rev. Orin Fowler prophesied in 1833, 'till tobacco-chewing,and tobacco-smoking, and snuff-taking shall cease'; and he wenton to estimate that at least a tenth of the drunkards in the UnitedStates and throughout the world were made so by the use of tobacco—apiece of guesswork which was picked up and repeated again andagain until, as Joseph Robert complained in his history of tobaccoin America, it became a 'sort of sanctified census'. Other campaignerstraced the route by which an innocent youth would be lured toperdition: having smoked, he would naturally resort to a sodafountain, from which it was an easy step 'to beer, and then brandy,and finally whiskey'. Tobacco was also attacked in the mid-nineteenth century as a dangerousdrug in its own right, causing—Dr. Joel Shew alleged—a widevariety of disorders, including insanity, delirium tremens, andepilepsy. He accused it of causing impotence, too; but this wasa minority view. The more general opinion among its detractorswas that it represented a threat to American womanhood. 'No mancan be virtuous as a companion', the eugenicist Orson S. Fowlerclaimed, who eats tobacco; for, although he may not violate the seventhcommandment, yet the feverish state of the system which it producesnecessarily causes a craving and lustful exercise of amativeness.Just as alcoholic liquors cause such amatory cravings, and forthe same reason. As alcoholic liquors and the grosser forms ofsensuality are twin sisters, so tobacco-eating and devilry areboth one; because the fierce passions of many tobacco chewers,as regards the other sex, are immensely increased by the fireskindled in their systems, and of course in their cerebellums,by tobacco excitement. Ye who would be pure in your love instinct,cast this sensualising fire from you. Such denunciations of tobacco continued to appear until the CivilWar. Then, the armies in the field demanded to be kept suppliedwith it; on the Confederate side, the soldiers had eventuallyto be provided with a ration. Hope of having tobacco banned onthe ground of its moral and physical effects dwindled. Restrictionscontinued to be called for, but mainly to protect the public fromthe anti-social side-effects, rather than to protect the smokerfrom the consequences of his vice. In Britain tobacco was assailed on a more serious clinical level,in the pages of the Lancet. After a few weeks of vigorouscontroversy, an editorial in April, 1847 had to admit that thoughtobacco was certainly a powerful and addictive drug, it was notquite clear what kind of drug. Whether or not moderatesmoking was healthy also remained debatable. There were no twoopinions—the Lancet insisted—about the evils of excessivesmoking. The only problem here was: what constituted excess ?The test, the editorial suggested, was 'smoking early in theday'—when 'unless a man be the victim of pernicious habits,he certainly requires neither a sedative nor stimulant'. Anythingover one or two pipes or cigars a day must also be regarded asexcessive. For youths, any indulgence in the drug was dangerous.Their minds would be emasculated if they were unable to face theircomparatively small anxieties without having recourse to the dailyuse of such a narcotic. 'Listless minds and languid bodies, slake-lessthirst and shaking hands, delirium tremens, madness—and death.We have distinctly and surely followed this unhallowed indulgencein youths who began their studies with bright promise of success,with fair characters, and honest purposes.' But by this time it had become futile for the Lancet topronounce such warnings. Tobacco, along with tea, had establisheditself as one of the drugs of the working classes. It was alsoin high favour with men of letters, as endless tributes had begunto show; in verse—Thomas Hood's How oft the fragrant smoke upcurled Hath borne me from this little world And all that in it lies . . . and in prose—Lord Lytton's He who doth not smoke hath either known no great griefs, or refusethhimself the softest consolation next to that which comes fromheaven. 'What, softer than woman?' whispers the young reader.Young reader, woman teases as well as consoles. Woman makes halfthe sorrows which she boasts the privilege to soothe. Woman consolesus, it is true, while we are young and handsome; when we are oldand ugly, woman snubs and scolds us. On the whole, then, womanin this scale, the weed in that: Jupiter, hang out thy balance,and weigh them both; and if thou givest the preference to woman,all I can say is, the next time Juno ruffles thee—O Jupiter,try the weed!' By this time, too, the defenders of tobacco had found a freshargument. Even if it were addictive, they claimed, at least theconsequences were less hideous than from other addictive drugs,opium, or alcohol; and they were able to cite E. W. Lane's popularManners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians, publishedin 1844. Tobacco, Lane had argued, as well as affording cheapand sober refreshment, calmed the nervous system, thereby probablyrestraining the peasant 'from less innocent indulgences'. In hisLetters from Turkey in the 1870s von Moltke went further;it had been tobacco, he suggested, which had changed the wildnomadic Scythians, the scourge of their neighbours, into the quietand all too sedentary Turk. The Maine Law A parallel controversy was also in progress about drink. Oughtbeer, wine and cider to be considered as a safer alternative tohard liquors? Or should they be prohibited in case youths, luredinto taking them because they were relatively mild, would be temptedto move on impetuously to gin, or whiskey, or rum? For a time, supporters of wine and beer were dominant. In AnInquiry into the effects of ardent spirits upon the human bodyand mind, published in 1784, Benjamin Rush had argued thatthe consumption of beer and wine should be encouraged, in orderto discourage dram-drinking. In Britain, even John Wesley hadpraised wine, 'one of the noblest cordials'; and in 1826 SydneySmith, recommending ale and tobacco to the readers of the EdinburghReview as 'the joys and holidays of millions, the greatestpleasure which it is in the power of fortune to bestow', warnedthat these were amusements 'which a wise and parental legislatureshould not despise, or hastily extinguish'. To his mortificationthe legislature was soon to go to the other extreme. In 1830 theWellington Government, in its death throes, tried to court popularitywith brewers and workers by reducing the cost of the licence tosell beer to £2 a year—a sum which was small enough tomake it possible for any householder to take out a licence, asthe brewers were delighted to advance the money. There was animmediate massive increase in the number of public houses—50,000in six years—and of facilities for cheap beer drinking. As aresult, there was a repetition of what had happened a centuryearlier when similar encouragement had been given to gin—thoughon a less lethal scale. Again, the prevailing social conditions—withthe lives of workers on the land being disrupted by enclosures,and of urban workers by the introduction of the factory system—encouragedthe consumption of alcohol as a narcotic rather than a stimulant.'Everybody is drunk,' Sydney Smith sadly observed, 'those whoare not singing are sprawling. The sovereign people are in a beastlystate.' In 1832 James Teare stood up at a temperance meeting in Manchesterand claimed that all intoxicating liquor was an enemy toGod and man; 'the sooner it is put out of this world, the better'.Ten weeks later, seven men signed the first teetotal pledge, inPreston; and in 1835 a national society of teetotallers was formed.The movement grew rapidly in Britain—and still more rapidlyin Ireland, where Father Mathew's preaching persuaded tens ofthousands to take the pledge. In this period the campaign wasfor voluntary abstinence; and although it became known that thesister movement in the United States was for legislative intervention,it came as a complete surprise when a prohibition Bill was debatedin the Maine Legislature in 1850, and as a still greater surprisewhen, the following year, it was passed. No attempt was made tostop people bringing liquor into the State for their own consumption,and the fruit-growers' lobby was influential enough to preventapple cider being included in the ban. But 'the Maine Law' wasgenerally regarded, and described, as prohibition; the first enactmentbased on the premise that all alcoholic liquors as such were dangerousdrugs which ought to be taken, if at all, only on a medical prescription. What happened in America had the effect of disrupting the movementin Britain. At first, the news of the Maine Law was enthusiasticallyreceived by all concerned. But it led some reformers to arguethat what had been done in America could be done in Britain; anda split developed between those who continued to advocate voluntaryabstinence, and those who wanted legal prohibition—the 'suasionists'and the 'suppressionists', as the two sides came to be described.In 1853 the United Kingdom Alliance was established 'to procurethe total and immediate legislative suppression of the trafficin all intoxicating liquors'; and it was soon engaged in vigorousand sometimes embittered controversy with the suasionists, whoobjected to legal compulsion on principle and argued that therewas no chance of such a measure passing in Britain. The controversy started a public debate on the rights and dutiesof the State, in this context, and the arguments were consideredby John Stuart Mill in his Essay on Liberty. Mill tookas his text a letter which Lord Stanley had sent to The Times,replying to the views propounded by the Secretary of the U.K.Alliance. 'All matters relating to thought, opinion, conscienceappear to me without the sphere of legislation,' Stanley had argued;'all pertaining to social act, habit, relations, subject onlyto discretionary power vested in the State itself.' But therewas another category, Mill pointed out. Individual acts mighthave social consequences. In that case, the Secretary of the Alliancein effect was arguing, If anything invades my social rights, certainly the traffic instrong drink does. It destroys my primary right of security, byconstantly creating and stimulating social disorder. It invadesmy right of equality, by deriving a profit from the creation ofa misery I am taxed to support. It impedes my right to free moraland intellectual development, by surrounding my path with dangers,and by weakening and demoralising society, from which I have aright to claim mutual aid and intercourse. What this amounted to, Mill thought, was a new theory of socialrights; 'that it is the absolute right of every individual thatevery other individual shall act in every respect exactly as heought'. So monstrous a principle, Mill felt, is far more dangerous than any single interference with liberty;there is no violation of liberty that it would not justify; itacknowledges no right to any freedom whatever except, perhaps,that of holding opinions in secret, without ever disclosing them;for the moment an opinion I consider noxious passes anyone's lips,it invades all the 'social rights' attributed to me by the Alliance. Mill was being unfair. The Alliance were not claiming that becausethey disapproved of the consumption of alcohol, they had a rightto stop other people drinking. They were simply arguing that ifan individual's drinking had social consequences of a kind whichaffected other people's rights—by, say, making the streets unsafe—theycould then claim that right. As it happened, the Alliance statedthat they did not even want to stop individuals brewing theirown beer; it was the consequences of the liquor traffic, ratherthan of liquor, to which they objected. But here, they had putthemselves on weaker ground, as the suasionist Joseph Liveseypointed out. If the Alliance were going to tell a man, 'you canbrew your own beer', he argued—he failed to see 'how it canbe wrong for your neighbour of the Royal Hotel to brew it foryou, and take pay for it'. Stanley had also uncovered a weakness in the Alliance's case.Their aim was to suppress the traffic in intoxicants; how wereintoxicants to be defined? 'Is tobacco to be included? Is opium?'The Secretary of the Alliance, who was presumably well aware thatany attempt to link tobacco with alcohol as a national menacewould weaken his organisation's prospects, was forced to hedge.The tobacco traffic, he claimed, rested on the drink traffic 'andwould fall with it, without any special enactment'—as also,he added, would the opium traffic. But he offered no evidencefor this assertion. Fanshawe's travels In Britain, though, the decisive factor—as Livesey realised—wasnot going to be philosophical disputation, but the compositionof the House of Commons. 'Out of the 658 members,' he wrote, 'thereare probably not a dozen who would claim to be abstainers. Thesegentlemen have their cellars stored with liquor, have it dailyon their tables, and have it introduced on every social occasionas a mark of friendship—and is it likely that they would passa Bill to prevent others enjoying the same, according to theirmeans?' It was most unlikely; but the hopes of suppressionistswere kept alive partly by the extension of the franchise in Britain,which brought in working class voters, and partly by the achievementsof the movement in America. Twelve other States had followed Maine'sexample; and though there had been backsliding as a result ofthe Civil War, the movement had soon picked up again. A NationalProhibition Party was formed in 1869; its candidates began towin seats in State legislatures; and in 1890, it won its firstseat in the House of Representatives at Washington. Was it possible that prohibition might be introduced, on a nationalscale? Could it work? Did it, in fact, work in the States whichhad introduced it ? In 1892 an English lawyer, E. L. Fanshawe,was despatched on a tour of America and Canada to try to findout. In his report, he was to claim that his sponsors—he didnot say who they were—had given him strict injunctions to preserveimpartiality; and whatever his personal opinions may have been(he was no teetotaller, himself) he did not allow them to obtrude. Fanshawe was intrigued, on his arrival in America, to observethe differences in drinking habits. They helped, he felt, to accountfor the different courses which the temperance movement had beentaking. In public, American men drank only water—iced. Exceptin a few cities, he usually found himself the only person takingwine or beer with his dinner. The clergy were virtually compelledto be abstainers; and at public functions, drink was the exception.At gatherings at the White House, disrespectful persons said,'water flowed like champagne'. Fanshawe found, though, that if he went into a bar, at any hourof the day, he might meet friends who had been drinking waterat dinner the night before, and they would be having a glass ofwhiskey, or a 'cocktail'. Worse (for once, Fanshawe could notrepress his disapproval) they would be 'treating' each other;a practice so un-English, at that time, that he had to explainit in a footnote; 'two Americans go together to a bar; one treatsthe other who, feeling himself under an obligation, must havehis revenge' (in Nebraska treating had been made illegal, 'butnot prevented'). Even in States where there was no prohibition, Fanshawe found,drinking was regarded as a vice. Those who indulged themselvestook care to do so in secret—or at least in privacy. And theydid precisely the same in States where there was prohibition.He had arrived expecting to hear complaints about the way prohibitioninfringed the rights of the individual. Instead, all he heardwas complaints about the difficulties of enforcing it. This was due partly, he decided, to the fact that the prohibitionists,not being numerous enough to win on their own ticket, had concentratedon acquiring sufficient strength to hold the balance of powerbetween Democrats and Republicans; which put them in a positionto compel one or other party to pass 'dry' legislation, but didnot necessarily compel them, when in office, to enforce it. Enforcementwould depend on who was the successful party's nominee to runthe police; and he might be in the pay of the brewers and distillers. In any case, the problems confronting even those communities whichwere determined to enforce prohibition were formidable. It hadbeen found relatively easy to enforce 'local option', where thatwas the law, because small communities were better able to winkleout illicit traffickers in their midst. When Fanshawe went toCambridge, Mass., he could see just how efficiently it worked.But it worked efficiently only because Boston was nearby, withits 'high return of arrests for drunkenness, and its high percentageof non-residents among those arrested'. As for prohibition atthe State level, Fanshawe's enquiries showed it to be almost farcical.In Maine, for example, there was nothing to stop citizens bringingin as much liquor as they could carry. They could even purchaseit in hotels to drink in private rooms; and in Bangor it was openlysold in bars, and by chemists. In Kansas, the State usually citedas having done most to make a success of prohibition, he was toldthat it was legal for members of clubs to keep liquor; they couldobtain it through 'bootleggers' or—again perfectly legally—byordering deliveries from a nearby 'wet' State. Fanshawe was not called upon by his English sponsors to pronouncea verdict: but the report spoke it for him. Prohibition couldnot hope to work. How could whiskey be kept out of 'dry' KansasCity (Kan.) when the 'frontier' was an imaginary line runningdown the middle of the street dividing it from 'wet' Kansas City(Mo.)? Why, then, had the futility of prohibition not been recognised? One reason, Fanshawe showed, was that men who had the responsibilityfor enforcing the law naturally also had an interest in pretendingthat it worked, if necessary by deliberate falsehoods. In Kansas,for example, the attorney general had boasted that prohibitionwas 'depopulating the penitentiaries' by reducing violence andcrime, a statement which had been gratefully repeated by the temperancereformers in England in a pamphlet, Does Prohibition Prohibit?When Fanshawe investigated the figures, however, he discoveredthat in proportion to the population, there were more prisonersin Kansas jails than there had been in 1860, the year prohibitionhad been introduced—a higher proportion, in fact, than in theadjoining 'wet' States. The fundamental difficulty about enforcement was that the manin the street, whatever he might do in the polling booth, wason the side of the law-breakers, rather than of the law—as anenforcement officer he had met in Bangor had freely admitted.And this was having the unfortunate effect of bringing the lawitself into discredit, by engendering 'a spirit of disregard forits observance'. It was also corrupting American political life.In Rhode Island, Fanshawe was told, a Republican attorney generalhad tried to implement campaign promises by bringing over a hundredoffenders to justice. Their lawyers cleverly delayed proceedingsuntil after the next elections, to give time for 'wet' influencein both parties to get to work. He was not re-elected—the onlyRepublican on the slate who failed to secure re-election; andthe proceedings were quietly dropped. The Anti-Saloon League Fanshawe's report, published in England, was hardly likely tomake any impact in the United States. Even if it had been, a differentverdict could have been wrung from it; that prohibition couldnever succeed unless it was extended to all States of the Union,and backed by federal law and federal enforcement. And while hewas there, the movement which was eventually to succeed in persuadingthe necessary proportion of the electorate to accept that solutionwas getting under way: the Anti-Saloon League, founded in 1893.For a time, however, there appeared to be a possibility of a compromiseplan, satisfying both suasionists and suppressionists, derivedfrom the Gothenburg experiment, begun in Sweden in the 1860s.It was not prohibition, but it went some way to satisfy the suppressionistaim of concentrating on the traffic, rather than on drink, bytaking control away from private enterprise and putting it inthe hands of 'disinterested management'. The manufacture, distributionand sale of drink were looked after by a board, none of whosemembers was allowed to have any pecuniary interest; the aim beingnot to stop consumption, but to ensure that it did the least possibleharm. To this end, alcoholic drinks became obtainable only through aform of lay prescription. The hours at which they could be purchased,and the type of premises in which they could be consumed, weredesigned to discourage social drinking. The idea was to favourbeer at the expense of spirits, and the consumption of beer roserapidly; but as it had been very low before, and as the consumptionof spirits fell, the experiment was regarded as successful, andthe system became general through Sweden and Norway. For a while, the United Kingdom Alliance was attracted to theGothenburg idea, thinking it might prove a handy stepping-stoneon the way to ultimate prohibition. It also attracted Joseph Chamberlain,fitting in as it did with his view that all monopolies grantedby the State should be managed by local authorities for the community,rather than for private profit. When he was elected to the Commonsin 1876, he moved a resolution in favour of a scheme along Gothenburglines, and it attracted fifty supporters. In the United States, too, some interest was shown in the experiment;the Massachusetts legislature and the Federal Department of Laborin Washington sent investigators to Sweden, both of them makingfavourable reports on how the scheme was working. But by thistime the movement for outright prohibition was gaining too muchmomentum to be thus sidetracked. The Anti-Saloon League establisheditself on a national basis, and it was to provide the organisationby which, over the next twenty years, prohibition became so powerfula cause that politicians were no longer able to exploit it fortheir own ends; instead, they found, the prohibitionists wereable to exploit them. By the 1906 elections, the League was ableto show that it could wreck the chances of a politician who opposedit; his name was sent for suitable treatment to the League's accreditedspeakers, and also circulated on a black list to all electors.The party bosses began to require their candidates to agree topledge themselves not to oppose prohibition; better still, toendorse it. There were some setbacks; but by 1913 the League showed its powerwhen the Webb-Kenyon Bill, designed to assist States to enforceprohibition more effectively, was passed in spite of a Presidentialveto. And to the frustration of the liquor interests, the war,when it came, did nothing to hinder the prohibitionists; it actuallyhelped them, as economists demanded cuts in drink consumptionto save cereals for the G.I.'s rations; and Congress agreed tosponsor an amendment to the Constitution to enable prohibitionto be introduced. The d'Abernon Committee In Britain, too, the war helped the suppressionist cause. If LloydGeorge had been able to get his way, prohibition might have beenintroduced there, too, to assist the war effort. But opinion inParliament and in the Cabinet was still hostile; and the costof some variant of the Gothenburg system, which he also contemplated,would have involved astronomical sums to compensate the liquorinterests. His colleagues were able to argue, too, that the consumptionof alcoholic liquor was falling rapidly, helped by a voluntaryabstinence campaign (King George V abjured drink for himself andthe Court for the duration of the war) and by various restrictionsimposed by 'DORA'—the Defence of the Realm Act, which amongother things regulated the hours at which public houses couldremain open. Although Lloyd George remained convinced that—ashe claimed in 1916—Britain was fighting Germany, Austria anddrink, 'and the greatest of these three deadly foes is drink',he allowed himself to be persuaded that not enough was known aboutthe enforced deprivation of drink on workers; and it was agreedthat before any decision was taken, a Committee under Lord d'Abernonshould investigate the whole subject of the effects of alcohol,and 'more particularly the effects on health and industrial efficiencyproduced by the consumption of beverages of various alcoholicstrengths'. The Committee's report, published in 1917, differed from thoseof earlier parliamentary investigations in one significant respect;it considered the action of alcohol as a drug. It was also, theCommittee conceded, a common article of diet; and the habit ofdrinking was encouraged by the agreeable taste of fermented liquors.They insisted, nevertheless, that it was basically as a drug thatalcoholic liquor was consumed. The need to consider alcohol in this way had been stressed bySydney Hillier in his Popular Drugs, published in 1910.He had devoted half the book to it, explaining that while statisticsshowed there had been a general decline in the consumption ofalcoholic drinks in England, the news should not be welcomed unreservedly,because it did not necessarily mean any reduction in drug consumption;'no statistics are available relating to morphinism or other drughabits, but there is a very general consensus of opinion, amongthose who are best able to judge, that there is an increase inthe number of persons addicted'. Drink must never—Hillier insisted—beconsidered as a problem in its own right. The possibility mustalways be kept in mind that it might be the lesser of two evils. Lord d'Abernon and his colleagues, however, were asked to consideronly drink, and its effects on the war effort. The figures theycollected were sufficient to warn the Government of the magnitudeof the confrontation Lloyd George was contemplating. The amountspent annually on alcoholic liquor in the United Kingdom was halfas much again as the entire receipts from the railway system,and more than double the expenditure on bread. Until the war,the amount spent had been almost equal to the entire revenue ofthe State; and in some countries it had actually been more. Whatwas likely to happen if prohibition were introduced was not withinthe Committee's terms of reference; but the statistics were disturbingenough in themselves. Lloyd George decided it would be wise torely on' DORA'—reinforced by such occasional additions suchas a 'No Treating' order, and reductions in the strength of beer.The expedients worked well enough. By the end of the war, consumptionof beer had fallen by nearly a third, and of spirits by more thana half. The rate of 'drunk and disorderly' convictions, too, droppedfrom nearly 200,000 in the first year of the war to below 30,000in the last. The Volstead Act No similar inquiry was conducted in the United States. The requiredquota of States having announced their ratification, Prohibitionwas introduced in 1920. Three years later Roy Haynes, the Commissionerin charge of the enforcement of Prohibition (as it came to becalled, with a capital 'P') gave an account in ProhibitionInside Out. It was designed to show that, appearances notwithstanding,'the illegal liquor traffic is under control'. But Haynes wasalso anxious to defend himself and his subordinates from criticism,already mounting. To do so, he had to describe the difficultiesthat had confronted them; and the book turned into a treatiseon why the illegal liquor traffic had not been, and could notbe, brought under control. To begin with, there had been the unwelcome discovery that thedemand for hard liquor was—in the economists' new jargon—inelastic.A high proportion of the spirit drinkers of the pre-Prohibitionera were prepared to continue to buy their supplies, even if theprice doubled or trebled. As expected, some were men and womenfrom all classes who had become so dependent on drink that theycould not bear to do without it. But much more serious was thenumber of respectable citizens who were drinkers in moderation,and who had no intention of drinking any less, whatever the lawmight say. 'One finds upon the Roll of Dishonour proud old nameslong worn without stain or blemish, now close-linked with namesthat have been a by-word with the demi-monde of half ahundred cities', Haynes lamented. 'One finds names that once epitomisedhonour and power and community esteem, steeped in the same befoulingbrew with the names of thieves, thugs and murderers.' Nor wasit only the rich man who must have his drink. It was also theindustrial worker, especially the immigrant; the German steelworker in Milwaukee, who had always regarded his beer as partof his life; the New York Italian who had never been drunk, yetcould not conceive of a meal without wine. To cater for this demand there were six main sources of supply;genuine liquor, in stock; genuine liquor diluted or mixed withsynthetic varieties; synthetic liquor made from grain alcohol,with colour and flavour added; 'moonshine'—liquor distilledfrom vegetable substances; 'denatured' alcohol, redistilled; andwood alcohol. This variety of sources would have made Haynes'task difficult enough; what made it impossible was the varietyof uses for which alcohol could still legally be manufactured.In the event of any attempt to stop the use of communion wine,the Rev. E. A. Wasson had announced in 1914, 'we would do as ourLord told us to do—"all of you, drink of this"—ifwe had to go to jail for it'. The threat had sufficed: Communionwine was exempted from the law, and many a consignment so labelledfound its way to the dinner, rather than the altar table. An evenmore abundant source was medical prescription. Whiskey and brandyhad been dropped from the Pharmacopeia in 1916, but alcoholremained an essential ingredient in prescriptions for a wide rangeof diseases; and although prescribing habits were subjected toscrutiny, any doctor who was prepared to break the law, eitherfor cash reward or for the benefit of himself and his friends,ran little risk. Chemists, too, licensed as they were to sellalcohol in certain forms, found the law easy to evade. The most prolific source of alcohol, though, was industry, whichhad so great a need for it that considerable quantities couldbe siphoned off without exciting suspicion. Industrial alcoholwas 'denatured'—rendered unfit for human consumption; but itcould easily be re-distilled. Firms were set up ostensibly toproduce commodities which required an alcohol base, but in realityto divert the alcohol into illicit channels. A State Governor,Giffard Pinchot, estimated in 1924 that the 150 firms which hadbeen authorised in his State to purchase de-natured alcohol tomanufacture perfumes and hair tonics had ordered enough of itto fulfill the needs of the population of the entire world. What with 'moonshine'—easy enough to make and, in a countrythe size of the United States, extremely difficult to check—Hayneshad been unable to stem the flow of illicit spirits manufacturedin the United States. But he had also to deal with smuggling;and the difficulties that presented, as set out in his book, andas expressed by other law enforcement officers at the time, readlike a weird parody of what had happened in China with opium,a century before. Vast quantities of liquor— James Beck, a Washingtonlaw officer, complained in an article in the London SundayTimes on July 15th, 1923—were being taken out from Britishpossessions with a full knowledge that they were to be used to violate thelaws of the United States and break down this policy of prohibition.Our requests that clearance papers should be refused to notoriousrum-runners were denied. They persisted, and wholesale lawlessnessvirtually challenged the right of the U.S. to be master withinits own household, for it has never been challenged by any competentauthority on international law that each sovereign nation, notwithstandingthe comity of nations, has entire right to assert full policepower over any foreign merchant vessel within the territoriallimits of the sovereign. William Jennings Bryan made the same complaint. 'There is no moreexcuse for the use of adjacent territory for conspiracies againstthe Prohibition Law . . . than for the use of such territory forconspiracies against any other law of the land. Piracy would notbe given protection under the British flag. Why should smuggling?'British merchants were as little disposed to listen to such argumentsas they had been to listen to Commissioner Lin. The Scottish distillerseven found a way of expanding their market. Distillers in theUnited States had been permitted to continue to export their spirits,provided they were sold for 'nonbeverage purposes'. The Scotchdistillers, buying them in bulk, could truthfully claim they hadno intention of drinking them; the whiskey they made out of themwas sent back across the Atlantic, for the Americans to drink. The Canadian distillers were soon on to the same ruse. As Haynessarcastically commented, the residents of British Columbia, whohad previously shown no enthusiasm for American whiskey, suddenlybecome so enamoured of it that they required 200,000 gallons.They, too, had been careful to honour the pledge that they werenot going to drink it; they had promptly re-exported it to California. The French, too, had not been disposed to let their wine and brandytrade to the United States be terminated. The islands of St. Pierreand Miquelon became the equivalent of Lintin. There were onlyabout 4,000 inhabitants and they were soon buying 1,000 gallonsper head, annually, of various liquors. Their harbours were throngedwith depot ships, supplying schooners designed to carry 50,000gallons, which could cruise in safety outside the three-mile limitfor weeks at a time, waiting for smuggling craft which came outfrom the shore, or taking with them their own equivalent of the'fast crabs'—speed boats which were faster than anything theAmerican customs possessed, and which could run a consignmentashore, land it, and return to the parent ship in the course ofa night. If it were too risky to put it ashore, they would dumpit on the seabed, with a buoy to mark its position, and leavethe vendor to collect it when he judged it safe to do so (a standardwine drinkers' joke was that the test whether a bottle of winewas a genuine import was the mud on the bottle). There was also piracy. Prohibition had not been many months inforce before Haynes received a report that pirate ships were beginningto operate along the Atlantic coast. 'Their method of operationis to learn of the destination and route of a boat regularly engagedin smuggling from the Bahamas and then overtake it, overpowerthe crew, and remove the cargo of liquor to the pirate boats.'Piracy even came to the Great Lakes, where men in 'swift Littlemotor boats' waited just out of sight of land to intercept thesmugglers, knowing the smugglers could not call on the law toprotect them. In one respect, Haynes was worse off than Lin had been. He hadthe land frontier with Canada to protect—as long as the distancefrom England to India, he ruefully noted. For much of its lengthit was marked only on the map; and, as somebody had put it, 'youcannot keep liquor from dripping through a dotted line'. The Americanenforcement officials could actually watch the liquor arriving,and being put into warehouses across the border; but they werethemselves being watched, and no move would be made until at asignal from the American side, small boats or lorries would runthe consignments across. It was more difficult—one of Haynes'men who had been a G.I. complained—than trench warfare in France;'over there we could shoot them or grab them where we saw them,or go right in and get them; but over here we've got to wait tillthey come over to our side of no man's land.' So, bootlegging had already become a major industry; and the consequences,Haynes did not attempt to hide, had been catastrophic. As therecould be no legal redress if inferior, or even poisonous, liquorwas passed off as gin or whiskey, the consumer had no protection.In Chicago, coroners' verdicts revealed that a hundred peoplehad died in the first five months in 1923 from drinking 'bootleghooch'; and the real figure, he felt, must certainly have beenfar higher. Equally serious was the way in which Prohibition was breedingcorruption. Forty-three of Haynes' agents had been found guiltyof illegalities in Philadelphia alone; and although he claimedthat this represented only a small proportion of the total force,he was careless enough in another part of his book to stress thatthe number of such offenders caught was 'doubtless but a fractionof those who are guilty'. Nor was it only his men who became involved.Reports of a trial in an Indiana town disclosed that liquor hadbeen freely on sale there in saloons—and even in soft drinkestablishments; the proprietor of one of them complained thathe had had to mortgage his premises, in order to pay the protectionmoney demanded of him. This was the result of a conspiracy which included the mayor, the sheriff, a judge of the city court, theprosecuting attorney of the county, a former sheriff, a formerprosecuting attorney, a detective sergeant, a justice of the peace,an influential lawyer, and former deputy sheriffs, detectives,policemen, petty lawyers, bartenders, cabaret singers and notoriouswomen. Haynes naively believed that the publicity given to the Indianatrial would lead to increasing respect for the law. But the sentencespassed on the conspirators, considering the enormity of theiroffense, had been derisory; and he had to admit that the lightfines often imposed in such cases had 'contributed in no smallway to the spirit of defiance in which bootleggers hold the law'.Although there had been a fair haul of little fish, the big-timeviolators had found little difficulty in avoiding prosecution—or,if they were prosecuted, in escaping conviction. Repeal The story of Prohibition has been told too often to need repeating.It was to last for another ten years, with the forces of the lawbecoming annually more disillusioned, more ineffectual, and morecorrupt, while the bootleggers became richer, more powerful and—asSidney Whipple was to show in his Noble Experiment—moreingenious; especially the smugglers. They would arrange for consignmentsto be periodically intercepted by a customs man who was in theirpay, so that he could lull suspicions; perhaps even get himselfwritten up as a hero in the local newspapers. So much a matterof course did the traffic from Canada become that the prices obtainablefor consignments in the nearest United States city would be availablein bars—as the price of opium had been listed in Jardine's Cantonnewspaper. The initial reaction to Prohibition's failure was a demand forhigher penalties, as a deterrent; and these were duly imposedin many States. In Michigan, a mandatory scale of penalties waslaid down, culminating at the fourth offense with imprisonmentfor life. When the first life sentence was imposed, the culpritturned out to be not the local Al Capone but Mrs. Etta May Miller,mother of ten, whose fourth offense was being found in illicitpossession of a bottle of gin. That was an extreme example: butbecause it was so rare for any of the men who ran the bootleggingindustry to be convicted, the policy of high penalties fell intodisrepute; as did Prohibition. Even in 1923, Haynes had lamented, there had been those who underminedthe law by criticising it; particularly the smartly dressed menand women, in fashionable drawing rooms or restaurants, The colour deepens on milady's cheek; the voice of her escortgrows thick. What are they saying as the pocket flasks run low? 'Prohibition is a joke . . . it can never be enforced . . . it's dead easy to get all you want . . . they can never make this citydry . . . popular opinion's against the law. As the 1920s went by, such opinions came to be more often heard,until even President Hoover was forced to realise that Prohibition'seffects were destructive—and embarrassing, in terms of the internationalreputation of the United States (with the possible exception ofthe Prince of Wales, Capone was the world's best known publicfigure). As Hoover had described Prohibition as 'this noble experiment',and had won election with the help of 'dry' votes, he could notvery well demand that it should be repealed; instead, he resortedto the traditional expedient of a Commission of Enquiry—tenmen and the President of Radcliffe, Ada Comstock. They studiedthe subject for eighteen months, and in spite of the fact thatthey had a built-in conservative Republican bias, they had toconcede in their report, published early in 1931, that Prohibitionhad failed. There was a mass of evidence, they had found, of drinking'in homes, in clubs, and in hotels; of drinking parties givenand attended by persons of high standing and respectability; ofdrinking by tourists at winter and summer resorts; and of drinkingin connection with public dinners and at conventions'. There wassimilar evidence of drinking by women, and by the country's youth:'votes in colleges show an attitude of hostility to or contemptfor the law on the part of those who are not unlikely to be leadersin the next generation'. The same attitude was also to be foundin the views and the conduct of well-off citizens in the averagecommunity, and 'in the tolerance of conduct at social gatheringswhich would not have been possible a generation ago'. Taking thecountry as a whole, people of wealth, business men and professional men and theirfamilies, and, perhaps, the higher paid working men and theirfamilies, are drinking in large numbers in quite frank disregardof the declared policy of the National Prohibition Act. One reason, the Report continued, was people's irritation withState interference in a matter where they felt the State had nobusiness interfering. In consequence, many of the best citizens of every community,on whom we rely habitually for the upholding of law and order,are at most lukewarm as to the national Prohibition Act. Manywho are normally law-abiding are led to an attitude hostile tothe statute by a feeling that repression and interference withprivate conduct are carried too far. This is aggravated in manyof the larger cities by a feeling that other parts of the landare seeking to impose on them. As a result, crime had become rampant, the huge profits enablingbootleggers to defy attempts to enforce the law; and there were'revelations of police corruption in every type of municipality,small and large, throughout the decade'. The report alarmed Hoover, less for its depressing verdict thanbecause of the implications for his forthcoming Presidential campaign,when he would need the 'dry' vote. He held meetings with the Commission,and managed to persuade them that however disastrous the consequencesof Prohibition might be, this was not the time to end it; whichenabled him to claim that 'by a large majority' the Committee'does not favour the repeal of the 18th Amendment as a methodof cure for the inherent abuses of the liquor traffic. I am inaccord with this view.' Collectively, as a Committee, this waswhat they had agreed. But only three of them, as individuals,had supported the continuance of the Act. The rest, for theirown reasons, had recommended either that it should be repealed,or substantially revised. As it happened, there was by this time a further argument againstProhibition, which may have been decisive; the need to providemore employment, and more revenue, following the great crash.The prices of illicit liquor in general had held so steady duringthe whole Prohibition period that it was actually possible toassess, with a reasonable expectation of accuracy, what the Governmentcould expect to get from duties if the trade was again legalised;roughly the same, it was found, as it got from income tax. 'Dry'influence was still sufficiently feared for Franklin D. Rooseveltto refrain from actively denouncing Prohibition in the 1931 Presidentialcampaign; but he pledged himself, if elected, to put the Prohibitionissue to the individual States. By the end of the year followinghis election, enough of them had ratified repeal to bring thenoble experiment to an end. Chapter 11 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-2IA031-000652-B038-300http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglis11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125726 text/html 58266HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:57:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:26:29 GMTContent-length: 58047 The Forbidden Game - Chapter 11 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 11 The International Anti-drug Campaign IT HAD NOT NEEDED THE FAILURE OF PROHIBITION TO TEACH THE Americans that if drugs were to be controlled in domestic use, the needwould arise for international regulation, too. Half a centurybefore, there had been alarm at the spread of opium smoking introducedby the Chinese who came to work in California; and also at themore insidious form of opium consumption indulged in by the growingnumbers of Americans who were persuaded to take tonics or cordialswhich had the drug as a prime constituent. After the Americanstook over the Philippines, too, they became concerned about opiumconsumption there. Measures to check the traffic proving unsuccessful,the idea of imposing international control was mooted; and bya fortunate chance, the opportunity suddenly presented itselfto secure international agreement. The Shanghai conference For some years, the improvement in the quality of the opium producedin China had been reminding the British in India that their holdon the Chinese market could not last much longer. Indian opium—theHong Kong Daily News had warned in the 1880s—was becominga drug on the market 'in more senses than one'; the day wouldsoon come when the native Chinese article would be exported. Exportsfrom India to China, which had risen decade by decade for so long,began to fall, the quantity of home produced opium in China surgingrapidly past the quantity imported. In December 1905 the Conservative Government in Britain, whichhad held power for a decade, resigned; and the following spring,the House of Commons unanimously adopted a resolution 'that thisHouse reaffirms its conviction that the Indo-Chinese opium trafficis morally indefensible, and requests His Majesty's Governmentto take such steps as may be necessary for bringing it to a speedyclose'. The new Liberal Government, urged on by its back-benchers'humanitarian zeal, opened negotiations with the Chinese by offeringto reduce opium exports annually, provided they reduced home production,step by step, and did not import from other countries. If allwent smoothly, in ten years' time the traffic could cease. TheChinese unhesitatingly accepted. 'It is hereby commanded,' theimperial edict ran, 'that within a period of ten years the evilsarising from foreign and native opium be equally and completelyeradicated.' The American Government, alerted by the authorities in the Philippines,realised that if India and China really did reduce productionthere was a chance that the United States' problems could be solved,too, provided that other countries did not expand production.Through the prompting of the State Department, an InternationalConference was convened in Shanghai in 1909 to study the wholeopium problem. All the major countries with an interest in thetraffic were invited and only one, Turkey, did not send a representative,owing to her domestic upheavals—a valid enough excuse, as theywere to lead to the victory of the Young Turks, and the depositionof Abdul the Damned. The representatives of the remaining thirteenstates met, conferred, and agreed in principle that there wasa need for greater effort on the part of their Governments tocontrol the traffic in opium and its derivatives, particularlymorphine. The Shanghai Conference had been arranged only for an exchangeof views; but its success prompted President Taft to call fora Conference of Delegates with plenipotentiary powers. It metat The Hague in 1911, attended by the representatives of China,France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,Persia, Portugal, Russia, Siam and the U.S.A. And again, a hearteningmeasure of agreement was reached. In future, it was agreed, theproduction and distribution of raw opium should be carefully regulated,and its export to other countries permitted only to duly authorisedpersons, through duly authorised channels. The production, distributionand consumption of prepared opium—the kind normally used forsmoking—was gradually to be suppressed altogether, so that tradein it would cease. The production and distribution of opium derivativeswas to be restricted to the amounts required for medical and scientificpurposes. The necessary licensing arrangements, the delegatesagreed, would be introduced by their respective States, when theyratified the agreement. Crucial to the success of the whole enterprise, clearly, was thesatisfactory working of the Anglo-Chinese agreement. And it hadfar surpassed expectations—as even the sceptical British Consul-Generalin China, Sir Alexander Hosie, was compelled to admit. As he hadtoured the poppy growing areas of China in the 1880s, he couldmake the necessary comparisons; and touring them again in 1910,he found that poppy cultivation in some provinces had virtuallyceased, and in most others had been greatly reduced. Public opinion,it appeared, had been roused against opium, in much the same wayas it had been aroused against spirits in Ireland by Father Mathew,but with the added element of patriotic fervour, opium still beingidentified with foreign oppression. And in a country as heavilypopulated as China, it was easy to detect and prevent poppy cultivation,when the will was there. Although the revolution in the centralprovinces in 1911, and the subsequent breakdown of the centralGovernment's authority, meant that the drive finally to eliminateopium production lost momentum, enough had been accomplished toshow that it might be possible to achieve that purpose, when orderwas restored. In India, too, opium production was being steadily reduced—orso the authorities claimed. But on a visit to Japan in 1916 theyoung American writer Ellen La Motte met a Hindu, who assuredher that the authorities were lying. They had reduced productiononly so long as there was no alternative, because the Chinesemarket was slipping from their grasp; but they were still deeplyinvolved in the traffic. At the time, La Motte assumed his allegationswere the product of his nationalist fervour; but in the year whichshe spent touring Eastern countries, she came to realise thatthey were wholly justified. As soon as the agreement to reduce exports of Indian opium toChina had been entered into, she discovered, every effort hadbeen made to evade it. The simplest way had been to send opiumto the International Settlements in the Treaty Ports, which werenot 'China' for export purposes. As a result—a Shanghai missionaryhad shown—the number of licensed opium dealers in the InternationalSettlement there had risen from 87 before the agreement, to 663in 1914; and the value of opium imports into the Settlements hadnearly trebled. The figures published showing the reduction inexports of opium to China also concealed the fact that much ofit was finding its way there in a different, derivative, form.Board of Trade returns disclosed that exports of British morphineto the Eastern countries had been rising rapidly; from five anda half tons in 1911 to fourteen tons in 1914. Although the acreage under poppy cultivation in India had fallenfollowing the agreement with China, Ellen La Motte was able toshow that the fall had stopped by the time war broke out, andoutput had begun to rise again. Such confidence did the BritishGovernment have that the market, so far from continuing to contract—asthe Hague Convention envisaged—would remain buoyant, that aloan made to Persia was guaranteed from the Persian opium revenue.Although the Persian delegate had signed the Hague Convention,La Motte recalled, his Government did not ratify it: 'no wonder!' The League of Nations By the time the first of La Motte's exposures of the duplicityof the British Government's opium policy appeared, however—in1920—the League of Nations had been established; and one ofits functions was to take over the supervision of internationalagreements such as the Hague Convention. At the League's firstmeeting, an advisory committee on opium and other drugs was setup, with two functions; to collect and analyse information onthe drug traffic, and to try to persuade member States to keepthe regulations laid down to control it. The information collected,when analysed, revealed that La Motte's strictures had been justified.The Hague Convention was revealed as no more than a string ofaspirations. The contracting nations, for example, had pledged themselves tocontrol the output of raw and prepared opium; but they had beencareful not to say how, or when. They had promised to manufactureno more opium derivatives than were required for scientific andmedical purposes; but they had not settled how much was required.And even when specific pledges had been made—for example, toend the trade in prepared opium—there had been nothing to stopmerchants in the countries which had previously imported it ordering,instead, the equivalent amount of raw opium, and processing itthemselves. Britain, as the chief opium producer, was the chief beneficiary;but firms in many countries shared in the profits, particularlyin Switzerland, already providing a haven for those who were evadingtheir own country's fiscal laws. The Dutch merchants were alsowell placed. Although their Government had been host to the HagueConference, and had been nominally in charge of securing adherenceto the Convention until the League took over, it had neglectedto make any regulation requiring returns from Dutch companiesof their output of morphine or cocaine. There was consequentlyno legal means of telling whether they were conforming to theHague code. Nor would the figures, had they been supplied, necessarilyhave been reliable. The Hague Convention, in requesting that relevantstatistics should be furnished, had neglected to make any provisionto ensure that the statistics would be accurate. At their fifthsession, the members of the Opium Committee of the League werepresented with, among other documents, two sets of figures; onefrom the British, purporting to be the amounts of morphine exportedfrom Britain to Japan between 1916 and 1920; the other from theJapanese, purporting to be the amounts of morphine imported fromBritain in the same period. Year British exports of morphine to Japan lb. Japanese imports of morphine from Britain lb 1916 7,257 37,898 1917 1,825 41,509 1918 0 7,749 1919 0 4,716 1920 1 11,741 No satisfactory explanation could be found for the discrepancies—orfor the one pound of morphine exported in 1920; but at least theyalerted the League to the futility of relying on information providedby interested parties. The British blandly used such evidence to justify their policyof keeping opium a government monopoly. British governments, theimplication was, could not lie, nor could they cheat. In replyto La Motte and others who accused them of exploiting the drugfor revenue, they reverted to the old excuse that, on the contrary,they were keeping the duty high to discourage consumption. Shehad shown that in the Straits Settlements, in the first decadeof the century, opium duties had sometimes provided the bulk ofthe revenue—a fact which, as it had been reported to Parliamentby a commission of enquiry, the Government could not easily dispute.But—the League's Opium Committee was told—this was preciselywhy the Colonial Government had acquired monopoly powers in 1910—forthe purpose of 'gradual and effective suppression'. The Governmenthad implemented that policy by drastically reducing the numberof licensed opium dens, which had fallen from 500 in 1909 to 200in 1922, and by putting up the price. It was only later that thestatistics, when they were published, revealed that so far fromthe suppression policy being effective, the State monopoly hadactually contrived to sell more opium, in spite of the reductionin the number of licensed dens. Coupled with the higher price,this had meant a most gratifying increase of revenue; in 1918opium still accounted for sixty per cent of the Straits Settlements'entire income. In India, too, the Government was doing its best to recoup someof the losses following the agreement with China by encouragingthe sale of opium under licence; when in 1921 the young Gandhicalled for a campaign against 'that other oppressor'—as he describedthe drug—his followers were arrested on charges of 'underminingthe revenue'. So little concerned were the British about the viewsof the League of Nations that after a Commission under Lord Inchcapehad investigated India's finances in 1923, its report, while recognisingthat it might be necessary to reduce opium production again ifprices fell, went on to warn against diminishing the area cultivated,because of the need to safeguard 'this most important source ofincome'. The 1925 Convention By this time, public opinion in the United States had been roused;and in February 1923 a Resolution was put before the House ofRepresentatives in Washington by Stephen Porter, Chairman of theForeign Affairs Committee, arguing that the crucial factor wasoverproduction of opium. At the very most, the world needed 125tons of opium for medical and scientific purposes—less thanone-tenth of what was currently being produced. All the evidence,he said, went to show that in such circumstances, 'habit-formingnarcotic drugs, by reason of their extraordinary nature, willovercome all barriers, even the bars of prisons'—and he quotedSir John Jordan, by this time a member of the League of NationsOpium Committee, 'Whatever and wherever opium is produced it willreach the consumer.' To try to control the traffic by even themost drastic of laws was futile; the only hope for effective controlwas to get the producing nations to cut production. Both Housesof Congress unanimously agreed to ask the President to requestthe producer nations to accept the necessary regulations. In theautumn, the Assembly of the League called a fresh conference,with delegates from interested member countries (and from theUnited States, though she was not a member) with plenipotentiarypowers, to see what could be done to improve upon the Hague Convention. To Ellen La Motte, who came to Geneva from America to report onits deliberations, it was a heartening experience. Here were delegatesfrom most of the great nations of the world coming together tograpple with one of the greatest of man-made evils; and the mostimpressive feature of all, she felt, was the integrity and dedicationof the representatives of the countries which had suffered most.'One fact emerged clearly', she wrote in her first report to theNation magazine. 'The whole Orient is anxious to put downopium.' But some of the European nations were equally anxiousto keep it up. Britain, as the European country which controlledthe major source of opium, would be the key; 'if Britain yields,the rest will collapse'. At the first meeting, the British delegates showed themselvesapparently ready and anxious to yield. They raised no objectionto the proposal, backed by the Americans and the Chinese, thatopium production and distribution should in future be limitedby international agreement. The only question—the British delegatessuggested—was how ? The answer, the Americans replied, was simple.An estimate should be made of the quantity of opium and its derivativesrequired for medical and scientific purposes, and production limitedto that amount by international agreement. Again, the Britishagreed, merely stipulating that the term 'legitimate' should beadded to 'medical and scientific' It seemed reasonable; but as the Americans soon realised; it effectivelysabotaged their proposal. One by one the delegates of the colonialpowers rose to explain what uses for opium, in their own colonies,they would consider 'legitimate'. The Dutch pointed out that allowancemust be made for custom; smoking opium might be evil, but it hadbeen eaten from time immemorial in the Dutch East Indies. TheFrench found it difficult to understand why it should be consideredany better to eat opium than to smoke it; if consumption was goingto be permitted at all, there was no reason to suppress it simplybecause of the way it was taken (in French Indo-China, opium wasusually smoked). The British agreed. What mattered was not howthe drug was taken, but for what purpose; they could not regardthe use of opium as a 'family drug' as illegitimate (in India,opium was licensed for sale as a family drug). Each delegate assuredthe Americans of his country's willingness to accept their proposal,so long as it was understood that each country had the right todecide what form of consumption was legitimate in its own colonies,and how much could be produced to cater for it. The Americans,disillusioned, quit the Conference, the British explaining thatit was all the Washington Government's fault, for giving themfirm instructions which left no room for compromise. But La Mottewas sure that the instructions which the British delegates hadreceived had been just as firm—'make it as difficult as youlike for a person to buy a grain of heroin, but don't hamper an"authorised person" from buying a ton, from time totime, as he pleases'. The British, though, had been careful notto reveal their policy. The British had certainly behaved as if 'don't touch production'had been their brief. When the Chinese urged them to introducerestrictions in their own colonial territories, they fell backon the argument they had adopted a century before: what wouldbe the use? Some other country would simply move in on the market,and keep the colonies supplied by smuggling. The British delegatesscarcely bothered to conceal which 'other country' they assumedwould do the smuggling: China. For a hundred years they had arguedthat they could do nothing to prevent opium from British coloniesbeing smuggled into China. Now, with exasperating logic, theywere claiming they would be able to do nothing to prevent Chineseopium from being smuggled into British colonies. Following theAmerican example, the Chinese delegation departed. The colonial powers, however, were careful to avoid giving theimpression that they were blocking reform. An impressive-lookinglist of proposals for control of the opium traffic was adoptedbefore the Conference adjourned. Coca and Indian hemp were added to the list of substances whichwere to be restricted. The contracting countries were to 'undertake'to enforce the regulations—rather than, as the Hague agreementhad put it, to 'use their best endeavours' to enforce them. Apermanent Central Narcotics Board was to be established, to whichthe contracting countries would be required to make returns ofall imports and exports of the listed drugs, and also to show,separately, the estimated amounts required for medical and scientificpurposes. When there was evidence of excessive production or importation,the country concerned could be asked to give an explanation. Aninternational accounting agency, with powers to investigate, wasalso to be set up; and the contracting parties agreed to acceptcompulsory arbitration in any dispute arising out of the new Conventionwhich could not be settled by other means. Considering the difficultieswhich the Conference had faced, not least through the withdrawalof the Americans and Chinese, its achievements appeared very creditable,on paper. American observers were not deceived. A former Editor of the NewYork Evening Post and Chief of the Washington Bureau of theAssociated Press, John P. Gavit, had been covering the meetings;and he asked himself, when they were over, what steps the Conferencehad taken 'reasonably calculated to limit the manufacture of thesesubstances or the production of the raw material from which theyare made'. The answer, he felt bound to emphasise, was 'nonewhatsoever'. Only two of the decisions, he felt, had heldout any promise: that relevant information would be more carefullyscrutinised and correlated: and that the permanent Central NarcoticsBoard was to be composed of men who 'by their technical competence,impartiality, and disinterestedness will command general confidence'—theywere to be given five-year contracts, further to reduce theirdependence on their own governments. But Gavit was obviously notthe only person to have realised that a strong independent centralboard, by publicising the relevant information, would be ableto expose which States were failing in their duty. Switzerland,whose pharmaceutical industry handled much of the European narcoticstraffic, promptly served notice that if the information she forwardedto the Board was disclosed to her disadvantage, 'she would forthwithcease to furnish any'. The Swiss need not have worried; the central board was never setup, its place being taken by an advisory committee. Only one ofits members, La Motte reported, was dedicated to controlling theopium traffic; the representative of China. The rest were dedicatedto preventing control from becoming effective, with the help ofingenious procedural techniques. One British delegate would insistupon open sessions, on principle. Another would agree, but putthe reasons why, in practice, this or that particular issue oughtmore properly to be discussed in private; a proposition whichwould be gratefully accepted by the other colonial powers. Atpublic sessions of the Opium Advisory Committee, the Chairmanwould proceed with remarks like 'Gentlemen, you have read Document 418? I take it there is nodiscussion? Good. We will now pass on to Document 419.' Sometimes, too, the reference would be to a numbered paragraphin a document which had not been made available to the press Asa result the 'open' sessions were productive mainly of gibberish. La Motte was, however, able to unearth one news story of interest:that the British Government was proposing to extend its opiumoperations in India. When criticised for over-production there,the British had long replied that at least the opium was goingup in smoke; it was highly esteemed for that purpose, but no goodfor extracting derivatives like morphine. Now, the League heardthat this was incorrect. Indian opium could produce admirablemorphine—and the British had decided to go into morphine productionin India for themselves. Alexander's travels La Motte's conviction that the British were pretending to supportthe League only to mask their own design—the extraction of themaximum revenue possible from opium—was soon to be given confirmation.In 1927 H. G. Alexander was offered a travelling fellowship toinvestigate the drug problem in the Far East; and after his returnto England he published an account of what he had found. He madeno secret of his own view, derived from the time when his fatherhad been Secretary of the Society for the Suppression of the OpiumTraffic; this, he claimed, had simply made him more careful torely only on sources which could not be regarded as prejudicedagainst the traffic, such as the reports of the Indian Revenue,Customs and Excise Departments. And they revealed that it wasstill Government policy to encourage the production not merelyof opium, but also of Indian hemp—even when there were complaintsabout the effects. Thus, in the report of the Excise Departmentof the United Provinces for the financial year 1926-7, the inhabitantsof the Benares region were criticised as 'most depraved in respectof the use of intoxicants, although it is the very centre of thesacred soil of the Hindus'; yet the same report boasted that 'thedownward tendency in the sales of charas has now been arrested',and disclosed that consideration was being given to a proposalfor the cultivation of more hemp to produce more ganjaand, therefore, more revenue. The sales of hard liquor were alsogrowing. When any suggestion was made that they ought to be reduced,the reply would be along the lines given in the Excise Reportfor the Bombay Presidency for 1925-6; attempts to curb legal salesmerely increased illicit traffic, so that there was 'no improvementin temperance, increasing contempt for law and authority, anddemoralisation of the inadequate excise staff'—as well as, ofcourse, 'loss of revenue'. So while the British Government was professing to be taking measuresto reduce consumption of opium and hemp drugs, its agents in Indiawere in fact busy pushing sales in order to increase the colony'srevenue. Alexander did not know what should be done—or couldbe done. Control, he admitted, would not be easy, and might requirea different approach in different circumstances; as between townand country, say. But of one thing he was certain: whatever policieswere adopted, they should not be left to Britain or to any othercolonial power to decide or enforce, or the situation would getworse: with, in all probability, destructive consequences—forthe colonial powers, as well as for their colonies. Even in the limited sphere of drug and drink habits, the mainguilt of the West, for which sooner or later, the East will callus to account, arises from the export of manufactured habitformingdrugs, such as morphine and cocaine, and from the export of spirits.So long as we go to the East with these things in our hand, Chineseand Indians and Malays are not likely to have much use for theprogrammes of social reform that we carry in the other. 'The Smugglers' Reunion' In the meantime, Ellen La Motte had been trying to keep the Americanpublic informed about what was going on at 'The Smugglers' Reunion',as the disillusioned newspaper correspondents in Geneva dubbedthe League's Opium Committee. She had found an ally: the Italiandelegate, Signor Cavazzoni. He was probably simply there to makemischief for Mussolini's amusement; but he made it entertainingly.The Opium Committee's only response was to find a new way to makethings more difficult for correspondents; it was agreed to cutdown on the number of their proceedings printed—'to save paper',they claimed. La Motte was sure it was to enable them to doctorthe records. Events were to show she was right. At this point the British delegates created a surprise, by proposingthat the League should send a fact-finding mission to the FarEast to investigate the opium situation there. This proposal,they could claim, showed they had nothing to hide. But as Gavithad already warned in his Opium, published in 1925, itwas part of the colonial powers' game to keep the general publicunder the impression that drug taking was an exotic Oriental vice,slipping into Western countries through the docks and slums; whereasin fact the real danger lay not in opium or hashish from the 'depraved'East, but in the drugs which were coming from the expensivelyequipped, skillfully and scientifically conducted pharmaceuticallaboratories of the 'civilised' West—Britain, the United States,France, Holland, but chiefly from Switzerland and Germany. Thefact-finding mission was being deliberately sent to the wrongplace. And the British had another motive, as one of their delegatesadmitted to La Motte: 'what we really want is independent proofof our inability to carry out our obligations under the HagueConvention'. The British memorandum on the project emphasisedthat in spite of the vigilance of their customs officials in colonieslike Malaya and Hong Kong, smuggling had greatly increased, andnow 'seriously embarrassed the Governments of those territories'.Smuggled opium or morphine were indeed embarrassing: they reducedthe colonial revenue. Having proposed the Commission, the British were in a good positionto limit its terms of reference, which they did by insisting thatonly the distribution and consumption of opium—not production—shouldbe studied. Three Commissioners were chosen: a Belgian economistand two members of the diplomatic corps, from Czechoslovakia andSweden. Their qualifications for selection remain obscure. Theyheld sittings in more than thirty different centres within thespace of seven months, which precluded any possibility of investigationin depth—though as they were careful to explain, staying longerwould not have helped, as the kind of information they were lookingfor was not available. They had hoped to be shown the resultsof research; but in this field little has been done. Even the question of how muchmorphine a smoker or an eater of opium absorbs is unsolved. Practicallyevery question connected with the opium smoking problem needsscientific study. A few examples of problems requiring investigationare the actual effects of opium smoking on the individual, theeffect of dross upon the consumer, the relative harmfulness ofsmoking and eating, the question of heredity . . . and the possibilityof finding harmless substitutes. The Commissioners, however, found no difficulty in collectingevidence in the form of personal views about opium; and what theyheard surprised them. They had all three come out—they explainedin their report—with the prevailing Western notion of the deleteriouseffects of opium on health, expecting to have it confirmed. Butamong the witnesses they examined, members of the indigenous racesas well as the Chinese, they had found a widespread opinion thatopium smoking was not harmful, the arguments in its favour 'reachingsometimes to a superstitious belief in the medicinal value thereof'.They also repeatedly came in contact with the opinion, based onpersonal experience, that opium used in moderation acted as auseful mental and physical stimulant, the physical stimulus beingparticularly valuable where people had to work hard under difficultclimatic conditions. Even those notorious establishments, the'opium dens'—or 'opium divans', as they were sometimes known—werefar from being the haunts of depravity that Western fancy haddepicted. They were 'often the only available resting places forthe poor, and though they are not attractive, they are scarcely,even at their worst, more repulsive than the localities wherethe corresponding classes of the Western people consume beer orstronger alcoholic beverages'. In general, the Commission's report did just what the Britishhad hoped it would do. It fed doubt into the minds of membersof the League whether opium should be regarded as a social menace;and it actually conceded that the system of government monopolieswhich had been established in British possessions was the bestsolution, because it presented the only means by which price andconsumption could be controlled. Their policies, the British couldboast, had been vindicated. But their scheme, as things turnedout, had worked rather too well. It was not opium—the reportwent on to argue—that was the real trouble. It was opium's derivatives,morphine and heroin, 'a far more serious menace to the world'. It had not taken long before heroin's pretensions to be a non-addictivedrug had been exposed; and experience had shown that it was farmore addictive than cocaine. The timing of the recommendation,too, was unfortunate for the manufacturing countries, as therehad just been a succession of embarrassing scandals in connectionwith the statistics which each member nation was required to sendto the League. Between 1925 and 1926, the returns had revealed,at least a hundred tons of morphine had disappeared—in otherwords, had been diverted from legal into illicit channels. The countries concerned had manufactured the morphine, and declaredit, as bound by the 1925 Convention to do; the morphine had thensimply vanished. Some idea of what this disappearance involvedcould be gauged from the fact that the world requirements of morphinefor medical and scientific purposes were put at less than fortytons a year. A search promptly began for a scapegoat, and it was convenientlyprovided by Turkey, which had refused to ratify the Convention.If the Turks were to disclose their figures—the rumour ran—theymight prove revealing. The Turks thereupon disclosed them, andthey were indeed embarrassing; but not to the Turks. They showedthat Turkey had exported more than two tons of morphine and fourtons of heroin to European countries which had ratified the Convention.Under the Convention, they were required to declare all such imports.Assuming that Turkey would not disclose the deals, none of thecountries involved had made the required declarations. Those consignments,too, had slipped into the illicit market. For still better measure, the Turks threw in the information thatin 1928 a single Alaska factory had manufactured nearly 9,000lb. of heroin—rather more than two and a half times the world'sestimated medical and scientific needs, that year, and 8,920 lb.more than the amount which the French had declared, in the productionfigures they provided to the League, for the three years 1926-8.The French Government, protesting its innocence, closed down thefactory. The Turks were apparently expecting this move, as thechemists who lost their jobs were offered work in new heroin factoriesin Turkey, How had the morphine and heroin been diverted ? The 'Naarden Case'helped to clear up part of the mystery. Naarden, a Dutch firm,had been ordering huge consignments from other countries, includingover 1,500 kg of heroin from a Swiss firm, and re-exporting them—butdescribing them as 'in transit', so that the Dutch Governmentwould not need to declare them in its returns to the League. Butthere were no statistics to reveal the drug's ultimate destination. The Blanco formula These scandals attracted hostile publicity. It could no longerbe pretended that the Hague Convention, even as 'strengthened'by the 1925 reforms, was working satisfactorily. But how couldit be improved ? The obvious solution was the one the Americansand Chinese had urged on the other States at the Geneva Conference;limitation of production of opium to the amount needed for medicaland scientific purposes. The delegates of the manufacturing countriesnow announced that they were prepared to accept limitation, providedagreement could be reached on how it was introduced. They were very careful to ensure that agreement would not be reached.It was accepted that each of the manufacturing nations shouldhave a production quota; but none of them was prepared to accepta smaller share of the market than it already enjoyed; and theidea of simply freezing the share of each, at the level at whichit had been on some agreed date, satisfied nobody, because, itwas claimed, it would destroy freedom of choice for the purchaserin the future, and infringe national sovereignty. The apparent deadlock had been broken by a member of the LeagueSecretariat. A. E. Blanco, son of a Spanish father and a Britishmother, had been in the British-run Chinese Customs Service; hehad given much thought to the matter. In future, he proposed,any country which wished to use a dangerous drug for medical orscientific purposes should declare in advance what supplies wouldbe needed, and where it proposed to obtain them. In this way itwould be possible to allocate quotas in advance the world over,but without freezing the levels or restricting choice; so thatif some manufacturer made a particularly good brand of medicalheroin or morphine, he would be able to benefit the followingyear from increased demand. The Blanco formula was the simple answer to the objections raisedby the manufacturing countries: altogether too simple for theircomfort. The Opium Advisory Committee—the 'Smugglers Reunion'—unableto think of any objection to the proposal, decided simply to ignoreit. Blanco resigned in disgust, and there the matter would haveended, had his scheme not been brought to the notice of the influentialAmerican philanthropist, C. K. Crane. Crane, struck by what he felt was the scheme's beautiful simplicity,recommended it in a letter to the State Department. It would automaticallydisclose the volume of the legitimate drug market in every country,he pointed out; yet it would leave producers free to compete fora larger share of the market, thereby minimising the need forgovernment intervention to apportion quotas. At the same time,States' rights would not be infringed, as States could each decidewhat supply of a drug they needed. Prompted by Crane, the StateDepartment drew the scheme to the attention of the Advisory Committee.The committee reacted as before. As the delegates could thinkof no valid objection, 'the only thing to do with the Scheme',the British representative suggested, 'is to bury it'; and onthe motion of the Indian delegate, that 'the matter should simplybe dropped', it was. Russell Pasha But it was soon revived, and from an unexpected quarter: Egypt,then a British Protectorate, suffering from an uneasy sense ofthwarted nationality. Towards the end of the nineteenth century the authorities therehad become increasingly worried by the number of young men whotook to smoking opium or hashish, deserting families, jobs andsociety. Various measures had been adopted to control drug-taking.Hashish had sometimes been subjected to a heavy duty; sometimesprohibited, with heavy penalties, even death, for anybody caughtwith it. The frequent alterations of policy, though, were an indicationof how ineffective the laws were; largely because they rarelyapplied to foreigners. The better the law was enforced in Egypt,the higher rose the price of opium or hashish; and the greaterthe profit would be to foreigners who could import the drugs withimpunity and sell them through illicit channels, until the pricecame down again. Malcolm Muggeridge was to describe in his autobiography how, whenhe went to teach at a school in Egypt in the 1920s, he observedthat the students at Cairo University often seemed to be 'faraway,lost in some dream of erotic bliss; a consequence no doubt, inthe case of many of them, of their addiction to hashish, widespreadamong the effendi class, and prevalent among the fellahin,particularly the ones who had moved into the towns' The deleteriouseffects of this addiction, Muggeridge recalled; were then universallytaken for granted, and the Egyptian authorities, following a plan of modernisationand national revival on the general lines of Kemal Ataturk's inTurkey, spent a lot of money and effort in an attempt to stampit out. Russell Pasha, the head policeman and the last Englishmanto hold the post, was particularly active in trying to preventhashish getting into the country, and in reducing indulgence init . . . if anyone had suggested that all this endeavour was misplacedbecause hashish did little harm, and was anyway non-addictive,the suggestion would have been received with incredulity and derision. And Muggeridge went on to use the recollection as the text fora sermon denouncing the apologists for cannabis half a centurylater; 'I know of no better exemplification of the death wishin the heart of our way of life than this determination to bringabout the legalisation of hashish, so that it may ravage the Westas it has the Middle and Far East.' The passage in his autobiography happens also to be an interestingexemplification of the way in which moral attitudes can colourmemories. 'Russell Pasha'—Thomas Wentworth Russell—did indeeddevote a great deal of time and energy to trying to keep hashishout of Egypt. Those were his orders, and he carried them out withintelligence and integrity. But he did not think hashish was amenace. He divided drugs into two categories 'white', and 'black'.Hashish—'the vice of the city slums'—was in the white category;it did 'comparatively little harm', he felt, and could not beheld responsible for the country's addiction problem. It wouldbe more sensible, he believed, to legalise the white drugs. Accordingto his friend and biographer Baron d'Erlanger, he announced that'he was seriously considering some form of government monopolywhereby hashish would be grown domestically, and its smoking wouldbe licensed and made to produce revenue for the Egyptian Government,instead of costing enormous sums for the prohibition and, in addition,draining the country of the money which was sent abroad to payfor the foreign grown raw material'. The idea proved unacceptable to his superiors; Russell had tocontinue to try to prevent hashish smuggling into Egypt. But hismain preoccupation was with the black drugs, heroin (which a missionary,Herbert Hayes, identified as the main threat as early as 1922)and cocaine (according to a report from the American consul inCairo in 1923, fashionable men and women could be seen stoppingtheir automobiles so that they 'could buy their stuff, and sniffit on the sidewalk'). It was heroin, though, Russell recalledin his autobiography, 'which nearly killed Egypt'. D'Erlangeragreed; by 1929, when Russell was appointed Director of the EgyptianCentral Narcotics Bureau, it had pushed opium, hashish and cocaineinto the background. Heroin not merely provided 'a sensation ofpleasant stupefaction, of happy contented drunkenness, of deadeningcomfortable drowsiness', which was what people had originallytaken it for, but also 'a buoyancy of spirits, increased imagination,temporarily enlarged brain power, and a capacity to think of thingswhich they would not otherwise have imagined'. But the price wasa disturbing addiction rate. One in four of Egypt's adult malepopulation, Russell estimated, became a black drug addict. His first task had been to find how the heroin was coming intothe country; something that had baffled the customs officials.From the start, according to d'Erlanger, 'a certain unromanticand sordid aspect was recognised and faced squarely; namely thatthe obtaining of reliable information is overwhelmingly a matterof money'. It was decided to pay informers so liberally that givingthe required information would be more profitable than smuggling.There was an immediate and gratifying response, revealing wherethe heroin was to be found; 'in cases of olives; in tins of powderedglue, of butter; in barrels of tomato sauce, of oil, and of wine;in sacks of prunes; in millstones; in stoves with false bottoms:in carpenters' lasts; in the soles and heels of shoes; and evenby means of tubes concealed in what Mrs. Grundy might have called'the most intimate recesses of the person' (a method which, d'Erlangerobserved, 'starts quite an amusing line of thought when one rememberswhich was the most usual way of taking heroin for its pleasurableeffects'). But as Russell soon realised, the men who were running the trafficwere never caught, because they took good care that the actualsmuggler, who might be caught, did not know who they were. Assoon as they found their consignments were being intercepted,they switched them into different channels; and any temporaryreduction in the supply of heroin available in Egypt actuallyhelped them, by raising its price, to afford the increased outlayin payments to couriers, and in bribes to customs officials AndRussell found, as Commissioner Lin had done, that informers wouldrealise they could again make more money by assisting the smugglersthan by assisting the police; or, they could have it both waysby tipping the police off to the occasional consignment, whilehelping the bulk of the heroin to go through. Russell was right; it was 'overwhelmingly a matter of money'.There was more than enough money in a single small tin labelledbeans, but containing heroin, to persuade many officials to dono more than wink, as the crate full of tins of beans went through;and the financial resources of the traffickers stretched muchfurther than those of the police. For Egypt to try to suppressheroin on her own, Russell realised, was a futile exercise. Itcould only be got rid of through an international agreement. Itwas with that objective that he went to Geneva to put Egypt'scase to the League. Largely by the force of his personality, hefinally goaded the delegates into activity. For all his achievement, though, in alerting public opinion tothe limitations of international control over the drug trafficRussell did not disguise from himself the limitations of the generalpolicy which he had been called on to carry out in Egypt. Wheneverby energetic measures he succeeded in limiting for a while thesupply of 'black' drugs, thereby pushing up the price beyond themeans of many Egyptians who ordinarily took them, the enforcedabstinence, he found, did them little good. They turned, instead,to a mixture of tobacco and henbane—impossible to deal witheffectively by police measures, as tobacco was too well establishedto ban, and henbane grew wild. They even started to drink 'stewed'tea, in the quantities required to intoxicate them, with lamentableconsequences 'to both their pockets and health'. So worried didthe Egyptian authorities become that in the 1930s they closedthe teashops, and smashed the utensils used to make and servethe tea. The addicts found other ways to get it. 'They are alwayssearching for a stimulant', an Egyptian landlord told a committeeof enquiry in 1933; and as they could no longer afford the harderdrugs, or hashish, 'they are now finding it in this vile brew,to the damage of their health'. The reason people became addicted in this way, the landlord suggested,would make an interesting subject for social and medical research.Russell would have agreed. He was a shrewd enough observer torealise that it was not the drugs, but the disposition to takethem, that mattered. Why, he wondered, were the Egyptians so susceptible?Might the responsibility lie with the spread of parasite-carrieddiseases like bilharzia, following the changes in the level ofthe Nile as a result of the construction of the Aswan Dam? Whateverthe cause, a drug or drugs was invariably found to assuage thecraving. Coffee, hashish, opium, heroin . . . and now, stewedtea; 'and so it goes on'. The 1931 Convention And so it went on; at Geneva, too, though not quite so smoothlyas before for the members of the Opium Advisory Committee. WhenRussell arrived in Geneva in 1930 as Egypt's delegate to the Committee,the scene there was quickly transformed: internally, by his energeticefforts to find ways round the obstacles they had put up, andexternally by the world-wide publicity his ideas and speechesattracted. When a meeting of delegates from the manufacturingcountries that autumn failed to reach agreement, because of theirunwillingness to accept quotas, the Blanco formula was revived,and in the summer of 1931, a modified version of it was at lastaccepted. In future, estimates of production and importation wereto be made by each member country, based on medical and scientificneeds and submitted, with explanatory memoranda, five months inadvance. All exports of heroin were to cease; all illicit heroinseized was to be destroyed or rendered harmless; and all importantcases of illicit trafficking were to be reported to the League. From the legal point of view, the 1931 Convention was unique;the first not merely to apply the principles of a controlled economyto a group of commodities by international agreement, but alsoto regulate all phases of the production of dangerous drugs fromthe time the raw material entered the factory to the final acceptanceof the finished product by hospital, laboratory, or chemist'sshop. Its impact appeared to be instantaneous; by 1932 the priceof raw opium was down to a quarter of what it had been in 1929.The Advisory Committee, which for so long had resisted the introductionof any such controls, now proudly boasted how well they were working.The figures presented by the manufacturing countries showed thatthey had begun to put the scheme into effect even before it hadbeen formally ratified; the amounts being manufactured had 'closelyapproximated to, or even fallen below, the amounts which appearto be required for legitimate consumption'. Gradually it became clear, though, that the fall in the priceof opium had little to do with the new Convention. It was thegreat slump that had drastically reduced demand; the resultingsurplus of opium and its derivatives had pushed down the price;and some governments were restricting the production of narcoticsmainly in the hope of keeping the prices from falling further.When the international drug traffic began to recover, it was seenthat the Convention was of little help in controlling it. Thefew countries which had refused to ratify were able to cater forillicit demand, wherever it was to be found; and modificationsto the Blanco formula reduced its effectiveness. The advance estimateswhich countries presented to the League of their drug requirements,it was agreed, did not have to be precise. Illicit narcotics,if seized, need not, after all, be destroyed. And there were nosanctions to employ against governments which failed to fulfilltheir pledges. The collapse of the Convention was described by Ferdinand Tuohyin his Inside Dope, published in 1934, illustrated by the'news flashes' which he had collected while writing it; rangingfrom the discovery that 251 carrier pigeons were being employedby the inmates of a U.S. prison to keep them supplied with narcotics,to the report of the discovery by the French authorities of asmuggling trick of the kind recorded a century earlier by CommissionerLin; a zinc-lined coffin from the Levant had been found to containheroin, as well as the corpse, the plan being to allow the committalservice and the burial to proceed, and 'for those in the dealon this side to act the ghoul later'. In spite of the optimismgenerated by Russell Pasha's impact at Geneva, Tuohy claimed,'the dope stream is experiencing small difficulty in finding newchannels'. And worse would follow. Earlier drugs—he cited hashish—hadat least been 'natural'; it was the alkaloids, the derivatives,which were disastrous. And now, they were being duplicated bychemists; one of his 'news flashes' concerned the invention ofa new synthetic drug, far stronger than morphine. Tuohy's fears were confirmed by S. H. Bailey's more academic surveyof the international campaign against drugs, published in 1936.The third phase of the campaign, as Bailey described it— thefirst had been initiated at The Hague, and the second by the revisedGeneva Convention in 1925—had not, he felt, been operationallong enough to be fairly judged; but already administrative difficultieswere making themselves felt. Any scheme for the limitation ofdrugs had to be grafted on to the diverse legal and administrative roots of morethan sixty independent States with their numerous and widely scatteredprotectorates, colonies, and leased or mandated territories. Desirableinternational measures may be obstructed by constitutional barriersin one country, or public sentiment in another. Handsome allowancehas to be made for the variations in the efficiency, experienceand reliability of administrative agencies in different territories. And by 1936, the chances that these administrative problems wouldbe solved was small. The League's authority was everywhere crumbling.The Japanese had defied it by occupying China north of the GreatWall; and although they could claim that by setting up their Manchukuoopium monopoly they were only following the British colonial pattern,as accepted by the League's own fact-finding mission, it seemedimprobable in view of their record that they would use their powersto reduce production. Visiting Manchukuo for The Timesin 1935 Peter Fleming asked himself the question, 'is the monopolya crusade or a racket ?'. On the evidence, he decided, it wasclearly a racket. Opium dens had been opened to all, even teenagers;consumption was increasing; and the monopoly was already makinghuge profits—as the Japanese authorities cynically acknowledged,by imprinting a flowering poppy on their Manchukuo coins. But even if the Japanese and all other producing countries hadbeen willing to co-operate, Bailey warned, the effort might befutile, because of the development of synthetic drugs; 'the infinitelyvaried and variable series of narcotic substances which competitiveresearch continues to discover and the medical profession of theworld to demand'. And it would never be easy to control such enterprisesbecause they were highly mobile; 'operations can be begun withlittle preparation in one centre and, when economic, legal oradministrative conditions become less favourable, transferredto another'. It was a prophetic statement; but for the time, thedrug manufacturers of illicit drugs hardly needed such assistance.With Mussolini leaving the League, and Hitler ignoring it, itsauthority was further eroded, and even the semblance of internationalcontrol of the drug traffic disappeared. Chapter 12 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-3IA031-000652-B039-23http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglis12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125740 text/html 53092HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:57:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:25:54 GMTContent-length: 52873 The Forbidden Game - Chapter 12 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 12 Heroin and Cannabis WHILE THE LEAGUE HAD BEEN WRESTLING WITH THE PROBLEM OF controlling the international drug traffic, its member States had been goingtheir individual ways, some paying little attention to the League'srequests. The nation which came closest to carrying out the League'srecommendations was, ironically, not a member: the United States;and the consequences of the methods it chose to adopt to stampout drug-taking were to prove even more disastrous, though ona smaller scale, than Prohibition. The Harrison Act The Harrison Narcotics Act, passed in 1914, was chiefly designedto restrict the use of opium and its derivatives to medical purposes,the doctor being permitted to prescribe them 'in the course ofhis professional practice only'. But the limits of what wouldconstitute professional practice were left undefined. Was thedoctor allowed to prescribe heroin to addicts—the maintenancedose, as it came to be known? Or did this fall outside his professionalcompetence ? The law enforcement officers took the view that itwas no part of the profession's duty to indulge the addict withhis drugs. Doctors who continued to provide patients with themaintenance dose found themselves liable to be arrested— which,even if they were not jailed, meant that they would face professionalruin. So the addict—as American Medicine commented soonafter the Act came into effect—is 'deprived of the medical carehe urgently needs; open, above-board sources from which he formerlyobtained his drug supply are closed to him, and he is driven tothe underworld where he can get his drug'. The underworld hadno difficulty in supplying him. By the end of the First WorldWar, an investigating committee found, the problem of addictionwas more serious than ever in American cities. The illicit trafficin opiates had increased until it just about equalled the legaltraffic, and the number of addicts had risen to around a million. Predictably, the committee recommended tougher laws, and tougherenforcement: and in 1924 an Act was passed prohibiting the importationof heroin—this being the policy the United States delegateswere trying to persuade the League of Nations Opium Conferenceto accept. The effect was rapid, and striking. Hitherto the professionhad made little distinction between morphine and heroin addicts,the general assumption being that though heroin was the more addictive,the two drugs were not significantly different in their effects.But—according to Edward Brecher in his survey of the periodin Licit and Illicit Drugs—hardly had the law been changedthan morphine, though easier and cheaper to get, almost disappearedfrom the black market. So far from stopping the traffic, the IllinoisMedical Journal complained in June 1926, the 'well-meaningblunderers' who had passed the Act had ensured that those whodealt in heroin could now 'make double the money from the poorunfortunates upon whom they prey'. All that the United StatesGovernment was doing was ensuring the prosperity of the bootleggersof narcotics, in the same way as they had ensured the prosperityof the bootleggers of alcohol, at enormous cost to the nation. The Rolleston Committee What would have happened—it was often asked—if the AmericanGovernment, instead of denying addicts their maintenance dose,had allowed them to have it on prescription? The easiest comparisonwas with Britain, which had had a similar problem with addictionto opiates in the early part of the century, arising out of ill-advisedprescribing habits and the boom in patent medicines; and whichhad also passed a law, the 1920 Dangerous Drugs Act, designedto bring them under control. When the issue came up whether themaintenance dose should be allowed, however, the decision laynot with the law officers, as in America, but with the Ministryof Health. The Ministry decided to appoint a committee, underSir Humphrey Rolleston, to advise on it; and the committee sentone of its members, Dr. Harry Campbell, to the United States toobserve how the Harrison law was working. As a consequence of the law, Dr. Campbell reported, a vast clandestine commerce has grown up in that country. Thesmall bulk of these drugs renders the evasion of the law comparativelyeasy, and the country is overrun by an army of peddlers who extortexorbitant prices from their helpless victims. It appears thatnot only has the Harrison law failed to diminish the number ofdrug-takers—some contend, indeed, that it has actually worsenedit; for without curtailing the supply of the drug it has sentthe price up tenfold, and this has had the effect of impoverishingthe poorer class of addicts and reducing them to a condition ofsuch abject misery as to render them incapable of gaining an honestlivelihood. The Rolleston Committee was exclusively medical in its composition.One of the most cherished tenets of the medical profession wasthat the doctor had a right to prescribe whatever he thought suitablefor his patients, with or without the State's sanction. Dr. Campbellhad given the Committee just the kind of evidence they neededto justify the continuance of this policy. They recommended thatdoctors should be allowed to prescribe heroin not simply in thecourse of treatment, but also to the patient who, 'while capableof leading a useful and fairly normal life as long as he takesa certain non-progressive quantity, usually small, of the drugof addiction, ceases to be able to do so when the regular allowanceis withdrawn'. The medical profession in Britain having more prestigeand more influence than the American, the recommendation was accepted.As a result, though there was always a black market in the opiatesbetween the wars, it remained very small. The addict who couldget his heroin for a few pence on prescription was not going topay ten times as much to a peddler. In the United States, heroin addiction grew progressively moreserious; for reasons given in 1936 by August Vollmer, who hadbeen Chief of Police in Berkeley, California, and subsequentlya Professor of Police Administration in Chicago: Stringent laws, spectacular police drives, vigorous prosecutionand imprisonment of addicts and peddlers have proved not onlyuseless and enormously expensive as means of correcting this evil,but they are also unjustifiably and unbelievably cruel in theirapplication to the unfortunate drug victims. Repression has driventhis vice underground and produced the narcotic smugglers andsupply agents, who have grown wealthy out of this evil practiceand who, by devious methods, have stimulated traffic in drugs.Finally, and not the least of the evils associated with repression,the helpless addict has been forced to resort to crime in orderto get money for the drug. Drug addiction, Vollmer went on to argue, was not a police problem—'itnever has been and never can be solved by policemen'; it was amedical problem. Instead of penal sanctions, 'there should beintelligent treatment of the incurables in outpatient clinics,hospitalization of those not too far gone to respond to therapeuticmeasures, and application of the prophylactic principles whichmedicine applies to all scourges of mankind'. Marihuana: Harry Anslinger Vollmer was a respected figure—he was a former President ofthe International Association of Chiefs of Police. But how littleattention was paid to his opinions could be gauged from the factthat the following year, Congress passed a law bringing yet anotherdrug under federal prohibition: Indian hemp. Before 1900, hemp had hardly rated as a drug in the United States.This was not because of any lack of availability; in the South,it had long been one of the main cash crops—grown by, amongothers, George Washington, and encouraged by later administrators,chiefly to provide fibres. It was no more regarded as a plantdrug than the morning glory—at least by the whites; they preferredtheir tobacco and alcohol. Only the Southern black slaves tookit; as Richard Burton, who liked to compare different types ofhemp as other men like to compare different wines, observed whenhe visited the region. He was interested to discover that 'fewof their owners had ever heard of it'. So little were its narcoticproperties known, let alone worried about, that S. S. Boyce'streatise on hemp, published in New York in 1900, contained noreference to them; and that same year the U.S. Department of Agricultureannounced that it had decided to import experimental quantitiesof 'superior varieties of hemp seed' from the East, for experimentsto see how they would grow in America. Drugs made from hemp were used to a small extent in medicines;and the Department, worried by the growing cost of imported drugs,and with a view to making the United States self-sufficient inher requirements, also embarked on a systematic survey over thenext few years to find how much was needed of hemp and other plantdrugs, and how and where they could best be grown. Experimentalfarms were established, at which tests could be made; and hempwas found to do very well in the Eastern and upper Southern States.Farms to produce it commercially were accordingly started in Pennsylvania,Virginia, and South Carolina. During the war, farmers were encouragedto produce still more, until they almost fulfilled the country'sentire requirements; a feat which was held to be greatly to theircredit by Henry Fuller in his survey of American drugs, publishedin 1922. During the 1920s, however, marihuana—as it came to be describedwhen taken for non-medical purposes—began to acquire a sinisterreputation; partly owing to the stories coming out of Egypt, wherehashish was still getting blamed for the addiction rate; partlybecause it began to spread north into States of the Union whereit had not been known before. Some of them banned it; and at thetime the Federal Bureau of Narcotics was set up under the wingof the Treasury Department in Washington in 1930, there was amove to get marihuana banned throughout the country. The Treasurywas unimpressed. 'A great deal of public interest has been arousedby newspaper articles,' its report claimed in 1931, 'appearingfrom time to time on the evils of the abuse of marihuana, or Indianhemp. This publicity tends to magnify the extent of the evil andlends color to the inference that there is an alarming spreadof the improper use of the drug, whereas the actual increase insuch use may not have been inordinately large.' The Chief of the new Narcotics Bureau, however, did not sharethe Treasury's view. Harry Anslinger had been Assistant Commissionerof Prohibition, and was understandably anxious to wipe out thememory of his failure to make it work. He was young—still inhis thirties—ambitious; and filled with a deep repugnance fordrugs dating back, by his own account, to an episode in his childhood.He had been born in Pennsylvania, near a township in which oneadult out of ten was reputed to be an opium addict; and as a twelve-year-old,he heard a woman screaming in agony for the drug, a sound he neverforgot. He had come to feel the same horror of marihuana. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics, however, was originally drawninto the campaign against marihuana less by Anslinger's antipathyto the drug than for administrative simplicity. It had becomeobvious that narcotics could not be adequately controlled so longas each State had a different set of regulations, and a nationalConference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws had been consideringhow best to unify them. In 1932 they put forward a draft narcoticslaw which, it was hoped, all States would introduce, imposingprohibition except for medical purposes. At this stage, the decisionwhether or not to classify hemp as a narcotic within the meaningof the Act was left optional. Anslinger, regarding this as unsatisfactory,determined to arouse public opinion to the marihuana menace. HisBureau therefore prepared a brochure in which it was claimed that,'those who are accustomed to habitual use of the drug are saideventually to develop a delirious rage after its administrationduring which they are temporarily, at least, irresponsible, andprone to commit violent crimes'; and that prolonged use was 'saidto produce mental deterioration'. 'Said to' was a favourite Bureau phrase when there was no evidencewho had done the saying. Anslinger had other devices, too, torouse fear of marihuana. It had dropped out of general medicalusage, he claimed, because its effects were too unpredictable.This was true; doctors did not find it easy to prescribe the appropriatedosage, because individual reactions were so varied. But Anslinger'sinterpretation of 'unpredictability' was his own. A patient, heexplained, might not react at all; but he might 'go berserk'.And the young were particularly at risk; much of the prevailingcrime, vice and gang warfare were due to the drug. The Bureau's report for 1933 promised a propaganda campaign againstmarihuana. For a while, it did not 'take'; The Reader's Guideto Periodical Literature, Brecher was later to find, listedno article on the subject in the ten years 1925-35—itself anindication of how little alarm the drug had been causing. Then,the flow began; and most of the articles either acknowledged thehelp of the Bureau, or showed internal evidence of having acceptedit. Anslinger himself gave network radio broadcasts to arouse,as he put it, 'an intelligent and sympathetic public interest,helpful to the administration of the narcotic laws'. They emphasisedmarihuana's close relationship with hashish, and attributed toit 'a growing list of crimes, including murder'. Anslinger's main aim was to shake Congress into action; and inthis he succeeded. When in 1937 the Treasury introduced a FederalMarihuana Bill, putting the drug into the same category as thenarcotics controlled by the Harrison Act, Congressmen were solittle concerned to dispute the Bureau brief that the only seriousopposition came from representatives of the bird seed industry.They managed, just in time, to put over their case that hemp seed,whatever it might do to humans, did only good to birds, upon whomit had no observable narcotic effects, and whose health—andplumage—suffered without it. Having committed himself to prohibition of marihuana, Anslingerwas aware he would need to justify himself by making a betterjob of enforcement than he had been able to do with either alcoholor heroin. The Bureau's campaign through the press intensified.In the same month—July—that the Act went through, an articleby Anslinger appeared in the American Magazine purportingto recount some of the crimes committed under the influence ofmarihuana, which bore an interesting resemblance to those whichhad been described to an Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, includinga murder in Florida: When officers arrived at the home they found the youth staggeringabout in a human slaughterhouse. With an axe he had killed hisfather, mother, two brothers and a sister. He seemed to be ina daze.... He had no recollection of having committed the multiplecrime. The officers knew him ordinarily as a sane, rather quietyoung man; now he was pitifully crazed. They sought the reason.The boy said he had been in the habit of smoking something whichyouthful friends called 'muggle' a childish name for marihuana. Anslinger omitted to provide any evidence that the smoking ofmuggle had been in any way responsible for the crime; but withhis authority for it, the incident was to be used again and again,in later articles, by journalists who had found it among the files. In one respect, the campaign was a little too successful for Anslinger'speace of mind. He had secured a fervent supporter in Earle AlbertRowell, a hot-gospeller, who had been touring America lecturingaudiences on marihuana's effects. The drug, according to Rowell'sthesis: 1 Destroys willpower, making a jellyfish of the user. He cannotsay no. 2 Eliminates the line between right and wrong . . . 3 Above all, causes crime, fills the victim with an irrepressibleurge to violence. 4 Incites to revolting immoralities, including rape and murder. 5 Causes many accidents, both industrial and automobile. 6 Ruins careers for ever. 7 Causes insanity as its speciality. 8 Either in self-defence or as a means of revenue, users makesmokers of others, thus perpetuating evil. The italicised part of Rowell's creed was an embarrassment tothe Narcotics Bureau, because it related to another of Rowell'sbeliefs; that in order to stamp out marihuana, it would be necessaryalso to ban tobacco, because smoking cigarettes led young peopleon to smoking marihuana. 'Slowly, insidiously', Rowell claimed, for over three hundred years, Lady Nicotine was setting the stagefor a grand climax. The long years of tobacco-using were but anintroduction and training for marihuana use. Tobacco which wasfirst smoked in a pipe, then as a cigar, and at last as a cigarette,demanded more and more of itself until its supposed pleasurespalled, and some of the tobacco victims looked about for somethingstronger. Tobacco was no longer potent enough. It was no part of Anslinger's strategy to add to his difficultieswith a campaign against tobacco: Rowell was repudiated. Marihuana was now officially a 'black' or 'hard' drug. What thiswas going to mean was forecast by Dr. Henry Smith Williams in1938. With the aid of newspaper propaganda already started, an interestwill be created in the alleged allurements of marihuana smoking;and the army of inspectors sent out to explore the millions offields in which the weed may be grown need only apply, with slightmodifications, the methods learned in the conduct of the narcoticsracket, in order to develop a marihuana industry that could eclipsethe billion dollar illicit narcotics racket of today. Racketeers. . . should have no difficulty at all in developing a five billiondollar racket with marihuana— provided only that the press canbe induced to stimulate curiosity by giving the drug publicity. And the press, fed with more horror stories by Anslinger, dulydid its worst. The La Guardia Report Up to this point, there had been no attempt seriously to investigatethe effects of marihuana in the United States. But when the Mayorof New York, Fiorello La Guardia, was urged to initiate a campaignagainst the drug, he recalled that many years before he had beenimpressed by a report on the subject by an army board in Panama,'which had emphasised the relative harmlessness of the drug andthe fact that it played a very little role, if any, in problemsof delinquency and crime in the Canal Zone'. In 1939, with thehelp of the New York Academy of Medicine, La Guardia set up acommittee consisting of twenty-eight doctors, pharmacologists,psychiatrists and sociologists, who were allowed the time andthe facilities to do what half a century earlier the Indian HempDrugs Commission, for all its thoroughness, had not attempted:scientific tests of the drug, in controlled conditions. The outcome of the enquiry was remarkably similar to that of itspredecessors. The behaviour of marihuana smokers—the Chairmanof the Committee, Dr. George B. Wallace, wrote in his summaryof its conclusions—was ordinarily 'of a friendly, sociable character.Aggressiveness and belligerency are not commonly seen.' No directrelation had been found between marihuana and crimes of violence.There was no evidence that it was an aphrodisiac. Smoking couldbe stopped without any resulting mental or physical distress comparablewith withdrawal symptoms after opiates; and there was no signthat smokers acquired tolerance of its effects, compelling themto take more. On the contrary, an excessive dose reversed theusually pleasant effects. 'Marihuana does not change the basicpersonality structure of the individual. It lessens inhibitionsand this brings out what is latent in his thoughts and emotions,but it does not evoke responses which would otherwise be totallyalien to him.' No mental or physical deterioration of a kind whichcould be attributed to it had been diagnosed even among thosewho had taken the drug for years. So far from its being a menace,'the lessening of inhibitions and repression, the euphoric state,the feeling of adequacy, the freer expression of thoughts andideas, and the increase in appetite for food brought about bymarihuana, suggest therapeutic possibilities'. The American Medical Association reacted angrily to the implicationthat it had failed to recognise cannabis's potential. 'Publicofficials will do well to disregard this unscientific, uncriticalstudy', the AMA Journal urged on April 28th, 1948, 'andcontinue to regard marihuana as a menace wherever it is purveyed'.The damage, it feared, had already been done—to judge by theaccount of some 'tearful parents' who had noticed a mental deteriorationin their son, 'evident even to their lay minds' and found he hadbeen smoking 'tea' (the then current slang); when taxed with it,he had cited the committee's report—which he had read aboutin a pop music magazine under the heading 'Light up! Reportfinds "tea" a Good Kick!'—as his justification.Anslinger was of the same mind. The report's 'giddy sociologyand medical mumbo-jumbo', he was later to complain in one of hisautobiographies, 'put extra millions in the pockets of the hoods'. Marihuana: the second phase Following the report of the La Guardia Committee, voices wereheard periodically in the United States suggesting that even ifits research had not been perfect, the results at least confirmedthat there were no known serious hazards from marihuana to theindividual or to society. Would it not be as well, then, to giveup the apparently futile attempt to ban it, and to concentrateinstead on the campaign against heroin and the other hard drugs? Anslinger found the proposal intolerable. To block it, he beganto advance a new argument, contradicting views he had himselfheld earlier. In 1937 he had assured Congress that marihuana didnot lead on to hard drug addiction, because he wanted to provethat marihuana addicts were, as he put it to Congress, 'an entirelydifferent class', who were made violent by the drug, rather thanby the need to find money to pay for it. They knew nothing ofheroin, he asserted, and 'did not go in that direction'. But by1956, when new forms of drug control were being debated, Anslingerrealised that he could no longer rely on Congressmen acceptinghis link between marihuana and violence, exploded by the La Guardiafindings. He would have to find some fresh reason for maintainingprohibition of the drug. Marihuana, he now admitted, was not a'controlling factor' in crime; the real danger was 'that marihuana,if used over a long period, does lead to heroin addiction'. Hisexpert advice was accepted. When it began to become obvious, later in the 1960s, that thecampaign to stamp out marihuana was not succeeding, and that thehabit was spreading rapidly throughout the country, particularlyamong the youth, State legislatures displayed the by now reflexaction. They passed laws to intensify enforcement, and to increasepenalties. Edward Brecher has since listed them in his Licitand Illicit Drugs, including: Alabama: mandatory sentence for the possession of a marihuanacigarette: five years. Second offence, up to forty years. No suspendedsentences or probation permitted. Illinois: for first offence of selling marihuana, ten years tolife. Louisiana: mandatory sentence for possession, first offence, fiveto fifteen years hard labour. Missouri: life sentence for first offence of sale, second of possession. Rhode Island: mandatory ten years for possession with intent tosell. And in Massachusetts anybody found in a place where marihuanawas kept, or in the company of anybody possessing it, could receivea five-year sentence. At the same time, the campaign was intensifiedon the federal level. In 1960 there had been 169 arrests in connectionwith marihuana; in 1965 there were 7,000, and the following year,15,000. The campaign was a humiliating failure, for two main reasons.One was that it proved impossible to stop smuggling. The longborder with Mexico, in particular, was easily breached—oftenby the owners of the 80,000 cars which, by the late 1960s, werepassing into Mexico and back into California every weekend (atone checkpoint there were eighteen lanes, which did not make forsecure customs enforcement). But the main reason was the sameas under Prohibition forty years earlier: that enforcement lackedsolid support from public opinion. The young were often on marihuana'sside; and parents were gradually learning to live with the knowledgethat their children were not going to be stopped from breakingthe law. It was also becoming apparent that none of the terrible consequencesAnslinger had forecast were manifesting themselves Marihuana causedno deaths, and no addiction of the kind which afflicted takersof the opiates or of alcohol; nor were its takers more prone tomania, to violence, or to crime than the rest of the community.By the time President Nixon, whose views reflected Anslinger's,set up his own enquiry—which he took care to 'load', appointingnine of the thirteen members himself, and leaving them and thepublic in no doubt as to what he expected of them—the campaignagainst marihuana was disintegrating. 'There is increasing evidence,'Dr. James Carey of the University of California told them, 'thatwe are approaching a situation similar to that at the time whenthe Volstead Act was repealed.' On the one hand, there were thesavage penalties; on the other, a breakdown of enforcement. Thepolice, though willing enough to make raids on hippy camps, didnot relish the idea of making sweeps through the massed ranksof fans at pop festivals; still less, of raiding the homes ofthe G.I.s—sometimes officers—who had brought the habit backwith them from Vietnam. Politicians, too, could no longer be so sure that a hard lineon drugs would win them electoral support. In some States, tacitagreements were reached to leave University campuses to disciplinethemselves over marihuana; fines for possession become nominal.In the winter of 1972 the Consumers' Union pronounced 'marihuanais here to stay. No conceivable law enforcement programme cancurb its availability', and called for a new Act to introduceorderly controls on cultivation, production and distribution.In 1973 Oregon took a tentative step towards legislation, by convertingpossession of small quantities of marihuana into a 'violation'—comparableto a parking offence—rather than a crime. And when the ShaferCommittee reported, to Nixon's disgust it recommended that possessionof small quantities of cannabis should cease to be a criminaloffence.. Britain and cannabis It might have been expected that the British, aware of the goodfortune in escaping the consequences of the United States' heroinpolicy, would have taken care not to ban cannabis themselves.But the drug was rarely used socially in Britain, and as the planthad continued to resist conversion into a standardised potion,or pill, it had been falling out of medical use. When it was introducedby the West Indian immigrants after the Second World War, it wasknown only through the lingering legends of the Arabian nights,and the Assassins. And for a time, it was allowed to circulatein what became semi-ghettoes where the immigrants lived. Around 1950, it began to spread out through much the same channelsas it had in the United States, chiefly through musicians andtheir fans; and stories about the way the drug was corruptingthe nation's youth began to appear in the newspapers. They wereloaded with menace: readers were reminded that cannabis was reallyhashish, the drug of the Assassins, and told that it was beingpushed by coloured dope peddlers. Britain had no Narcotics Squad,and no Harry Anslinger; but it had Dr. Donald McIntosh Johnson,later to be Conservative M.P. for Carlisle, whose Indian Hemp:a Social Menace sounded the alarm in 1952. In it he describedhow the respectable 'Mr. A' had been slipped a 'Mickey Finn',which had driven him into so manic a mental condition that hehad had to be certified, and incarcerated for a few days in amental hospital. The drug used, Dr. Johnson claimed, was cannabis;and he went on to explain that it had also been responsible forthe outbreak of hysteria which had afflicted the citizens of theProvencal town of Pont St. Esprit, not long before. The Pont St. Esprit outbreak was soon traced to ergot poisoning;but the explanation of 'Mr. A's' disorder did not come until severalyears later, when Dr. Johnson revealed in an autobiography thathe was 'Mr. A' himself (thus qualifying, perhaps, as the onlyman to have been elected an M.P. after having been certified).He was unable to show that cannabis had been responsible. By then,however, the combination of the press campaign and the propagandaof the Society for the Study of Addiction (whose Hon. Secretary'sviews were given in the introduction to Johnson's book; distinguishingbetween drunkards and cannabis users, he claimed that 'alcoholism,for all its attendant degradation, does not usually poison one'snature; drug addiction does') had led the Government to determineto ban sales of the drug. As the medical profession disclaimedany desire to use it, it ceased to be available even on prescription. What followed was a repetition of what had been happening in theUnited States, though with the additional complication that thepolice activity was initially directed against the West Indians.A number of respectable citizens, who had taken cannabis all theiradult lives in much the same way as their white neighbours tookbeer, found themselves given long prison sentences, coupled withjudicial homilies on their wickedness in corrupting British youth.The effect the campaign had was greatly to increase the demand.By driving it underground, the authorities succeeded in making'pot' a secular cult, combining the attractions of a rebel conspiracyagainst parental and civil authority, and a secret society. Whiteteenagers took to the drug in rapidly growing numbers, so thatby 1964 more whites than coloureds were being convicted of cannabisoffences.. Inevitably, the demand grew for tougher enforcement,and higher penalties. But cabinet ministers or stockbrokers whoapplauded the searches of a pop singer's suitcases by the Customs,or his flat by the police, became less enthusiastic when theyfound that most of the white malefactors were from the aristocracyand the professional classes—including their own sons and daughters. This was an embarrassment, because by the Dangerous Drug Act of1965, designed to implement United Nations' policy, penaltieshad been raised. In theory, anybody found in possession of cannabiscould receive as long a sentence as a convicted murderer. In 1967the Labour Home Secretary, Roy Jenkins, sought a way out of thedifficulty by appointing a committee of enquiry into the wholesubject under Lady Wootton, the leading British authority in thearea where sociology, criminology and psychiatry overlap. Itsreport, published in 1969, followed those of earlier enquiries.There was nothing to suggest that cannabis was responsible foraggressive social behaviour, or crime, or ill-health. Physically-speakingit was 'very much less dangerous than the opiates, amphetamines,and barbiturates, and also less dangerous than alcohol'. Nor wasthere any evidence that cannabis-takers were led on to take heroin;'it is the personality of the user, rather than the propertiesof the drug, that is likely to cause progression to other drugs'. James Callaghan, Jenkins' successor as Home Secretary, was nomore disposed than Nixon to accept the committee's verdict. Heexcused himself from taking action by claiming—as Nixon wasto do—that the committee had allowed itself to be bamboozledby the cannabis lobby. But whatever the disagreements on the committee'sfindings there was no disputing one of its assertions; that inspite of campaigns to stamp it out, cannabis use was on the increase.Doubtless encouraged by the report, the users continued to multiply,as an investigation undertaken by the Sunday Telegraph,revealed in 1972. Previously, the cannabis had entered the countrychiefly in small consignments, often amateurishly brought in.But the demand had now put up the price to the point where itattracted a smuggling network of the sophisticated kind hithertoassociated with the heroin traffic: Ingenuity shown in disguising cannabis in freight is endless.It has been found concealed in crates of foodstuff, the handlesof badminton racquets, padded ice-hockey gloves, sub-aqua airbottles, surf boards, hippie beads, sculptured busts, contraceptives,antiques, Moroccan pouffes and ornamental bricks. Other expedients employed by the traffickers included the useof radio-controlled model aircraft, launched from motor-boatsin the English Channel, and—most serious of all—of the diplomaticbags addressed to members of the Embassies of the poorer countries,who had learned how they could enjoy high living in London withno trouble, and rarely any risk. A senior member of the staffof the Indian High Commission had been detected, the SundayTelegraph report claimed, smuggling 50,000 grains of cannabisinto Britain in a consignment of chutney. Faced with such evidence, the reaction of the Customs was to boastthat larger quantities of cannabis were being intercepted. Butthis, as Timothy Green explained in his book about internationalsmuggling, must be regarded as the measure of prohibition's failure.No large scale smuggling operation could afford to lose more thana small proportion of its consignments—around five per cent,Green estimated. It followed that if more cannabis was being intercepted,this could only mean that more was finding its way in. Only ifinterceptions began to fall, should the Customs claim theywere succeeding. In much the same way, the rise in the numberof convictions, which the police used to justify themselves—fromaround fifty in 1957 to over 10,000 in 1972—could more sensiblybe regarded as a reflection of a great increase in drug taking.The estimates of the number of cannabis users supplied to theWootton Committee in 1968 had ranged between 30,000 and 300,000.The Sunday Telegraph's investigators came to the conclusionthat in 1972 'although the United Kingdom is in general a law-abidingcountry, anything up to two millions of its citizens use the drug'. Heroin: U.S.A. If the authorities in Britain and the United States could notsuppress the use of cannabis by banning it, the chances of thetraffic in heroin, easier and vastly more profitable to smuggle,being effectively stopped by prohibition were remote. The British,realising this, held on to their policy of allowing doctors toprescribe a maintenance dose; and it worked—though they hadsome uneasy moments in the 1960s, when it was found that the numberof new cases of addiction, though negligible by American standards,was rising with disconcerting rapidity. An investigation revealedthe reason; a handful of doctors were prescribing heroin so lavishlythat they were feeding the small black market in the drug. Therehad always been the risk that leaving it up to the individualdoctor to decide who needed heroin might lead to trouble. Thebiggest category of morphinists in the world, Lewin claimed, weredoctors; and there were ninety doctors among Britain's 300 knownheroin addicts in the early 1950s. There were also a few who wereconcerned only to increase their incomes. Reluctantly, the medicalprofession had to agree to abrogate its members traditional right,and confine the prescribing of heroin to designated clinics. Theexpedient worked; the rise in the addiction rate was halted. Why, then, was the British system not introduced in the UnitedStates ? Partly because it would have meant passing control tothe Department of Health and Welfare. It was Anslinger's boastthat he blocked this proposal, because he preferred to work inliaison with the Coast Guard, the Customs, the Secret Serviceand the Department of Justice. When it was pointed out to himthat control by the Department of Health in Britain had largelymade it unnecessary for the Coast Guard, the Customs, the SecretService and the Department of Justice to concern themselves withthe heroin traffic, he insinuated that the British must be hidingthe real addiction figures. Anyway, he added, Britain was a smallisland, which made it easier to prevent smuggling. This was an unfortunate choice of argument, because it revealedwhy his policies had been foredoomed to failure—the smugglingof heroin into the United States could not be prevented. Neitherstricter enforcement nor severer penalties were reducing it. Anystandard textbook on drugs showed why. Many heroin takers acquired'tolerance', needing larger amounts to enjoy the same effects.The more they took, the more difficult it was to stop taking thedrug, because of the agonising nature of the withdrawal symptoms—evenworse with heroin than with the other opiates: yawning, restlessness,irritability, tremor, insomnia, depression, nausea, vomiting,intestinal spasm, diarrhea, chilliness alternating with sweatiness,gooseflesh, cramps, pains in the bones, muscle spasms. While undergoingthese tortures, the addict knew—as a textbook listing them putit—that 'at any point in the course of withdrawal, the administrationof a suitable narcotic will completely and dramatically suppressthe symptoms'. To purchase this relief, he would pay any price,and risk any penalty. As a result, heroin became a profitableenough commodity for the traffickers to be able to afford to conducttheir smuggling operations on a highly organised and efficientlevel. The blackest irony So, by a savage paradox, the more determined the campaign by theUnited States Government to stamp out the drug traffic, the betterit suited the traffickers. By the late 1960s, it was possiblefor a syndicate to offer $35 a kilo for raw opium—enough toensure an abundant supply from impoverished peasants in Easternand Middle Eastern countries, and to encourage them to cultivateland which had not been tilled before. The heroin manufacturedfrom that kilo could be sold for $20,000; sometimes considerablymore. Out of so spectacular a profit rate, the syndicate wereable to afford to perfect their chain of operations so that ateach stage, the carriers of the heroin could not betray the manwho had consigned it to them, because they would not know whohe was: nor could they be betrayed by the man they handed it overtoo, except through carelessness or bad management (a techniquewhich Timothy Green likened in his study of smuggling to a systemof electrical fuses so arranged that if one blew it could be replaced,and the rest could continue to function normally). The largerthe difference between cost price and selling price, too, thebetter the syndicates were able to afford to bribe Customs Officersand policemen, and the greater the incentive for the 'pusher'to extend his market by attracting new customers. And they werethrown into his path by the Vietnam war, which introduced tensof thousands of G.I.s to heroin. In Vietnam they could buy thepure product at one-twentieth of its cost back home, where itwas often heavily adulterated. What happened—as described byFrances Fitzgerald in her Fire in the Lake—reads likemimicry of what had happened to so many earlier efforts at prohibition. The traffic in heroin was the final and perhaps the blackest ironyof the war. The heroin came largely from Burma and Laos. Muchof it was processed in or near Vientiane by those people for whosesake (it was to be supposed) the U.S. Government was demolishingthe rest of Laos. It came to Vietnam either by air drop from Vietnameseor Lao military planes, paid for by the U.S. Government, or throughthe Customs at Tan Son Hut airfield. The Vietnamese Customs Inspectorsearned several dozen times as much for not inspecting the bagsand bundles as for inspecting them. When the American Customsadvisers attempted to crack down on their 'counterparts', theydiscovered that the two key customs posts were held by the brothersof Thieu's Premier ... As this 'freely elected Government' wouldnot prosecute the Customs Officials (heroin, the Vietnamese said,was 'an American problem'), the heroin continued to enter thecountry unimpeded. Once in Vietnam it was sold openly in the streetsand around the American bases by young war widows and childrenorphaned by the American War. The United States might leave Vietnam—Frances Fitzgerald remarked—butthe Vietnam war would never leave the United States; 'the soldierswould bring it back with them like an addiction'. They did. Thedemand for heroin continued to rise until, as Frederick Forsythunkindly noted in a survey of the heroin traffic in 1973, it became'America's largest single consumer import', worth $4,000,000,000a year. The fact that the prohibition policy led to an increase in drug-taking,though, was less demoralising than its social side-effects; particularlycrimes of violence. This was not because drugs unleashed criminaltendencies, as Anslinger had claimed; the criminal activity waslargely the result not of the drugs, but of the prohibition policy.As the Le Dain Committee of enquiry into drug use in Canada putit, in their interim report, Because of the illegal nature of the drug the cost of a heavyheroin habit may run anywhere from $ 15.00 to $50.00 a day andhigher, in spite of the fact that the medical cost of the drugsinvolved would be just a few cents. There are very few legitimateways in which most individuals can afford to meet that kind ofexpense. Consequently, when tolerance pushes the cost of druguse above what the user can afford legitimately, he is forcedinto a decision—either to quit the drug and go through withdrawal,or turn to easier, criminal, methods of acquiring the necessarymoney. In 1972 the New York Health Department estimated that there werearound 400,000 heroin addicts in the city; 15,000 of them in jails,25,000 under treatment, the rest on the streets—where, accordingto the police commissioner Patrick Murphy, they were connectedwith seventy per cent of the city's crimes. In Washington thatyear, the city's Narcotics Treatment Organisation put the countof heroin addicts at 15,000; its head, Dr. Robert du Pont, estimatedthat 'the annual value of property and services transferred becauseof addiction, through robbery, theft, prostitution, drug salesand so on, was $328,000,000.' And at the same time, prohibitionwas creating new criminals out of men and women who would notordinarily have become law breakers—as the Le Dain Committeenoted in its final report in 1973. The fact of a drug being unobtainablelegally 'will often drive a person to seek support and reinforcementin a deviant or criminal sub-culture'; and a prison sentence tendedto reinforce this bond, because there was 'a considerable circulationof drugs within penal institutions'. With heroin, as with marihuana, enforcement officials were readywith what appeared to be evidence that they were doing their job—figuresshowing that they were improving the interception rate. The U.N.narcotics committee were told that seizures of heroin in the UnitedStates were up from 160 kg in 1969, to 221 kg in 1970. But inthe same period, the United States narcotic authorities' own estimatesfor the illicit import of heroin, assuming they were correct,showed that the proportion which was being seized had actuallyfallen. And there was sufficient evidence of the involvement ofCustoms and police by 1966 to lead John M. Murtagh, a judge ofthe New York Criminal Court, to comment that the narcotics law'corrupts more than it corrects'; a warning borne out three yearslater when, within twelve months, no fewer than thirty-nine NewYork narcotics agents who were under investigation for drug offencesresigned, Control at source Although the attempt to stop drugs coming into the United Stateswas not succeeding, there were hopes for a time that it mightbe possible to introduce an alternative method of control. In1959 an American fact-finding mission was despatched to visitthe countries of the Near East to investigate the drug traffic.It reported that the chief source of illicit heroin were the Turkishpoppy fields. The opium was being smuggled through the Lebanonto Italy and France, where it was converted into heroin and exportedto the United States. There was little prospect of interception,as the people involved were untouchables; the Mafia, in Italy,and unknown but evidently influential figures in France. But whywait until the opium was on its way? Why not cut off the supplyat its sources? The idea had the attraction of simplicity. The United States Governmentwas paying huge sums annually in a futile effort to beat the smugglers;part of the expenditure could be diverted, in the form of aid,to induce the Governments of the countries where the poppy—orany other drug-producing plant—was cultivated, to prevent cultivatorsfrom growing crops to supply the illicit market. The problem wouldthen solve itself, for there would be no raw material for thetraffickers to work on. All that was needed was some new internationalagreement, of the kind that had been mooted in the old Leaguedays, but which the U.N. should be better able to enforce. Anslingerhad himself appointed as the United States delegate to the U.N.Commission to promote the policy, and in 1961 agreement was reachedon what became known as the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. It proved to be as unworkable as the Hague and Geneva conventions,and for the same reasons; chief among them, the fact that someof the nations involved had promised more than they could perform,and others had never any intention of implementing their pledges.Typical of the unreality was the Convention's decision that 'theuse of cannabis (hemp) for other than medical and scientific purposesmust be discontinued as soon as possible, but in any case withintwenty-five years'; a 'rather optimistic time-table', as Dr. NormanTaylor—Curator of the New York Botanical Gardens, and authorof a couple of refreshingly sane books on drugs—remarked, when'matched against three thousand years of use by untold millions'.Taylor's scepticism was justified. Visiting Morocco eleven yearslater, a Guardian correspondent found that though the Governmenthad pledged its support to the campaign to phase out kif,it had carefully refrained from interfering with the cultivationof hemp. The farmers were earning twice as much from it as theyhad earned from growing corn; so, as a tribesman explained, 'nowwe've all switched'. The attempt to deprive the heroin traffickers of their main source,the poppy fields of Turkey, also failed. Tempted by the promiseof American aid, the Turkish Government agreed to try to stoppoppy cultivation for the black market; and for a while the productionof opium was restricted. But as the illicit marketeers were ableto offer higher prices, this only meant that it was the supplyof legitimate—medical—opium which dwindled. By 1972 some nationswere running short; the Japanese representative complained atthe U.N. that his country could only get half its legitimate requirements.At the same time the Turkish peasants, who had been instructedto stop growing poppies, were becoming restive. The payments theyhad received out of the American funds, they felt, were insufficientto compensate them for the loss of so lucrative a crop. As theirvotes were at stake, the Turkish Minister for Agriculture in theEcevit Government began, in 1974, to dismantle the controls hispredecessors had introduced. Chapter 13 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-4IA031-000652-B039-51http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglis13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125754 text/html 24157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:57:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:25 GMTContent-length: 23938 The Forbidden Game - Chapter 13 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 13 The Collapse of Control EVEN IF HEROIN AND CANNABIS COULD HAVE BEEN BANISHED, it had becomeclear by the 1970s that they would immediately have been replacedby other drugs. Some had already established themselves—occasionallywith the active help of governments, or of the medical profession,or both. When the amphetamines—'pep pills'—were first marketed in the1930s, doctors had begun to prescribe them for patients who felttired or lethargic; and later as a slimming aid. During the warthey proved a help to men in the forces who were required to stayalert on duty; and when it ended, vast quantities of them, surplusto requirements, were dumped on the open market. Sometimes theywere employed as an adjunct to alcohol; when in 1947 'Chips' Channonheld the dinner party which one of his guests, Somerset Maugham,told him was the apogee of his career (the guests included twoqueens), he described in his diary how he had 'laced' the cocktailswith benzedrine, 'which I find always makes a party go'. But thenit was realised that, injected intravenously, the amphetaminescould produce an explosive bout of euphoria; and as they werecheap and easily available, they were soon being extensively usedfor that purpose, with destructive effects on the health of someof the addicts, ranging from brittle finger-nails to ulcers, chestinfections, liver disorders, and cerebral haemorrhages. Governmentsbanned sales, except on prescription; but so many people had acquiredthe habit of taking the drug, and so many doctors were willingto indulge them, that the black market was rarely short of supplies.Taking amphetamines, in Brecher's estimation, ranked 'among themost disastrous forms of drug use yet devised'—particularlyin Sweden, where the attempt to impose total prohibition led onlyto a rise in the price, encouraging illicit manufacture and smuggling,and leading to a spectacular growth in the number of addicts. Barbiturates took a similar course. In 1949 Colliers ranan article under the title 'Thrill pills can ruin you', alertingits readers to the fact that sleeping pills, if injected, wereeuphoric. The health authorities added their warnings which, asBrecher commented, ensured that 'throughout the 1950s and the1960s, the relatively harmless sleeping tablets of the 1930s playedtheir new role as one of the major illicit American drugs'. Aswith the amphetamines, the barbiturates were so widely prescribedthat control was impossible; the black market could be fed fromtens of thousands of family medicine cupboards. But when a committeeof enquiry set up by the British Government recommended in 1972that the barbiturates should be re-categorised, to bring themunder the same type of control as heroin, the British MedicalAssociation's scientific committee successfully blocked the proposal,ostensibly because of the 'practical difficulties in implementingregulations', but really because it would further have erodedthe doctor's right to prescribe. Cocaine also made a come-back 'Sniffing' had enjoyed a vogue inthe United States in the 1920s; in his Drugs and the Mind,Robert S. de Ropp surmised that the original 'dope fiend' peddledcocaine, rather than heroin. But it was expensive; the amphetamines,far cheaper and more easily obtainable, for a while replaced it.When the amphetamines proved an unsatisfactory substitute, cocainebegan to return to favour in American cities. Its high price wasless of an impediment to sales than it had been in the depressed1930s, and provided an incentive to smugglers; Timothy Green estimatedin 1969 that a yachtsman carrying 10 lb. of cocaine to the UnitedStates could make £10,000 on a single trip; and by 1973,according to Thomas Plate in the New York magazine, 10lb. was fetching anything up to $ 160,000 on the market. Withthe raw materials, coca leaves, abundant and cheap, this leftan ample margin to perfect smuggling techniques, and to bribeCustoms or police. Once the cocaine had been brought in, therewas no difficulty in selling it. What Plate called the iron lawof drug marketing, 'supply determines demand', came into operation;whenever it was available, cocaine became ... the drug of choice, not only among whites but ever increasinglyamong affluent black drug users as well . . . Among Latin Americansin New York, cocaine is often the preferred drug of entertainers,expensive prostitutes, very successful businessmen, and certainreligious sects for whom cocaine use is literally an act of faith.And among white drug users, cocaine is especially popular withrock stars, writers, younger actors and actresses, and stockbrokersand other Wall Street types ... And even if all these drugs could have been brought under somecontrol—by, say, the discovery of some instrument on the linesof a Geiger counter, capable of infallibly detecting them—itwould not have solved the problem. Apart from synthetic variants,there were numerous substances which though not sold as drugs,could be used for that purpose—and frequently were. Benzineand glue had long been sniffed 'for kicks', and with the adventof the aerosol can, it was found that there were endless alternatives;'literally hundreds of easily accessible sources', the Le DainCommittee found, including paints, paint removers, lighter fuel,and dry-cleaning fluids: 'it was recently observed that thirty-eightdifferent products containing such substances were available fromthe shelves of a service station's highway store in Ottawa'. Inthe circumstances, the Committee pointed out, effective restrictionwas hardly practicable, 'except at considerable inconvenienceto a large segment of the population'; and, as the large segmentof the population was unlikely to accept that inconvenience, theexistence of these 'substances' created a problem 'which clearlycalls into question the potential of the crimino-legal systemin controlling drug use'. The doors of perception The crimino-legal system of control, whatever its defects, wasat least theoretically relevant so long as there was agreementthat drug-taking was a social evil, which ought to be suppressed.But by this time a different category of drug had come into widespreaduse, supported by testimonials from men whose opinions commandedrespect, who claimed that it could bring great benefit to society. During the war a Basle chemist, Dr. Albert Hofmann, took a minutequantity of an ergot derivative—four-millionths of a gramme—inhis laboratory, and after cycling home with some difficulty ('myfield of vision swayed before me and was distorted like the reflectionsin an amusement park mirror, I had the impression of being unableto move from the spot, although my assistants later told me thatwe had cycled at a good pace') he experienced startling symptoms,which he noted down when he recovered; vertigo, visual disturbances—the faces of those around me appearedas grotesque, coloured masks; marked motor unrest, alternatingwith paralysis; an intermittent feeling in the head, limbs, andthe entire body, as if they were filled with lead: dry, constrictedsensation in the throat; feeling of choking; clear recognitionof my condition, in which I sometimes observed, in the mannerof an independent, neutral observer, that I shouted half insanelyor babbled incoherent words. Occasionally I felt as if I wereout of my body . . . By that time—1943—there was more of a disposition to investigateany drug capable of inducing such a reaction—not out of anyfeeling that the visions might be of value to the beholder, butbecause the Pentagon was looking for a drug which might be usedto facilitate brainwashing, or for disorienting enemy forces inthe field. And as the visions which Hofmann's LSD induced sometimesbore a resemblance to those seen in psychotic states, a few psychiatristsbegan experimenting with it in the hope it might help in the treatmentof schizophrenia. Although the military soon lost interest, andthe psychiatrists' hopes were not realised, LSD was rememberedwhen there was a sudden resurgence of interest in vision-inducingdrugs, following the publication of Aldous Huxley's The Doorsof Perception in 1954. There was nothing strikingly new in Huxley's experience aftertaking mescaline. His description of looking at his bookshelves— Red books, like rubies; emerald books; books bound in white jade;books of agate, or aquamarine, of yellow topaz; lapis lazuli bookswhose colours were so intense, so intrinsically meaningful, thatthey seemed to be on the point of leaving the shelves to thrustthemselves more insistently on my attention —might have come from Havelock Ellis, or from the case historiesprovided earlier by Louis Lewin. But the general public, disillusionedwith civilisation's materialist progress, was more willing bythe 1950s to listen to Huxley's argument that the heightened oraltered perception obtainable from mescaline was worth enjoying,not just in its own right, but for the new insights, the new meanings,it could provide. 'I am not so foolish', he wrote as to equate what happens under the influence of mescaline orof any other drug, prepared or in the future preparable, withthe realisation of the end and ultimate purpose of human life;Enlightenment, the Beatific Vision. All I am suggesting is thatthe mescaline experience is what Catholic theologians call 'agratuitous grace', not necessary to salvation but potentiallyhelpful and to be accepted thankfully, if made available. To beshaken out of the ruts of ordinary perception, to be shown fora few timeless hours the outer and the inner world, not as theyappear to an animal obsessed with survival or to a human beingobsessed with words and notions, but as they are apprehended,directly and unconditionally, by Mind at Large—this is an experienceof inestimable value to everyone and especially to the intellectual. People who wanted to shake themselves out of the ruts of ordinaryperception did not find it easy to obtain mescaline, for whichthe raw material peyote was scarce; but LSD could be manufacturedin a laboratory, and it quickly became the standard drug for thatpurpose. And scientific trials began to confirm—in so far assuch trials could—that it worked. In LSD—Dr. Richard Blumand his associates at Stanford University claimed in 1964—ameans had been found 'for enhancing values or expanding the self,a road to love and better relationships, a device for art appreciationor a spur to creative endeavors, a means of insight, and a doorto religious experience'. For a few individuals, though, researchersadmitted, the consequence of taking LSD was a 'bad trip', involvingexperiences which were disturbing and sometimes terrifying. Storiesbegan to circulate about the destructive effect of these bad tripson promising youths, like those which had been heard about marihuana(or tobacco), but with some characteristic twists—in particular,the much-repeated tale of the girl who told her friends 'look,I can fly!' and stepped to her death from a fourth-floor window. Inevitably, down came the ban—even, in the United States, onresearch into LSD. The outcome was the growth of a cult, cateredfor through a profitable black market. The formula was generallyknown; the materials available; the manufacturing process notdifficult; and distribution ridiculously simple, as LSD, in additionto being tasteless, odourless and colourless, occupied negligiblespace in relation to its potency. Prohibition was immediatelyfollowed, Brecher wrote, (a) by an increase in the availability of LSD, and (b) by an increasein the demand. The increased availability can be explained inpart by the higher prices which law enforcement engendered, andwhich attracted more distributors. The increased demand can similarlybe explained in part by the LSD publicity that legislative actionengendered. As in the case of the opiates, the barbiturates, theamphetamines, glue and other drugs, the warnings functioned aslures. The peyote cult It is possible from the available evidence to show how the attemptto suppress the vision-inducing drugs has failed, and why: becauseit has repeated the self-defeating pattern so often seen before.What is not yet possible is to assess the impact of the mescaline/LSDmovement (or even, for that matter, of the influence of the cannabiscult) on those who came to take it, let alone on society as awhole. Early on, the psychedelic movement split into two main groupings,though they were never clearly differentiated. Both derived fromthe views of Humphrey Osmond—who had introduced Huxley to mescaline:that these drugs 'provide a chance, perhaps only a slender one,for homo faber, the cunning, ruthless, foolhardy pleasure-greedytoolmaker, to merge into that other creature whose presence wehave so rashly presumed, homo sapiens the wise, the understanding,the compassionate'. By some of Osmond's followers, this was takento mean that the function of the drugs was simply to reveal, toanybody who took them, the limitations he had been imposing onhimself; so that he would seek ways, not necessarily through drugs,to explore the potential within himself which he had not knownexisted. But there were others who, like Dr. Timothy Leary, tendedto invest the drugs themselves with almost magical powers, andto propagandise for them on a national—and eventually, on aninternational—scale. By the 1970s the Leary version was beginningto go out of fashion; LSD was being used, if not with more discrimination—itsillegality made this difficult—at least with greater care, inrecognition of the unpredictability of its effects. But the storyof the movement which Huxley and Osmond sparked off, and whichin their different ways William Burroughs, Allen Ginsberg andCarlos Casteneda, among others, pushed along, cannot yet adequatelybe told—not, at least, as history. What can be told is the parallel story of how differently peyotlwas handled in the Indian reservations; and how different theresults. A century ago it was found that the peyotl cult had not,as had for many years been believed, been successfully put downby the Spaniards. After they were driven from Mexico, it beganto re-emerge. The peyotl cactus, anthropologists found, was stillworshipped, though the ceremonial had picked up Christian accretions,originally designed to deceive the Spaniards, but eventually establishingthemselves in their own right, so that the ceremony took the generalform of the Mass, and Jesus's name was involved. Peyotl was stilltaken, though, for the traditional vision-inducing purposes, aswere the morning glory, and the psilocybe mushroom; the Mazatecsbelieved that Jesus had given the mushroom to them, and includedhim and his saints' names in their chants. In the 1880s the peyotl cult began to spread north into the UnitedStates, alarming members of the Commission on Indian Affairs.The Commission's agent in charge of the Comanche reported in 1886that they were getting a kind of cactus from Mexico 'which theyeat, and it produces the same effect as opium, frequently puttingthem to sleep for twenty-four hours at a time'; he forwarded somespecimens for analysis, adding that 'as the habit of using themseems to be growing among them, and is evidently injurious, Iwould respectfully suggest that the same be made contraband'.The Federal Government did not take his advice; but from timeto time individual State legislatures, disturbed by reports thatIndians in their reservations were going over to peyotism, woulddebate how to stop them getting supplies of the drug. The difficultyordinarily was that peyotism was a religion and that it had wrappeditself up in enough Christian doctrine to be able to liken peyotlto communion wine. How far this was originally deliberate policyis hard to tell; but it became so with the foundation of the NativeAmerican Church, whose expressed aims were to foster and promote religious beliefs in Almighty God and thecustoms of the several tribes of Indians throughout the unitedStates in the worship of a heavenly Father, and to promote morality,sobriety, industry, charity and right living and cultivate a spiritof self-respect, brotherly love and union among the members ofthe several tribes of Indians throughout the united States andthrough the sacramental use of peyote But to many Christians, the use of peyotl was not so much sacramentalas sacrilegious; and to many respectable citizens, it was scandalousthat the American Indians should be permitted to enjoy a notoriousdrug. A campaign after the Second World War to have it bannedwas only warded off with difficulty, largely through the effortsof two anthropologists who had studied the subject, Weston LaBarre and J. S. Slotkin. It was amazing, Slotkin observed, tofind that the expert evidence on which the campaigners relied—fantasticstories about the effects of the drug, and the nature of the ritual—wasderived from white and Catholic officials in the reservations;'none of them have had the slightest first-hand experience withthe plant or with the religion, yet some fancy themselves to beauthorities and write Official reports on the subject.' From hisown extensive experience, members of the cult were both more industriousand more temperate in their drinking habits than other Indiansin the reservation. With the renewal of interest in vision-inducing drugs in the 1950s,the campaign against peyotl started up again, this time for fearof what it might do to the white youth of America. In 1964 a Californiacourt ruled that it was a sufficient public danger to justifya ban on it, in violation of religious freedom, because it wasgaining adherents among the hippies; and the rumour circulatedthat it was frequently the cause of insanity. Newspapers beganprinting some of the same kind of stories that had circulatedabout hemp drugs in India. An investigation was set up by Dr.Robert L. Bergman, of the Public Health Services, to follow upthe fifty-odd reports of peyotl-induced psychosis. The vast majorityof the reports, it was found, were simply hearsay, and could notbe traced to any source. Only one single instance was found whichcould be described as 'a relatively clear-cut case of acute psychosis',and that was of a Navajo who, in defiance of the cult's own injunction,had also consumed a quantity of alcohol. Although the cult didnot always 'take'—the Apaches on their Reservations adoptedit for a while, but went back to alcohol, their preferred drug—ingeneral its effects appeared beneficial. 'We have seen many peoplecome through difficult crises with the help of this religion',Dr. Bergman commented, and it appears to me that for many Indian people threatened withidentity-diffusion it provides real help in seeing themselvesnot as people whose place and way in the world is gone but aspeople whose way can be strong enough to change and meet new challenges. The success of the cult, admittedly, does not prove that it wouldhave been possible to establish anything similar among the whitepopulation of America, or of other Western countries. Nor wouldthe obvious alternative—making LSD a prescription drug, to bedealt with by doctors—have worked; few doctors have the requiredinterest or understanding. What the peyotl experience does suggestis that alternatives could have been found to the drug policiesof Western governments, had there been a better appreciation ofwhat was involved. Mao's way In retrospect, then, the lesson which emerges from the confusedhistory of drugs is that though we have been unable to learn theright way to handle them, we have at least been shown what isthe wrong way: prohibition. But there has been one striking exceptionto this rule: Communist China. It seems to be agreed, even byobservers who have little sympathy with the rule of Chairman Mao,that opium has effectively been banished. Three forces were at work to make this possible. Public opinionin China remained hostile to opium, as a foreign imposition. Inso highly communalised a country, it was difficult for those whosmoked opium to do so for long without being detected, and denounced;and even harder for farmers to cultivate poppies. Most importantof all, smuggling became unprofitable because the ordinary commercialchannels through which opium could be illicitly distributed ceasedto exist. In Western countries, though public opinion might be hostile todrugs, there was always sufficient privacy available to enablethose who were able to obtain them to take them with relativelylittle risk; the commercial channels were geared to assist thesmuggler, as was the freedom of movement between country and country;and there was far more purchasing power available to be spenton drugs. China s example, consequently, was irrelevant, and wouldremain so as long as the Western countries retained their traditionaleconomic and social fabric. Chapter 14 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-5IA031-000652-B039-70http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglisp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125804 text/html 14326HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:57:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:10 GMTContent-length: 14107 The Forbidden Game - Postscript Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library Postscript ENDLESSLY, OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS, THE ISSUE HAS BEEN DEBATED;should cannabis, or mescaline, or LSD, be legalised ? The recordof history suggests that the question should be put the otherway round: should such drugs be banned ? For then, the answercan be given unequivocally: no. Prohibition has always failedin free enterprise societies—free, that is, to the extent thatconsumers who have the means can exercise freedom of choice. Ifthey choose drugs, no law can stop them. Prohibition may restrictsupplies, for a time, but that will only drive up prices, bringingin fresh supplies—or different drugs. And this flouting of thelaw breeds disrespect for it, alienates otherwise law-abidingcitizens, and corrupts the law enforcers. The question needs to be re-phrased: not, shall we legalise? but,how shall we legalise? And to this, unfortunately, history givesno satisfactory answer. It is easy to say, as drugs cannot besuppressed, they should be regulated; but at this point the samedifficulty arises as with prostitution. The kind of man to whomdrugs, or prostitutes, are anathema, whether he be an Anslingeror a Muggeridge, finds the prospect of regulating them distasteful.It implies recognition, and they do not want what they regardas a vice to be recognised. They consequently cling to the illusionthat drugs can be suppressed, if only the law is enforced. This leads to a further error of policy. Unwilling to accept theexistence of a distinction between, say, cannabis and heroin,they justify banning both, by claiming 'soft drugs lead on tohard'. They sometimes do; but not nearly so inexorably as theprohibition of soft drugs leads on to hard. The reasonis obvious; hard drugs are both easier and far more profitableto smuggle. The most striking example is what happened in HongKong when opium smoking, which had been tolerated for a century,and had never given the authorities any worry (the rate of addictionto opium among the Chinese, reports often pointed out, was farless serious than the rate of alcoholism among the Europeans onthe island) was banned. After the ban, opium was squeezed outof the market by heroin; and by the 1970s, according to the Commissionerof Police, four-fifths of the men in the island's penal institutionshad been involved in drug offenses.. Much the same happened inVietnam, according to the investigator sent by the Pentagon toexamine the drug situation there. The only beneficiaries froma campaign against marihuana, he reported, had been the heroinpushers. But governments have ignored the evidence that prohibition cannotwork. And this is not surprising, as they have a powerful financialinterest in maintaining a situation in which certain suppliersare allowed to keep their hold over the legal drug market, inreturn for their massive contribution to the revenue. Legalisingcannabis, admittedly, might have augmented the revenue; but therewas always the risk that it would provide a diversion, reducingthe quantity of liquor and tobacco sold. It is never wise to attributecalculation, in such matters, to ministers. Individually, perhaps,none of them may realise how the policies they have followed havecome to be formulated. But revenue has tended to be the overridingconsideration; and anything which has threatened it has been discouraged. This has been illustrated recently in the elaborate efforts whichgovernments have made to appear to be campaigning against cigarettes,as a danger to health, while in fact making very certain thattheir campaign will not, and cannot, succeed. Governments, infact, are the real drug-pushers of our time. They seem to know—bythe instinct of financial self-preservation—that the 'safe'drugs from their point of view are those on which users come todepend, socially as well as psychologically—drink and cigarettes;and they cling to the two of them, in spite of the ugly evidencethat has been building up against them. Cannabis and LSD, whichdo not exert the same hold, would not serve the exchequer nearlyas well. State licensing, therefore, though less disastrous in its consequencesthan prohibition, is an unsatisfactory method. It controls drugs,but to ensure their profitability rather than their safety. Andeven where a measure of safety is sought by handing over responsibilityto the medical profession, the results (though again, better thanprohibition) have been discouraging. There is little in a medicalstudent's training to qualify him to dispense drugs wisely, and,as the medical journals frequently complain, the lavish prescribingof drugs in recent years suggests that doctors are often moreconcerned to save themselves time and trouble, than to find thecause of the patient's disorder. Just as governments are the pimpsof the tobacco and liquor interests, so the medical professionhas allowed itself to become a licensed drug-peddler for the pharmaceuticalindustry. There is little to be hoped from State intervention, therefore,until the electorate begins to grasp the lessons of the past.But as Hegel once complained, what experience and history teachis that 'peoples and governments never have learnt anything fromhistory, or acted on principles derived from it'. And in the caseof drugs, there is an additional reason why the lessons have notbeen learned; the existence of a deep irrational fear of them,which leaves otherwise sensible and intelligent members of thecommunity unwilling to accept that there can be a case for legalisation,let alone to listen to it—even when the objective is the reductionof drug taking. Such people will not accept the realities of the situation—forexample, that alcohol is a drug, and a much more dangerous onethan most of those which are banned. On the other hand, they willswallow the corniest fantasies about other drugs. They believethat heroin, say, has a built-in addictive attraction, so thatanybody taking it once can be enslaved for life. Yet this wasexploded years ago by Louis Lasagna, researching into addictionin America: most people given heroin for the first time, he found(other than for the relief of pain), were either not interested,or actually disliked the experience. As the Le Dain Committeeput it, 'the once popular notion that opiate narcotic experienceis intrinsically pleasurable, or that physiological dependencedevelops so rapidly that most who are subjected to it are promptlyaddicted, is without support'. Then, there is the persistent myth that drugs can turn the ordinarycitizen into a maniac. It is as old as Marco Polo's tale of theOld Man of the Mountain; it has been told of almost every drug;and it still crops up. In 1940 the rumour spread—Evelyn Waughrecalled it in Put Out More Flags—that the German infantrythen sweeping across France was composed of teenagers, druggedbefore battle to make them oblivious of danger, so that they advancedunhesitatingly even when being mown down by allied machine-gunfire. It later transpired that these drugs were amphetamines,issued in case the soldiers needed to stay awake. A quarter ofa century later American troops in Vietnam brought back pillsfound on allegedly drug-crazed Vietcong, who had been wiped outin an insanely reckless attack. On analysis the pills turned outto be antibiotics, sent to Saigon at the expense of the Americantaxpayer, and then discreetly diverted by the minister who receivedthem to the enemy, for the usual consideration. This is not to dispute that a drug—any drug—may precipitatea character change; the gentle, quiet man who gets aggressivewhen drunk is all too familiar a figure to publicans. But thedisorder lies in the individual, or in his life pattern; not inthe drug. Most of the troubles which have arisen are due to society'sfailure to make this distinction. Yet a last line of argumentin favour of the status quo remains. Drugs may not be thecause—any more than cars are the cause of road accidents; butin irresponsible hands drugs, like cars, can be lethal. Does thisnot require intervention, by the State or some duly authorisedbody, for society's protection ? Looked at from this point of view, drugs have three main dangers.Unquestionably the most serious is intoxication. In the long term,though man has an astonishing capacity to survive his chosen poisons,certain drugs can be shown to have deleterious consequences, onthe evidence of mortality statistics; and in the short term, peopleunder their influence—whether at the wheel of a car, or at theheel of a drunken argument—can be very destructive. But as theintoxicant which has the worst long-term health record is tobacco,and the one with the worst short-term accident record is alcohol,this represents an argument for stricter control of establisheddrugs, rather than of those which are illegal. The risk of addiction—the second reason commonly given whena repressive drug policy is being defended—has now been shownto be less a drug problem, in the strict sense, than a psychologicaldisorder. Unless drugs of all kinds, including nutmeg and paintremover, could be removed from the market, there is little pointin hoping that it can be dealt with by legislation. It is the third common consequence of drug-taking which presentsthe real challenge; the personality change which some people undergoas a result of introduction to cannabis or LSD. Their record inother respects is much better than alcohol and tobacco. They donot intoxicate, unless taken in improbably large doses; they arenot addictive; and their adverse effects on health, so far ascan be judged on the evidence available, are relatively insignificant.But they confront society with an issue that it has been unwillingto face. People may need these drugs; not in their own right,but as a preliminary to restoration of the link, largely lost,between man's consciousness, and all that lies beyond it. Thepersonality change may be for their benefit. The positive values people find in the drug experience—as theLe Dain Committee put it—'bear a striking similarity to traditionalreligious values, including the concern with the soul, or innerself. The spirit of renunciation, the emphasis on openness andthe closely-knit community, are part of it, but there is definitelya sense of identification with something larger, something towhich one belongs as part of the human race.' This theme was takenup by Andrew Weil in his The Natural Mind. Weil arguedthat to think of drug-taking, or even of drug-addiction, as somethingto be prevented or cured is a mistake. The sensation, and thecraving, are symptoms of a psychic need. He produced evidencewhich indicates that there is no great difficulty in getting peopleoff even heroin, provided they have, as it were, something tolook forward to—which suggests that withdrawal symptoms mayrepresent not simply the body's resistance to being deprived ofa drug, but the mind's resistance to being deprived of its effects. To Weil, however, this does not entail believing that cannabis,say, should be legalised. On the contrary, in his testimony tothe Shafer Commission he opposed it, on the ground that it wouldbe used in ways as unintelligent as tobacco and alcohol ordinarilyare. The drug scene cannot be changed by tinkering with the law,he argued, because it is 'a manifestation of useless ways of thinkingat all levels of society—among users of drugs as well as ofnon-users'. Drug use, and drug abuse, are a reflection of society, its tensions,its values, and its needs. To punish drug-takers is like a drunkstriking the bleary face which he sees in the mirror. Drugs willnot be brought under control until society itself changes, enablingmen to use them with discrimination, and perhaps in time to dispensewith them. Acknowledgements Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-6IA031-000652-B039-98http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglisa.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125832 text/html 24876HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:58:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:05 GMTContent-length: 24657 The Forbidden Game - End Pages Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library Acknowledgements ANYBODY KNOWN TO BE WRITING ABOUT DRUGS CAN COUNT UPON gettingcountless ideas and suggestions and occasionally a valuable leadtowards books or authors he has never heard of. I have been verylucky, in this respect; finding myself more than once in possessionof a scrap of paper with some reference on it, and rememberingonly that I had received it from some chance acquaintance at aparty. To all those who have helped me in this way, my thanks;and especially to Frances Fitzgerald, Dr. Griffith Edwards, ProfessorMax Gluckman, Professor Bernard Lewis, Dr. Jonathan Miller, Dr.Neal E. Miller, Professor Michael Shepherd, Dr. Gerry Stimson,Frances Verrinder, R. G. Wasson, and Lyall Watson. Francis Huxleymade some suggestions about the section on drugs in primitivesocieties which I was glad to incorporate; Raye Farr, and BillGrundy read a preliminary draft (I hope I have profited from theirastringent comments) and, along with Bernard Levin (I wish I couldhave included some of his asides) somehow also found the timeto do the invaluable chore of proof-reading. I am also gratefulto Jasper Woodcock and his team at the Institute for the Studyof Drug Dependence; but my chief debt is to the London Library,for the help from its staff, and for the access to its shelves,where I could browse at random in the—to me—often unfamiliarterritory into which the research so often lured me. Sources IN HIS BOOK ON COCA, PUBLISHED IN 1901, W. G. MORTIMER WAS ableto boast that he had collected 600 titles of articles and bookson that drug alone. The bibliography compiled a few years agoby the U.N. Economic and Social Committee on Narcotic Drugs listednearly 2,000 sources of material on cannabis. In its interim reporton drugs in Canada, the Le Dain Committee stated that there werealready some 3,000 reports on LSD in scientific journals. WhenJoseph Robert wrote his history of tobacco, in 1949, the standardresearch guide contained over 6,000 titles; when he came to revisethe book in 1967, he found that the guide, which was also beingrevised, was expected to include a further 4,000 titles. Nobody,so far as I know, has tried to keep count of the works on opiumand its derivatives, but they would certainly reach five figures.As for alcohol, the library at Rutgers University, which specialisesin the subject, is reputed to contain 40,000 items. The writer of any work purporting to be a history is ordinarilyanxious that his bibliography should display the extent and depthof his research; in admitting that mine has been far from comprehensive,I can only plead these figures in mitigation. And there has beenanother difficulty. As my concern had been mainly with the socialrather than the pharmacological effects of drugs, several academicdisciplines have been involved. Information about attitudes todrugs can be found not only in many social histories, but in workson anthropology, ethnology, mythology, theology, phenomenology,ecology, etymology and archeology, as well as in the descriptionsof travellers, explorers and botanists. It has consequently beenan enormous advantage when some professional—or an inspiredamateur, like R. G. Wasson—has already researched some partof the territory, and published his findings; but such ventureshave been regrettably few. There are also some gaps, which cannot be filled until more—ormore reliable—information becomes available; drug use behindthe Iron Curtain, for example. So the structure of the book, witheach chapter devoted to a theme, is designed as far as possibleto make use of the material which is available, to illustratedevelopments in attitudes, to, and legislation about, drugs, ratherthan to try to cover all the historical ground. Where I have quoted from early sources, I have where necessarytranslated the text into modern English; standardized spelling(sometimes to personal preference: peyotl rather than the nowmore common peyote); and occasionally modified punctuation orgrammar, for clarity. BIBLIOGRAPHY For the sake of brevity, I have omitted standard histories, biographies,journals, etc.; nor have I listed the individual state paperswhich are the chief source of material for the later chapters. The place and date of publication refer to the edition I haveconsulted, which is not necessarily the first edition. Aaronson, Bernard, and Humphrey Osmond, Psychedelics, London,1971 Abrams, Stephen, 'Cannabis Law Reform in Britain', (MarijuanaPapers, 1972) Adams, E. W., Drug Addiction, Oxford, 1937 Alexander, General R., The Rise and Progress of British opiumsmuggling, London, 1856 Alexander, H. G., Narcotics in India and South Asia, London,1930 Allegro, John, The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross, London,1971 Allen, Dr Nathan, The Opium Trade, Boston, 1850 Allsop, Kenneth, The Bootleggers, London, 1961 Anderson, J. W., Fiji, London, 1880 Andrews, George, and Simon Vinkenoog (editors), The Book ofGrass, London, 1967 Anselmini, O., ABC of Narcotic Drugs, Geneva, 1931 Anslinger, Harry, and William Tompkins, The Traffic in Narcotics,New York, 1953 Anslinger, Harry, and Will Oursler, The Murderers, NewYork,1961 Anslinger, Harry, and J. D. Gregory, The Protectors, NewYork, 1964 Anstie, Francis, Stimulants and Narcotics, London, 1864 Bailey, S. H., The Anti-Drug Campaign, London, 1936 Banks, Sir Joseph, Journal 1768-71, London, 1896 Baudelaire, Charles, My Heart Laid Bare (edited by PeterQuennell), London, 1950 Beaglehole, J. C., The Journals of Captain Cook (HakluytSociety), Cambridge, 1961 Beattie, John, and John Middleton (editors), Spirit Mediumshipand Society in Africa, London, 1969 Beecher, Henry K., 'The Powerful Placebo' (in Journal of theAmerican Medical Association, December 24th, 1955) Benzoni, Girolamo, History of the New World (tr. AdmiralW. H. Smyth; Hakluyt Society), Cambridge, 1851 Bloomquist, E. R., Marijuana, Beverley Hills, 1968 Blue, Frederick, When a State Goes Dry, Ohio, 1961 Boyer, S. S., Hemp, New York, 1900 Brecher, Edward M., Licit and Illicit Drugs, Boston, 1972 Brereton, William H., The Truth about Opium, London, 1882 Brinton, Daniel G., The Myths of the New World, Philadelphia,1896 Brooks, Jerome E. (editor), Tobacco (five volumes), NewYork, 1937 —The Mighty Leaf, London, 1953 Brown, F. C., Hallucinogenic Drugs, Springfield, III.,1972 Burroughs, William, 'Points of distinction between sedatives andconsciousness-expanding drugs' (Marijuana Papers, 1972) Burton, Richard (translator), The Book of the Thousand Nightsand a Night, Benares, 1885 Castaneda, Carlos, The Teachings of Don Juan, Los Angeles,1971 —A Separate Reality, London, 1971 Catlin, George, Liquor Control, London, 1931 Central Control Board (Liquor Traffic) Advisory Committee Report,Alcohol: its action on the human organism, London, 1918(The D'Abernon Report) Chang, Hsin-pao, Commissioner Lin and the Opium War, Harvard,1964 Cherrington, Ernest, History of the Anti-Saloon League, Ohio,1913 Chinese Repository, 1832 ff Christlieb, Theodore, The Indo-British opium trade and itseffect (translated by D. Croom), London, 1879 Claridge, Gordon, Drugs and Human Behaviour, London, 1970 Clark, Walter, Chemical Ecstasy, New York, 1969 Cocteau, Jean, Opium: the diary of a cure (translated byMargaret Crosland), London, 1957 Cohen, Sidney, Drugs of Hallucination, London, 1964 Collis, Maurice, Foreign Mud, London, 1946 Connell, K. H., Irish Peasant Society, Oxford, 1968 Cook, Captain, Voyages of Discovery, London, 1906 Costin, W. C., Great Britain and China 1833-60, Oxford,1937 Cotlow, Lewis, In Search of the Primitive, London, 1967 Cust, Robert, The Opium Question, London, 1885 Czaplicka, M. A., Aboriginal Siberia, Oxford, 1914 D'Avenant, Charles, 'An Essay upon Ways and Means' (Politicaland Commercial Works, London, 1771) Dennett, Tyler, Americans in Eastern Asia, New York, 1941 De Quincey, Thomas, Confessions of an English Opium Eater,London, 1967 D'Erlanger, Baron Henry, The Last Plague of Egypt, London,1936 De Ropp, Robert S., Drugs and the Mind, London, 1958 De Vesme, Caesar, Primitive Man, London, 1931 Dowdeswell, G. F. 'The Coca Leaf' (Lancet, April 29th,May 6th 1876) Drake, William Daniel Jr., The Connoisseur's Handbook of Marijuana,London, 1971 Dunn, Will, The Opium Traffic in its International Aspects,New York, 1920 Eatwell, W. C., On the Poppy Cultivation, Calcutta, 1851 Elaide, Mircea, Myths, Dreams and Mysteries, London, 1960 —Shamanism, New York, 1964 Ellis, E. S., Ancient Anodynes, London, 1946 Ellis, Havelock, 'Mescal: a new artificial paradise' (ContemporaryReview, January 1898) Emboden, William, Narcotic Plants, London, 1972 Evans-Pritchard, Edward Evans, Witchcraft among the Azande,Oxford, 1937 —Nuer Religion, Oxford, 1956 Fairbank, John, L., Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast1841-54, Cambridge, Mass., 1953 Fairholt, F. W., Tobacco, London, 1870 Fleming, Peter, One's Company, London, 1934 —'A Far Eastern Inquiry' (Times, March 8th, 1935) Forsyth, Frederick, 'The Killer Poppy' (Telegraph Magazine,August 11th, 18th, 25th 1973) Freeman-Mitford, A. B., Attaché at Peking, London,1900 French, Richard, Nineteen Centuries of Drink in England,London, 1884 Fry, Edward, 'China, England and Opium' (Contemporary Review,February 1876) Fry, William Storrs, Facts and Evidence relating to the OpiumTrade, London, 1840 Fryer, John, A New Account of East India and Persia (HakluytSociety), 1909 Fuller, Henry C., The Story of Drugs, London, 1922 Furst, Peter T., Flesh of the Gods, London, 1972 Garcilaso de las Vegas, Royal Commentaries of the Incas (translatedby H. V. Livermore), Austin, 1966 Gautier, Theophile, The Hashish Club (translated by RalphGladstone; Marijuana Papers, 1972) Gavit, John P., Opium, London, 1925 Gelfand, Michael, Witch Doctor, London, 1964 Geller, Allen, and Maxwell Boas, The Drug Beat, New York,1969 Ginsberg, Allen, 'First manifesto' (Marijuana Papers, 1972) Gluckman, Max, Politics, Law and Ritual in Tribal Society,Oxford, 1965 Goldenweiser, Alexander, Early Civilisation, London, 1923 Goode, Erich (editor), Marijuana, New York, 1969 —The Marijuana Smoker, New York, 1970 Gorer, Geoffrey, Africa Dances, London, 1935 Green, Timothy, The Smugglers, London, 1969 Greenberg, Michael, British Trade and the Opening of China,1800-47, Cambridge, 1951 Gustaitis, Rasa, Turning On, New York, 1969 Von Hagen, Victor, Highway of the Sun, London, 1856 Haggard, Howard W., Devils, Drugs and Doctors, New York,1929 Von Hammer, History of the Assassins, (translated O. Wood),London, 1835 Hariot, Thomas, The New Found Land of Virginia, Ann Arbor,1931 Harner, Michael J. (editor), Hallucinogens and Shamanism, Oxford,1973 Harrison, Brian, Drink and the Victorians, London, 1971 Hassell, Arthur, 'Properties and Effects of Tobacco' (Lancet,February 21st, 1857) Haynes, Roy, Prohibition Inside Out, London, 1924 Hayter, Alethea, Opium and the Romantic Imagination, London,1968 Hemming, John, The Conquest of the Incas, London, 1970 Hesse, Erich, Narcotics and Drug Addiction, New York, 1941 Heward, Edward, St. Nicotine, New York, 1909 Hill, J. Spencer, The Indo-Chinese Opium Trade, London,1884 Hillier, Sydney, Popular Drugs, London, 1910 Hollingworth, H. L., The influence of caffeine on mental andmotor efficiency, New York, 1912 Holt, Edgar, The Opium Wars in China, London, 1964 Hosie, Sir Alexander, On the Trail of the Opium Poppy (twovolumes), London, 1914 Hsu, Immanuel, The Rise of Modern China, New York, 1970 Huby, Pamela, and C. W. M. Wilson, 'The effect of centrallyactingdrugs on ESP ability in normal subjects' (Journal of the Societyfor Psychical Research, June 1961) Hunter, Monica, Reaction to Conquest, Oxford, 1936 Hunter, W. C., The 'Fan-Rwae' at Canton, Shanghai, 1911 Huxley, Aldous, The Doors of Perception, London, 1954 —Heaven and Hell, New York, 1955 —Island, London, 1962 Im Thurn, Everard, Among the Indians of Guiana, London,1883 James I, King of England, Counterblaste to Tobacco, London,1604 James, William, The Varieties of Religious Experience,New York, 1925 Johnson, Donald McI., Indian Hemp; a Social Menace, London,1952 Johnston, James F. W., The Chemistry of Common Life, London,1879 Jones, Howard, Alcoholic Addiction, London, 1963 Jones, John, The Mysteries of Opium Revealed, London, 1701 Kidd, Dudley, The Essential Kafir, London, 1904 Kluver, Heinrich, Mescal, London, 1928 Koskowski, W., The Habit of Tobacco Smoking, London, 1955 Kroeber, A. L., Anthropology, London, 1923 Kunnes, Richard, The American Heroin Empire, New York,1973 La Barre, Weston, The Peyote Cult, New Haven, 1938 La Farge, Oliver, A Pictorial History of the American Indians,New York, 1956 La Guardia, Committee on Marihuana, Report, New York, 1944 La Motte, Ellen N., The Opium Monopoly, New York, 1920 —The Ethics of Opium, New York, 1924 —Opium at Geneva (articles reprinted from the Nationmagazine), London, 1930 Lane, E. W., The Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians,London, 1908 Lang, Andrew, Myth, Ritual and Religion (two volumes),London, 1887 Laurie, Peter, Drugs, London, 1967 Leary, Timothy, The Politics of Ecstasy, New York, 1965 Le Dain, Gerald, et al., The non-medical use of drugs (interimreport of the Canadian Government Inquiry, 1970), London, 1971 —Final Report, Ottawa, 1973 Levy, Hermann, Drink, London, 1951 Lewin, Louis, Phantastica, London, 1931 Lewis, Bernard, The Assassins, London, 1967 Livingstone, David, Missionary Travels, London, 1857 Ludlow, FitzHugh, The Hashish Eater, New York, 1960 MacAndrew, Craig, and Robert Edgerton, Drunken Comportment:a social explanation, Chicago, 1969 McBain, Howard L., Prohibition: legal and illegal, NewYork, 1928 McCord, William, and Joan McCord, Origins of Alcoholism,London, 1960 Mackenzie, Compton, Sublime Tobacco, London, 1957 Malinowski, B., Magic, Science and Religion and other essays,Boston, 1948 Masters, Robert, and Jean Houston, The Varieties of PsychedelicExperience, London, 1967 Mattison, J. B., 'Cocaine drugs and cocaine addiction' (Lancet,May 21st, 1887) Medhurst, W. H., China, London, 1840 Melland, Frank, In Witch-bound Africa, London, 1923 Michelet, Jules, The Sorceress (translated by A. R. Allison),London, 1905 Mill, J. S., Essay on Liberty, London, 1972 Mitchell, S. Weir, 'Remarks on the effects of the Anhalonium Lewinii(the Mescal Button)' (British Medical Journal, December5th, 1896) Monardes, Nicolas, Joyful News out of the New Found World,New York. 1925 Moore, James J., et al. (UN Social Defence Research Institute),Psychoactive drug control: issues and recommendations,Rome, 1973 Moorehead, Alan, The Fatal Impact, London, 1966 Morse, H. B., International Relations of the Chinese Empire,1834-60, London, 1910 —The Chronicles of the East India Company trading to China,1635-1834 (five volumes), Oxford, 1926 Mortimer, W. G., Peru: History of Coca, the 'divine plant'of the Incas, New York, 1901 Moser, Brian, and Donald Tayler, The Cocaine Eaters, London,1965 Nadel, S. F., 'A Study of Shamanism in the Nube Mountains' (Journalof the Royal Anthropological Society, 1946 (1)) O'Shaughnessy, W. B., On the Preparation of Indian Hemp, Calcutta,1842 Owen, David, British Opium Policy in China and India, NewHaven, 1934 Payne, Ronald, et al., 'Cannabis on Demand: Britain's drug dilemma'(Sunday Telegraph, November l9th, 26th, 1972) 'Philaretes', Work for Chimney Sweepers, London, 1602 Pliny, Natural History (four volumes), London, 1856 Puharich, Andrija, The Sacred Mushroom, New York, 1959 Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford, History of Java, London,1817 Rathbone, W., and L. Fanshawe, Liquor Legislation in the UnitedStates and Canada, London, 1895 Raymond, Irving, The Teaching of the Early Church on the Useof Strong Drink, New York, 1927 Reich, Charles, The Greening of America, New York, 1972 Robert, Joseph, The Story of Tobacco in America, Universityof N. Carolina, 1967 Rolleston, Humphrey, Report of the Committee on morphine andheroin addiction, London 1926 Rosenthal, Franz, The Herb: Hashish in Medieval Muslim Society,Leiden, 1971 Rouhier, Alexandre, Le Petotl, Paris, 1927 —Les Plantes Divinatoires, Paris, 1927 Rowntree, Joseph, and Arthur Sherwell, Public Control of theLiquor Tratic, London, 1903 Rowntree, Joseph, The Imperial Drug Trade, London, 1906 Rush, Dr Benjamin, An inquiry into the effects of ardent spiritsupon the human body and mind, Brookfield, 1814 Russell, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Egyptian Service 1902-46,London, 1949 Sacks, O., Awakenings, London, 1973 Schofield, Michael, The Strange Case of Pot, London, 1971 Schmidt, Jacob, Narcotics, Springfield, III., 1959 Schultes, Richard E, 'An overview of hallucinogens in the WesternHemisphere' (in Furst, 1972) Shadwell, Arthur, Drink, Temperance, and Legislation, London,1902 Shafer, Raymond, et al., Drug Use in America (2nd Reportof the National Commission on Marihuana and drug abuse) Washington,1973 Shepherd, Michael, 'The classification of psychotropic drugs'(Psychological Medicine, May 1972) Silvestre de Sacy, Sur la dynastie des Assassins et sur l'originede leur nom, Paris, 1809 Sinclair, Andrew, Prohibition, London, 1962 Slotkin, J. S., Menomini Peyotism, Philadelphia, 1952 Smith, Sydney, 'The Licensing of Alehouses' (Edinburglt Review,September 1826) Solomon, David (editor), The Marijuana Papers, London,1972 Sonnini, C. S., Travels in Egypt (three volumes, translatedby Henry Hunter), London, 1790 Stevenson, Robert Louis, Works (vol. XVIII), London, 1912 Talalay, Paul (editor), Drugs in Our Society, Baltimore,1964 Taylor, Norman, Narcotics; Nature's Dangerous Gifts, London,1963 —Plant Drugs that changed the world, London, 1966 Terry, Charles, and Mildred Pellins, The Opium Problem, MontclairN.J., 1970 Thelwall, A. S., The Iniquities of the Opium Trade with China,London, 1839 Thomas, Keith, Religion and the Decline of Magic, London,1971 Thomson, Basil, The Fijians, London, 1908 Tinling, J. F., The Poppy Plague, and England's Crime,London, 1876 Von Tschudi, J. J., Travels in Peru, London, 1847 Tuohy, Ferdinand, Inside Dope, London, 1834 Turner, F. S., British Opium Policy, London, 1876 Tylor, Edward B., Primitive Culture (two volumes), London,1929 Underhill, Ruth M., Papago Indian Religion, New York, 1946 Wasson, E. A., Religion and Drink, New York, 1914 Wasson, R. G., and Valentina Wasson, Mushrooms, Russia andHistory (two volumes), New York, 1957 Wasson, R. G., Soma; divine mushroom of immortality, NewYork, 1968 Watson, Lyall, Supernature, London,1973 Watt, George, A Dictionary of the Economic Products of India,London, 1892 Watts, Alan, The Joyous Cosmology, New York, 1971 Weddel, H. A., Voyage dans le nord de la Bolivie, Paris,1853 Weil, Andrew, The Natural Mind, London, 1973 Whipple, Sidney B., Noble Experiment, London, 1964 Wighton, Charles, Dope International, London,1960 Wilkinson, Paul, 'Cannabis Indica; a historical and pharmacologicalstudy of the drug' (British Journal of Inebriety, October1929) Williams, S. Wells, The Middle Kingdom (two volumes), NewYork, 1883 Willoughby, W. W., Opium as an international problem, Baltimore,1925 Wilson, A. J. C., 'Ayahuasca, Peyotl, Yage' (Proceedings ofthe Society for Psychical Research, 1949) Wilson, George B., Alcohol and the Nation, London, 1940 Wolf, Stewart, 'Effects of suggestion . . . the pharmacology ofplaceboes' (Journal of Clinical Investigation, 1950) Wolff, Pablo, Marijuana in Latin America; the threat it constitutes,Washington, 1949 Wootton Committee on drugs, Report, London, 1969 Zaehner, Robert, Drugs, mysticism and make-believe, London,1972 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-7IA087-000632-B029-54http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univfore.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064932 text/html 9736HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:49:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:29 GMTContent-length: 9518 The Center of the Universe - Foreword Foreword It is perfectly natural that man himself should be the most unintelligible part of the universe. —Alan Watts Man himself is the last frontier. The so-calledhard sciences, the sciences dealing with objects, atoms andmolecules to stars and galaxies, or with numbers, energies,fields and innumerable abstractions, are nearing a degree ofperfection unimagined in the wildest fantasies of the medievalalchemists. Yet sciences dealing with man himself, despite theconfident tomes warping the shelves of our libraries andbookstores, remain in a state of rapid evolution, to put itkindly. There are even fundamental differences of opinion as towhy the study of humankind is so difficult. Nowhere among the sciences of man do we findcontroversy and confusion more rampant than in the study of themind. Some, who profess to study only the hardest of objectivefacts, have proposed that the mind is nothing but a computerprogram. Another school of thought would eliminate mindaltogether. For several decades the academic tyranny ofBehaviorism made it practically obscene even to mention suchwords as consciousness, belief, intention or free will in ascientific journal, a state of affairs which stifled progress inpsychology for half a century. Now it seems, as Jimmy Durante wasfond of remarking, "everybody wants ta' get inta' deact." Several top-rate books and a great many articles haverecently appeared, taking up such subjects with a vigor typicalof the aftermath of some prohibition or repression, in this casea repression of ideas whose development in the work of suchpioneers as William James came to a halt at the beginning of the20th Century. It is not my intention to berate the manyauthors and researchers who have struggled with such problemsover the past several decades. They have faced the most difficultproblems ever faced in the scientific search for truth, and hardresults have been difficult to achieve. Such wide-open fields infact provide, and have historically provided the greatestopportunity for the scientific revolutionary, who should wellknow the risks involved in exploring uncharted territory. But Ido wish to stress that with all the so-called progress that 20thCentury science has achieved, there remains a rather large andimportant area of understanding that is still in the stone-age ofdevelopment: man's understanding of himself; and it is thedifficulty of the subject, not the intelligence of the professorswhich is the problem. With difficult subjects however, we often findwith hindsight that fairly obvious leads were ignored at criticalperiods of research: a few strange ideas advanced by someoutsider or non-expert, or some heresy proposed by an iconoclast,seemingly to cause dismay and discord and without serious valueto ongoing work. Or perhaps anomalous experimental results werecast aside, ignored as irrelevant or the result of someundetermined experimental or methodological error. All greattruths begin as blasphemies, noted George Bernard Shaw. Asestablished experts in a field seldom publish blasphemies, wemight learn something from history and pay more attention tooutsiders, non-experts and the like, for if their suggestionsreally are worthless, this should not be difficult to prove, ifthe theories and models of the established discipline are inorder and working efficiently. The historian of science ThomasKuhn pointed out that scientific revolutions are almost alwaysinitiated by young workers, or those new to the field theyrevolutionize. It may be objected that the non-expert hasinsufficient grasp of the fundamentals, or is not fluent enoughto distinguish superficial anomalies in a field from importantones, or is lacking in a command of the accumulated technique ofthe discipline thus making the likelihood of his work being thecatalyst for an ensuing scientific revolution negligible. Suchobjections would be significant in well-developed sciences: wewould not expect a non-chemist to revolutionize even a smallcorner of the field of chemistry, or a truck driver to providedeep new insights in quantum mechanics. But in a field in which agenerally agreed paradigm seems a far-distant dream, a fieldstill in the stone-age of development, the outsider, or awell-read amateur, may well be in a position to supply the key torevolution. For one thing, he has no great intellectualinvestment in one competing school of thought or another. In afield of study ripe for fundamental change where reputations andcareers are on the line, we might expect the entrenched expertsto be the least likely candidates to introduce revolutionaryhypotheses. In the following pages I propose a ratherwide-ranging theory concerning man, his mind and brain, behavior,his evolution and anthropology, his sociology and psychology,religion and apostasy, myth and metaphysic, sciences andcertainties, and it will already be obvious that no writer canpossibly be an expert in such a wide selection of topics. But mytheory may amount to more than armchair speculation if I havediscovered and developed one of the important clues largelyignored by the experts, one of the leads which with hindsightwill be seen to have provided the key to a revolution inunderstanding. Of course my lack of expertise in the subjects Ineed to examine must predictably lead to criticism from theprofessionals; no doubt I abuse their terminologies andmisinterpret some of the finer points of their disciplines, orworse. But I believe that the errors noted will be, for the mostpart, technicalities, or simply part of the ongoing controversyin a given field and inconsequential to the overall theory I willpresent. In constructing this theory, and in the presentdescription of the results of my inquiries, I have tried to liveup to the view expressed by Aldous Huxley, when he saw hisposition as one of bridge-builder between areas of knowledge thathad previously been too separated or independent, one body ofknowledge ignoring or even rejecting another for no reason otherthan tradition, or as a result of the peculiarities of the way inwhich students become trained and indoctrinated in a field. Thusthe durability of the theory I have shaped will be a function notof the accuracy of fine details which will have to be filled inor corrected over time, but of the overall concept of the theoryand its ability to combine and predict: Combine disparate aspectsof present understanding and predict future observations andtrends in this primary area of man's search for truth. And if itis a good theory, it may also provide an understanding whichcould assist in improving the condition of man, the relationshipsbetween his societies and nations, and the increasingly fragilebond linking him with his only available home, the planet Earth. I have tried to write a book which will not onlyhold the interest of a wide audience, but contribute tounderstanding both by professionals and laymen alike. Thus thereare some autobiographical passages, hopefully entertaining andillustrative of yet another, hidden side of the cultural andsocial upheaval of the 1960's, but the story line is also thehistory of the ideas which led to the theory and so is intendedas an enticement for the non-technical reader to think about somescientific subjects he has probably very little knowledge of, orinterest in. For professional readers, or those laymen whoalready are following some of the current debates in the subjectsdealt with here, I have tried to construct the more technicalparts of the book so that they flow smoothly, and areunencumbered by the myriad definitions and explanations thatwould be essential for the non-technical reader. For him, I canrecommend that the more difficult passages may safely be quicklyscanned, and the terms and ideas expressed therein may be betterunderstood by referring to the Glossary provided at the end ofthe book. But a thorough understanding of some of the moretechnical evidence for the theory should not be necessary tograsp its overall intent or scope. Although it is customary at the beginning of abook to thank the friends and co-workers who have contributed tothe author's completion of his task, the many persons who havebeen instrumental to my own work shall remain unnamed with theexception of other authors whose works are listed in thebibliography. I will not single out any names here for specialthanks either, as I have had very limited contact with themexcept through their published works. Reasons for theseconditions should soon become obvious from what is to follow. Table of Contents Chapter 1WT01-B36-8IA087-000632-B029-77http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064942 text/html 23874HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:49:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:20:15 GMTContent-length: 23655 The Center of the Universe - Chapter 1 1. Beginnings Mexico, early in 1968. With a few friends ofsimilar disposition, I have left the deteriorating summer-of-lovecounter-culture scene of New York City on an adventure destinedto occupy the next quarter-century of my life. We follow in thefootsteps of many other seekers, both professional and amateur,who have sought to know more about the astonishing collection ofpsychoactive plants indigenous to the tropical and semi-tropicalregions of the New World. Native Americans had discovered theseplants many thousands of years before, and almost withoutexception they came to be of major importance for the tribes andcivilizations which grew to prominence long before the arrival ofthe white man. Each of us has his own reasons for embarking onsuch a voyage, the immediate and conscious reasons each wouldhave stated having perhaps little to do with underlyingmotivations that would be seen as important only from the distantfuture. One friend has come along, offering to assist me in my asyet vague project of finding and experimenting with some of thesemysterious plants. Another is to meet a friend who hasestablished a modest trade with rural farmers who grow the famedvariety of cannabis known as Acapulco Gold. Another seems merelyto be along for the ride. And of course we are all in that stageof youth where little risk is perceived in launching into themost uncertain or unplanned projects with little more than atotal faith in one's ability to improvise. From the wisdom ofmiddle age, this could only be seen as a recipe for disaster;from the perspective of youth, it is the essence of opportunity. But, at least for myself, the hidden catalystswhich propel me in this uncertain direction are not altogetherundiscovered. There is a war going on, I'm supposed to befighting it. I'm supposed to be a member of a society which hasbeen shaped so skillfully with regard to democratic principlesand respect for freedom that it is not only unnecessary, butindicative of some mental or spiritual pathology to question thefundamentals of this system which now finds itself living up tothe worst travesties it had imagined of its arch-enemy just a fewyears before. My fifth grade teacher had impressed me with thefact that the reason I didn't know what propaganda was, was thatwe simply didn't have that sort of thing here in America. But theRussians... And then there are these persistent ideassurfacing in my mind about Native Americans, for I had been doingmy homework reading about the many ways in which it could clearlybe seen that, despite all current mythology, it had been theNative Americans who had had the superior culture and wisdom atthe point of contact between themselves and the Europeaninvaders. It was the white man who had played the role ofbarbarian on that sad stage of conquest and slaughter, and it wasnow the white man who continued in his supreme arrogance by justrecently outlawing not only the use, but even further researchwith these so-called hallucinogenic drugs so important to theindigenous peoples of the conquered land. According to theofficial doctrine, the effect of these drugs is to mimicpsychosis or model something akin to schizophrenia, with theever-persistent risk of permanent psychological impairment andeven suicide. Each one of us has had several experiences with apsychedelic drug and to us it is not the drug experience but theofficial doctrine that is psychotic and symptomatic of a severecollective psychological impairment in society itself. Never, wefeel, was there a successful society so easy to be alienatedfrom, so absurd in its pronouncements and ongoing policies ofunending conquest. The enormity of the Great Sin of EuropeanCivilization enters into our conversations only briefly,obliquely, for these areearly days and we are more attuned to"what if" than to what was. I have brought along somerudimentary laboratory equipment and my assistant and I installourselves in a little rented bungalow on the outskirts ofGuadalajara. We plan expeditions into the countryside both nearand far to look for the psychedelic plants which beckon like somespecies of holy grail oh so unholy to that society we so readilyleft behind. At the public market buying oranges we discover wehave already succeeded in our first objective, for on the upperlevel there is an entire wing of the market devoted to stallsselling traditional medicines and shamanic items of the mostdiverse character. Peyote cacti are suspended in rows along theshop windows, and are hawked to gringos passing by. It isdifficult to judge whether the twinkle in the eye of the shamanicapothecary at the prospect of daily increasing sales of such acommon item is even greater than that in the eye of theprospective rebel from American Ignorance about to embark on themost ancient voyage of mankind. We negotiate for a fifty kilo sack of peyotecactus to be delivered the next day and depart. To say that ourspirits and anticipation are high captures only the mostsublunary aspects of the moment. Over glasses of orange juice, myassistant and I review our plans for isolation of a totalalkaloidal extract of the sacramental plant, a preparation thatshould produce the exact effect of peyote taken the traditionalway, without the nausea and discomfort produced by the highcontent of soap in the raw plant material. The active psychedelicfraction of the plant we know contains several closely relatedalkaloids, and we want to experiment with the hypothesis thatthis blend of alkaloids produces a psychedelic experiencesuperior to that of synthesized mescaline, the principal alkaloidof the mixture. We have both taken the synthesized alkaloid inNew York on one or more occasions, and although the resultingexperiences were complex, mysterious, highly instructive, andcertainly intense yet gentle, we feel that there was a certainlack, difficult to put your finger on, of the sense ofspirituality described by those anthropologists and otherresearchers who had undergone the experience with the naturalproduct during the Native American ceremonies. The ritual andsetting of such ceremonies play a major role we know, but ourintent is to test the effect of the psychedelic preparationitself in determining outcome. The next few days are occupied with slicing,preparing, and drying the cactus tops, and we even replant theconical tuber-like remains so that they have a chance toregenerate the parts we have amputated. A two-liter Osterizerblender facilitates a primary extraction with aqueous alcohol,and a series of liquid-liquid extractions to separate the soaps,chlorophyll and other miscellaneous impurities results in ourproud possession of a small flask containing an amber,semi-crystalline syrup, practically odorless but having thecharacteristic taste of synthesized mescaline sulfate. From here,chromatographic or other simple processes would be capable ofseparating the mixture into its component alkaloids, but we areinterested in this natural blend and load several double-zerogelatine capsules with two hundred milligrams of the syrupyelixir. From this vantage point, the prohibitionist fanaticism ofthe land we left only a few weeks ago seems as remote as homeprobably seemed to those first barbaric explorers who pillagedthis land and tried to eradicate forever the knowledge of themysterious substance we have just bottled. How different ourintentions from those of our ancestors! The sense of triumph overthe collective stupidity of centuries, even on such a small,fragile, and local scale, perfuses the laboratory and even thoughit is very late, we have trouble postponing what we know will bea twelve hour visionary experience until the morrow. Anyone who has tried to write an account of evena mild psychedelic experience will know the minimal power ofwords to describe that which is not only indescribable, butbeyond language itself. Language seems to me as merely a sort ofresonance to experience, coming somewhat after the fact, andcapable of dealing with only the established habits and routinesof thought and perception. The totally novel experience, if sucha concept be allowed, can have no ready-made language patterns toactivate. And perhaps the reverse is true as well: in meditation,we are told by its adepts, the quieting of the inner dialogueleads to a purified perception of reality, unsullied by thecategorizing imperatives of language. Freed from suchrestrictions, every experience is potentially unique. Eventhe most trivial of everyday situations has its originality, butit is the learned, devastatingly efficient habits of the mindwhich cause one to feel that it is necessary to cope withreality rather than celebrate it. Hence boredom at the apparentsameness of the events of daily routine displaces the inescapablebut elusive magic of even a moment of life lived with truefreedom. Somehow the peyote extract we took the next dayproduced such a freedom from the known; pure experience seemed toflow from some mysterious source to which the resonance oflanguage was not only lacking, but completely superfluous. Thoseof us who sat together during that voyage sensed this astonishingreality not with fear, nor despair at the inability of normalconscious processes to analyze or explain this strange way ofperceiving, but rather it seemed that this state of mind, thismethod of perceiving reality, was aboriginal, the way thingshappened long ago when humankind was only beginning his longjourney into civilization. And what was more, we clearly realizedthat this aboriginal mode of perception was not at all primitive,nor limited in its ability to deal with modern life; on thecontrary, it utilized and required the entire capacity ofone's being, it was in fact larger and more comprehensive thannormal everyday, routine consciousness. It seemed that this wasthe way the mind would work all the time if it were not being impededby the narrow forms mankind had imposed upon himself through theestablishment and maintenance of certain styles of civilizedsocieties. From that point of view, it was obvious that WesternMan had, step by step, backed himself into a spiritual cornerfrom which, although he had achieved impressive control of themundane, physical aspects of reality, he had lost something notprimitive, but essential. Thus it seemed that the NativeAmericans, who had used these miraculous plants as existentialmedicines since the beginning, had kept possession of thatsomething which the white man had long ago lost, and the NativeAmerican societies that resulted were by comparison ecological inthe true sense of the word, having a balance and correspondinglack of destructive contradiction both within their societies andalso in relation to the environment. During the next few days, I began to realizethat with the new restrictions on research with psychedelicagents, and the continued marginalization of the remnants ofNative American societies, Western Civilization was attempting todrive the final nail in the coffin of a vast body of psychedelicknowledge, the culmination of a 500-year-old process designed toeliminate an embarrassment to the conviction that wisdom andprogress were the rationale behind the spread and hegemony ofEuropean Civilization to every corner of the earth. And not onlythe rationale: Western Civilization now appeared to claim to bethe sole possessor of the very concepts of wisdomand progress. Anything that could be done to dampen thisenthusiasm to ignore, vilify, and destroy everything that was notModern, not Capitalism, not Democracy, not Advanced, notScientific, not Civilized, not US, I saw as not only a worthwhileproject, but as an undertaking one would be required to doon the basis of simple moral principles. I had no alternative butto apply any modest talents or abilities that I might possess todiscovering the mechanisms by which these psychedelic chemicalsproduce their effects not only on the brain, but on the mind andspirit; to finding the link between the widespread use of suchsubstances among the most ancient tribes of men, and what thatmight indicate about the evolution of the human species; tounderstanding what the current fanatical attempts to prohibit theuse of these substances and even stifle further research byqualified scientists indicated about the underlying psychology ofthe Modern American Attitude; to discovering whether knowledgeabout these and other aspects of psychedelic use might provide akey so badly needed by the whole range of the sciences of man toovercome widely recognized limitations of these sciences not onlyto explain but above all to improve the deplorable condition ofhuman social interaction in this century of holocaust. Were thesethe medicines of a long-lost age, of no further use to humankindin his now modern world, or could we discover that they mightstill be useful, perhaps essential for a future which did notinclude the suicide of the species? The moral imperative that I perceived then,combined with the normal predilection by youth for daring deeds,left me with little doubt as to my future course of action. Theprobability that I would find it necessary to become an outlawwas of no great consequence to me, it was an exciting conceptthat it might be possible to be an outlaw from AmericanCivilization and be morally justified in doing so. In fact, I wasalready an outlaw, a draft-evader, and I had just been dabblingwith forbidden fruits in a most serious way, as ascientist practicing his art in defiance of the law of the land.How rare the opportunity to be able to practice a forbiddenscience in this day and age! The concept itself put paid to manyarrogant assumptions about the rationality of the American Way ofLife and its justification for eliminating any and allcompetition to its oxymoronic Philosophy. I cannot pretend that the work in which Iengaged over the next several years was serious research on a parwith what our modern academic institutions would accept. But inlight of the severe handicaps that have always been the limitingfactor for progress in the understanding of controversial orforbidden subjects, I think I may have nevertheless achievedsomething of value toward a broadly based theory of psychedelicexperience. Of course there were others, many others, in fact,who were working on threads of the puzzle presented by modernman's rediscovery of the ancient psychedelic medicines. Someresearchers who had, previous to the newly institutedrestrictions, been working on the most diverse and interestingaspects of the effects and uses of psychedelics both therapeuticand esthetic, continued their work in diminished, or at leastdifferent ways. Although they were forbidden to give apsychedelic drug to any patient or (more importantly) researchvolunteer whatsoever, substitute methods for activating apsychedelic state were used, sometimes with reasonable success.Some other workers continued with theoretical work based onpreviously accumulated data, and a very few obtained permissionto continue with biochemical experiments with psychedelic drugsgiven to various laboratory animals. Sadly, permission for suchwork seemed much easier to obtain when the proposed researchmight show that the psychedelics were harmful, broke chromosomes,or lived up in some way to the irrational fears of theprohibitionist elements in American institutions. But even ifsome of these experiments were little more than overdose partiesfor rats, they produced, valuable data on, for example, the sitesof action of psychedelics in the brain. Even more tragically, however, some very giftedworkers left psychedelic research entirely, unable to continuemeaningful work. Prohibition of the use of some substance, likealcohol, tobacco, tea, cannabis, opium, or anything else you canname, is historically so easily shown to be self-defeating, thatit bewilders the rational mind to attempt to understand thephilosophical outlook of those otherwise intelligent humans whopropose that man can be protected from folly by the simpleexpedient of the passage of law. One would have to hypothesizeulterior, perhaps unconscious motives on behalf of those whopropose and maintain prohibitions, or conclude that they are notrational human beings at all. It is several orders of magnitudemore difficult to understand the philosophy of prohibition of anavenue of scientific research. This is not to say that thereshould be no control whatsoever of scientific research activitiesby publicly-elected government. If over-enthusiastic pursuit ofprofit by biotechnology companies seems to be leading todangerous situations such as widespread release of bio-engineeredorganisms into the environment, safeguards must be installed: thebiotechnology enterprise is not simply eradicated by fiat.Government authorities and legislative bodies have not seemedunduly worried about proven deleterious world-wide effects ofresearch on nuclear energy or weapons. The prohibitions onpsychedelic research may well indicate ulterior motives andhidden agendas by those at the center of power. More importantly,if more difficult to analyze, the prohibition must indicate someinherent collective psychological conflict at the very core ofthe belief system of Modern Western Civilization. It is as if,collectively, we have no greater fear than that engendered by therediscovery of a most ancient, important, and healing practiceand phenomenon, the psychedelic experience. This is most curious,and I shall return to the topic in chapter 8. In the wake of repression then, there aroseanother group of psychedelic researchers, which like other groupsdown through the history of acts of repression by the powerful,was effectively driven underground to an at least temporaryobscurity. In the middle ages we had the alchemists, purportedlylooking for ways to make gold from something less valuable, aproject which certainly would meet the approval of theacquisitive ecclesiastical authorities of the time. The truealchemical quest, if we can believe some modern interpretations,would not at all have met the approval of an authorityproclaiming its monopoly on spiritual matters. No one today woulddeny the historical existence of the underground aspect ofalchemy in the middle ages, a science which of course bordered onwitchcraft, wizardry, and sometimes sheer lunacy caused perhapsin some cases by exposure to toxic heavy metals such as lead andmercury, favorite substances for the alchemists. Nor will themodern historian of science deny the influence and importance ofmuch of the work of the alchemists for the succeeding generationsof researchers who made the beginnings of a modern science out ofa diverse collection of arcane experimental data. But theexistence of underground science today, practiced by a fraternityof no less colorful and sometimes equally as crazed individualsas the alchemists, must be dismissed as a fairy tale by thoseauthorities who have been instrumental in bringing about the verysituation from which underground science must necessarily grow. Underground science has many limitations anddifficulties which the establishment scientist never need suffer.There are no universities and publicly financed institutionsallowing research to flourish and researchers to enjoy areasonable standard of living including the respect of societyand sometimes even fame and fortune. Under severe repression,underground scientists have little chance even for peer review oftheir work, not to mention journals for publication of theirpapers, or conferences, research grants, awards, and always thethreat of moderate to severe penalties meted out by theInquisitors, which today includes not burning at the stake, butlanguishing incommunicado for periods of time that might makesome wish for a return to the fiery methods of medievalism. Withincreasing calls for the application of the death penalty (in theUnited States) in cases of "major trafficking", we mayyet achieve or surpass the medieval traditions. To be fair, there do exist a few journals, andsome excellent books that have been published during the thirtyyears of Inquisition, and even a few conferences have broughttogether luminaries in the field of psychedelic research. Sincethe late 1980's, a very few limited research projects with humanshave been approved using some types of psychedelic drugs intreatment programs for addiction or other psychological problems,or in metabolic studies. But the scope and extent of suchresearch has not even begun to approach that seen already in the1950's, and certainly the continuation of important andproductive research of the 1960's, for example on creativity, orphilosophical and religious aspects of the psychedelicexperiencxe, has not even been suggested to governmentauthorities for approval. And so the fact remains that for themost important and interesting uses of psychedelics, no one maygive a psychedelic drug to a volunteer human being and thenpublish the results without drug police knocking on, and todayoften smashing down, the door. Even the time honored tradition ofself-experimentation is cause for arrest, and if one is in thewrong place at the wrong time with a few bucks not instantlytraceable to justifiable and tax-paid income, civil forfeiture ofall moneys and properties by the defendant (still under thepresumption of innocence) ensues. If this seems an exaggerated or surrealisticview of today's world, then the reader is certainly in theestablishment camp. For as an underground scientist who has hadthe pleasure of knowing a few other individuals similarlymotivated, I can attest that the fears are real and certainly notthe result of paranoia. I have known several who have languished,forfeited, or both. I myself am no stranger to enforcedlanguishing. And it is with a certain caution that I now attemptto reveal my findings while hoping to retain an intact frontdoor. In any field find the strangest thing and thenexplore it. —John Archibald Wheeler Table of Contents Chapter 2WT01-B36-9IA087-000632-B029-102http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064957 text/html 31082HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:49:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:20:09 GMTContent-length: 30863 The Center of the Universe - Chapter 2 2. Models and Theories Later on that year. We have slowly been buildingup a stock of seeds of the "Heavenly Blue" morningglory, Ipomoea violacea, which grows widely in this areaof Mexico. A short drive out of the city in any direction leadsto the discovery of some extensive stand of the plant, and welook for groups of boys playing and gather them 'round for ashort lesson on economic realities. It seems that we offer hardpesos for anyone who will gather these funny little black seedsfor us, and be here on this spot in exactly one week. Returningafter a week we usually find only one or two of the boys hastaken us seriously and actually collected even a coffee-can full.But when the scales come out of the back of the pickup, and hardcash changes hands for what would seem to all excepting gringos aworthless commodity, eyes widen with dreams of transistor radios.Mexico is a tragically poor nation, and our harvest of seeds has,upon last inventory, attained rather amazing levels with verylittle expense. Our peyote experiments have been a resoundingsuccess. We have sent capsules of our extract to severalaficionados of psychedelic preparations, and received verypositive reports comparing the natural alkaloidal blend favorablywith both synthesized mescaline and other psychedelics.Institutional researchers would of course immediately dismiss ourresults as anecdotal and subjective, and we certainly have nottroubled ourselves to do "double-blind" experiments aswould be expected for "scientifically" legitimateresults. The legitimacy of our results is, for better or forworse, not dependent on institutional acceptance, but upon theopinions of those whose wisdom we have come to respect. A peyoteshaman, asked to perform a double-blind ceremony using ourpreparation, would be as correct to ridicule our idea as theinstitutional scientist for criticizing the lack of suchprotocol. We quite enjoy the eclecticism of the middle ground wehave staked out for our research paradigm. The modern institutional requirements foracceptance of research have been sometimes accused by evennotable scientists as not only too strict and exclusive, but alsoas being ignorant of the methods of a great deal of exceptionaland ground-breaking science before the present period. (See forexample the reference in footnote 5, below, for a criticism ofthe requirement of "blind" and "double-blind"techniques.) Single-case studies, subjective reports, experimentswhich are not, in principle, repeatable, and other (according tomodern dogma) "non-scientific" methods we are free touse and interpret with our own guidelines. When an unrepeatable,subjective experiment leads us to an heuristic or empirical modeland thus provides a component for a theory which then accuratelypredicts and points the way for further research, criticism basedupon the nature of the original experiment sends the distinctmessage that the critic has "his eyes in his pocket and hisnose on the ground". And in the field of psychedelicresearch, more than any other we know, trying to achieve the"hardness" of results that academics insist is soimportant is often like "trying to catch the wind". (Iwill presently have more to say about our concepts of models andtheories and how they relate to both "hard" science andto the "softer" disciplines such as our own. And in thenext chapter I will deal with the multitude of purported"effects" of the psychedelic drugs and whyexperimentation has so often led to confusion when thepresumption of classical cause and effect relationships is theguiding paradigm of experiments.) The one significant disappointment of the peyoteextract is that it is unstable. Within even one week, a 500milligram dose is just perceptibly less potent, and within amonth the potency of the dose is significantly reduced. Since thestability of the dried cactus tops or "buds" has beenreported to be exceptional, a noted authority on the subjectcalling the buds "practically indestructible", it isobvious that the "impurities" we have removed in ourprocess are essential to preserving psychedelic activity of theraw alkaloidal mixture. This result, combined with the necessityof processing large volumes of material to produce enough extractfor even twenty or thirty doses, make any practical use of theproduct prohibitive. It is expensive to produce and ephemeral. Inaddition, we feel that any attempts to produce a stablepreparation by further processing would probably nullify theadvantages of the broad-spectrum alkaloidal extract principlethat we have tested. We have therefore turned our attention topreparing and experimenting with extracts of the morning glory. At least two species of morning-glory seed havebeen used since antiquity as divinatory agents by the Amerindianshamans of Mexico. The Ipomoea violacea we have collectedseems to grow just about everywhere, and is, in fact, the exactsame plant that horticulturists have introduced in Europe and theU.S., the ornamental "Heavenly Blue" morning-gloryvine. The second psychedelic species, Rivea corymbosa, wehave found only further south, but in the scientific literatureits reported habitat is the entire coastal area of the Gulf ofMexico. We obtained about a kilo of seeds from a local source,but did not seek out larger quantities since our supply of Ipomoeaviolacea was quite sufficient, and of the two species, wasalso the most potent. (1) An interesting page in the history of thebiochemical study of alkaloids was recorded the day in 1960 whenAlbert Hofmann presented his findings about the identity of thealkaloids of the morning-glory to a symposium in Melbourne,Australia. Until that day, it was believed that the only naturalsource of the lysergic acid alkaloids was the parasitic fungus ofgrasses, ergot. In the plant kingdom there are extremely diverseplants, from primitive fungi to the highest species of floweringplants, that produce the biochemical substances known to chemistsas alkaloids. These natural plant substances are widespread, andso diverse in their nature that no simple or unique reason fortheir evolution can be postulated. And their diversity andcomplexity is such that it is rare to find the same alkaloid intwo different plants even if they are close evolutionaryneighbors. When Dr. Hofmann announced that the alkaloids of themorning-glory vine (a plant far removed on the evolutionary treefrom the primitive ergot fungus) were also derivatives oflysergic acid, many in the audience of scientists were plainlyincredulous. Despite the impeccable reputation of Dr. Hofmann andthe Sandoz Laboratories of which he was a director, more than onegroup of scientists attempted to disprove the findings. One groupthought that the seeds used must have been contaminated with somespecies of ergot-like fungus and published a paper to the effect.Painstaking further work in which seeds were carefully dissectedand shown not to be infected with any type of fungal spore orgrowth finally proved the location of the alkaloids to beconcentrated in the embryonic material of the seeds. We had obtained reprints of all the relevantscientific papers in New York and were now ready to prepare alarge sample of the morning-glory alkaloids for furtherexperimentation. As with our peyote extraction, we wished toobtain a total alkaloidal extract of the seeds even though it hadbeen postulated by some that only one alkaloid of the group wasthe active psychedelic component. Hofmann had shown that probablyfour or five lysergic acid derivatives were active: lysergic acidamide, isolysergic acid amide, lysergol, elymoclavine and perhapsergometrine. We thought it of great significance that the firsttwo of these compounds, and the last as well, have a structurepractically identical to LSD. The fact that the use of LSD-likepsychedelic agents had been as significant as of the peyotecactus or the psilocybin mushrooms, at least in this area of theworld, made claims that LSD was a modern, synthesized, andtherefore "unnatural" psychedelic drug seem ratherill-conceived. (2) Hofmann and his co-workers had made severaltests of the psychedelic activity of their own extracts, both asbroad spectrum mixtures and also of the separated alkaloids, buttheir self-administered dosages had not reliably produced muchmore than minor effects. Our first goal would therefore be toobtain an extract which, when taken in a dose roughly equivalentto that used in native ceremonies, produced some effects ofsignificance. We based our extraction procedures both onpublished analytical work, on generally accepted routines forchemical extraction of alkaloids, and gave some consideration aswell to the methods used by the shamans in preparing seeds fortheir ceremonies. In tribal use, the seeds are first ground to afine flour, then soaked in cold water. After a short time, theliquid is filtered off and drunk. This would indicate firstlythat the active components were readily soluble in water, andsecondly that other components of the seed, not so readilysoluble, might possibly interfere with the psychedelic effects orproduce diverse effects of their own. Such a hypothesis mightexplain the inconsistent results of some workers who hadexperimented with Ipomoea or Rivea seeds and foundthem lacking in activity. A second goal for our work would be to try toobtain pure lysergic acid from the seed extracts by chemicalhydrolysis. A rather large industry had evolved since the turn ofthe century which produced the alkaloid ergotamine from alaborious process of growing the ergot fungus on rye grass.Ergotamine had been a widely used lysergic acid alkaloid fordecades, but recently other derivatives of lysergic acid had beenfound to be more useful, and to produce them, the ergotamineyield from ergot was first hydrolyzed to lysergic acid, thenappropriately reacted with various amines or other compounds. Itwas work of this type that had led Hofmann to synthesize LSD byreacting pure lysergic acid, via an intermediate, withdiethylamine. We intended to evaluate the possibility thatmorning glory seeds might someday provide an alternate, or evenbetter source for lysergic acid than the ergot/rye process. (3) We would at thesame time be determining if it were possible for an undergroundchemist, using morning glory seeds instead of ergotamine (whichwas tightly controlled and difficult to obtain), might producesmall amounts of LSD with very little risk. I say small amounts,because the alkaloid content of morning glory seeds had beenassessed at barely 0.06%, and assuming normal losses and otherfactors it would therefore be necessary to process perhaps ahundred kilos of seeds or more to produce even a gram of LSD.Still, due to the vanishingly small effective dose of LSD, such aprocess was far more a practical possibility than thatnecessitated by the required minimum dose of peyote extract, morethan two thousand fold that of LSD. With a view to obviating any objections thatpublishers, general readers, or various drug control authoritiesmight have concerning the description of processes used toproduce forbidden substances, I will not further discuss here ourexperiments along these lines. Any competent underground chemistwill certainly, in any case, already know quite enough toformulate his plans for the future. And it should already beevident to the reader what my evaluation of the prohibition ofpsychedelics signaled about my own intentions. To me, it was oneof the greatest absurdities ever perpetrated that persons ofreasonable attitude and situation, and with proper guidance,might not have access to substances which had proved not onlyvaluable, but essential to so many societies of man down throughthe ages. If societies that we ignorantly called primitive coulduse these medicines to advantage, where was the logic in thebelief that suddenly these same substances presented some kind ofgrave threat to man in the Twentieth Century? One of the topprohibitionist agitators of the time had made the preposterousstatement that LSD was "the greatest threat facing thecountry today...more dangerous than the Vietnam War."(4) If certain excessesand unwise use of the psychedelics were appearing in Americansociety it was not very difficult to see that if one single thingcould be designated a cause of the problem, it was theprohibition itself. And how could a society purportedly sogrounded in the logic, rationality, and intellectualityillustrated by its great scientific achievements come to be sohoodwinked, so deprived of its rationality, so easily ledinto absurdity, when it came to the subject of "drugs"? One clue came from the observation that itseemed necessary to have had some personal experience with thesubstances. This very same problem had been observed in the earlydays of psychedelic research, before Prohibition. Almost withoutexception, the researchers who had themselves taken psychedelicdrugs produced much more intelligible and significant work thanthose who had abstained, for one reason or another. But soon theabstainers were publishing accusations that personal exposure tothe substances had caused researchers to be biased, even thatthey had suffered permanent deformations of personality, weredelusional and no longer competent to judge the results of theirown experiments. Two researchers, Cole and Katz, went so far asto flatly state in a paper that "only claims made bytherapists who have not themselves taken LSD are valid"(5). As Osmond wrylyobserved, the same critics who were accusing enthusiasticresearchers of having suffered permanent personality changes dueto their use of psychedelics, were at the same time denyingthat such personality changes could be brought about inexperimental subjects or patients! It seemed to us that if such irrational battleswere raging in the halls of academia, the only hope for thecommon man to see behind the curtain obscuring the wisdom of theages was to be persuaded by a friend to find out for himself. Theknowledge of psychedelics was then something that would have topass from hand to hand among friends of mutual trust and respect;that same knowledge would be met publicly only with outrightrejection, or worse: a situation of superb medievalism right herein modern America. Despite the apparent confidence of ModernCivilization that it was the very epitome of rationality, theissue of the prohibition of psychedelics had to be diagnosed asindicative of grave underlying contradictions in the paradigmsand beliefs of that civilization. And the nature of thesecontradictions could only be understood by viewing them as acollective psychological phenomenon, a view which took on acertain forcefulness and poignancy from within the psychedelicexperience itself. What a privilege to be party to suchknowledge! And it was more than mere knowledge, it was Wisdom forit made you weep to see it thus, and to realize the odds againstcounteracting or curing the situation, even on the simplest oflevels. To correct one's own metaphysical outlook in themidst of such confuision was already an unlikely achievement formost, even with psychedelic assistance. I should now briefly discuss the meanings ofcertain terms I have been using. Models, theories, paradigms,hypotheses, even data, knowledge and wisdom can be thrown aboutrather loosely in today's writing, their meaning more dependenton the intended audience of a book than on precise definitions.If the definitions I will now give are not acceptable to all,then at least I will be saying what I, personally, take theseterms to mean, and what they should be considered to mean when Iuse them here. At the beginning, in those early days in Mexico,I certainly had no idea of searching for a theory ofpsychedelic experience. In retrospect, after the passage of manyyears, I see that the work that I did and the experiences Igained, combined with further study that has occupied a largepart of my time ever since, fit into a pattern the structure ofwhich now seems to constitute a rather interesting andmulti-faceted theory about the psychedelic experience, itsplace in anthropology and evolution, the mechanisms of itsfunctioning, etc. Thus a theory is a broad and explanatory viewof a panorama of topics united by a central fact or aspect ofreality. A theory is a theory of something, although itmay deal with the most diverse subjects in the explaining of thatcentral something. But it falls short of being a paradigm in theKuhnian sense, (6)because it is an expressed, conscious and explicit structure,continually in the state of further refinement and development.The paradigm is rather a theory or set of theories that hasbecome transparent to the community or society that employs it intheir world view. It is a set of implicit principles and viewsthat are so taken for granted that individual components of theparadigm are often quite difficult to discover, so enmeshed arethey in the view they represent. A paradigm is also static, ornearly so, it is not normally developing with the addition of newexperimental evidence. This is why it is found that a paradigmbecomes obsolete, and is replaced by a new paradigm. Atheory in development, on the other hand, may evolve in suchcomplex ways that it arrives at a point which may be radicallychanged from its original form. Thus I do not claim that mytheory is in any way a paradigm, or a revolution in theunderlying assumptions and world-view now reigning in WesternCivilization. But the theory may, in combination with othertheories, eventually contribute to such a revolution, as I hopeit will. The elements which make up a theory are models,and may take many forms. A model may be logical, deductive,mathematical, and completely abstract as in the description of acertain process or phenomenon by an equation or set of equations.Einstein's mathematical description of curved space is a goodexample: no exercise of the imagination can produce a concretevision of how empty space might be curved, curvature isalways in our experience a curvature of something, and ifempty space is anything, it is nothing, not something, accordingto the common sense way our minds work. The mathematical model ofcurvature of space makes up a part of the general relativistic theoryof the structure of the universe. Other models may be practically photographic intheir imaginability. The planetary model of the atom with itsdiscrete orbiting electrons around a hard little nucleus ofanother flavor of "stuff" is still a quite useful wayof picturing matter at this level. Notice in this example, thatthe model may be useful, at the very minimum as a teaching aid,even when the "reality" the model describes has beenshown to be something quite more complex and nebulous. In"reality", the quantum-mechanical model of atomicstructure indicates that electrons are far more like probabilityclouds or waves than little hard individual particles. Thus amodel such as the planetary one may be strictly analogical,metaphorical, perhaps even an outright "lie", and stillretain some usefulness in representing aspects of a theory. Thetheory of chemical combination of atoms into compounds, as in thereaction of sodium and chlorine to form common salt, forinstance, can still profit from the planetary model of the atom. And when we get to the study of life sciences,where "hard" data is often difficult to come by, amodel may even fall short of the imaginable metaphor; it maysimply be the result of a process of curve-fitting andextrapolation of seemingly random points on a graph, theextrapolation and predictions of the model executed with littlemore than sheer intuition. Thus a model may range from thelogical and deductive hardness of a precise mathematicalequation, to something as fleeting and a-logical as a suddeninspiration or intuition about the object of study and how itmight behave under various conditions. Here we might note that a model, no matter howprecise it may appear, is never a complete or "true"picture of reality, it is merely a temporary device usedto form hypotheses about what kind of experiments to perform.Thus a model can be something as simple as an assumed viewpointtaken just to see what that viewpoint might lead to; it functionsas an heuristic aid toward the formation of testable ideas, ideaswhich have a high probability of being relevant, eitherpositively or negatively, for the formation of a theory. A model is thus a device helping to formhypotheses which are then tested experimentally. The results ofexperiments then can be used to form an improved model, or analternative model, and this circular process may proceed at greatlength until a summation process has suggested the outline of afull-fledged theory. But the theory that results is morethan just another model, or collection of models, for it is morethan just a device: it is something complex, an intricate patternof relations which in a very significant way is more than justthe sum of its parts, because a good theory will have manyimplications and ramifications beyond those which are immediatelyevident, or those which took part in its formation. A good theoryprovides a framework around which further modeling andexperimentation falls into place almost spontaneously, ratherlike the growth of a crystal around a small seed particleimmersed in a supersaturated solution. It is perhaps like anearly-completed jigsaw puzzle, which although was fittedtogether from pieces which at times only seemed to fitapproximately, the overall intelligibility of the emerging scenelends great weight to its probable accuracy and applicability,and further pieces of the puzzle seem to fall into place almosteffortlessly. A bad theory, by contrast, tends to accumulateever-increasing anomaly and counter-argument against it, and itwinds up being defended by its last remaining protagonists usingthe most spectacular of intellectual gymnastics, to no avail. Thus a good theory may contain among the manymodels used to construct and support it models which, consideredalone, are difficult to accept, or even completely unbelievablein light of previously accepted theory and paradigms. Many of themodels or pieces of the theory I will now describe will certainlyfall into this category for some readers, particularly those withestablished professional viewpoints to defend. In the nextchapter, for example, I am going to attack the currently acceptedmodel that psychedelic drugs cause a wide range of unpredictableand multi-faceted effects. Most people would not even call this amodel, they would call it simple observation! The alternativemodel I will propose is deceptively simple, if somewhat tricky toexplain, and to support it I have had to create new models ofpsychological functioning replacing some current models whichthemselves are so generally transparent and accepted that theirstatus as models would be questioned. Here is the processdescribed above where anomaly leads to an alternate model of somephenomenon, which leads to experiments, further models, furtherexperiments, and so on until an entire theory begins to takeshape. If in those early days in Mexico I hadn't the leastinkling that I was working on a theory, I wasconsciously searching for models which made my experiences andexperiments begin to conform to a tentative pattern. And at thatstage of creative work, it is of advantage to dream up even thewildest and most unlikely models along with the more obviousones; only once a theory is consciously in the making is morerigorous selection warranted. (This process of the evolution of atheory parallels what we see in biological evolution: in theearly stages, the wildest and most bizarre life forms are tried.Later on, after disastrous extinctions have wiped out entirephyla, the course of evolution is found to be much moreconservative). Once the outline of an emerging theory is inplace, research may begin to scan widely in many areas. Researchmay at times consist largely of reading about and re-interpretingresults of experiments performed by others, from the newviewpoint represented by the maturing theory. New ways oforganizing and explaining data in areas as yet unexamined by thetheory begin to show that the theory either has wideimplications, or is not as comprehensive as previously thought.This process of testing the theory against many new areas ofunderstanding is what finally yields the most interestingresults. For example, just recently I began reading about the newresearch on brain function now made possible by the latestmethods of brain-scanning techniques such as PET and MRI.Interpreting much of the data collected in terms of thepsychological and cognitive models I had invented for thepsychedelic theory was not only possible, but led to a furtherrefinement of those models and a strengthening of the theory aswell. It was especially interesting to note that some of thebrain-scan results which had so far only been interpreted in verytentative ways, could be explained rather well using thepsychedelic models of brain function versus cognitive processproposed by my theory. Now that the background has been constructed, it is with pleasure and relief that I launch my theory of psychedelic experience into certainly turbulent waters. If it be based on delusion and self-deception the sinking will be so rapid as to be unnoticed, saving me intense embarrassment; if there is a glimmer of truth therein, the violence of the storm in which it must survive might sink it as quickly. I can only grease the ways well and hope I have not left any gaping holes in its structure! (1). For further information on thetwo species of morning-glory and their use by Mexican Amerindiantribes including a few isolated groups still today, the reader isreferred to the Botanical Museum Leaflets of HarvardUniversity, November 22, 1963, Volume 20, No. 6. This issuecontains an important article by R. Gordon Wasson, a luminary andone of the originators of the science of ethnobotany, and anotherarticle by Albert Hofmann, inventor of LSD, and discoverer of theactive principles both of the morning-glory and the Psilocybemushrooms of Mexico. (back) (2). As further work by Wasson andHofmann was later to show, there is a strong probability that anLSD-type psychedelic preparation was also, over a period of twomillennia, an important and integral part of religious andintellectual life in an area of the world much closer to ourWestern Civilization, ancient Greece. See The Road to Eleusis,Unveiling the Secret of the Mysteries, by Wasson, Ruck, andHofmann, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978. (back) (3). We were unaware at that timethat two pharmaceutical companies, Sandoz and Farmitalia, wereperfecting a method to grow the mycelium of ergot fungus instirred vats filled with nutrients. This process was able toproduce high yields of an alkaloid much easier to use for furthersynthesis than ergotamine, paspalic acid. With the introductionof this method, other processes depending on production andharvest of either ergot or morning glories would be of littlecomparative utility. (back) (4). A statement by C.W. Sandman,Jr., chairman of the New Jersey Narcotic Drug Study Commission. (back) (5). see "Criticisms of LSDTherapy and Rebuttal" in The Hallucinogens, Hofferand Osmond, Academic Press, 1967, pp197-205. Humphrey Osmond isone of those rare scientists who is equally at home in theresearch institute as in an Amerindian peyote ceremony, and hisresearch is illustrative of the open-mindedness yet scientificrigor which go hand in hand to produce great scientific advance.Dr. Osmond was the one to introduce Aldous Huxley topsychedelics. (back) (6). See Thomas S. Kuhn, TheStructure of Scientific Revolutions, Second Edition, 1970,The University of Chicago Press, for the introduction of thisterm into the modern vocabulary concerned with the history andphilosophy of science. (back) Table of Contents Chapter 3WT01-B36-10IA087-000632-B029-134http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065012 text/html 105429HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:49:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:20:02 GMTContent-length: 105209 The Center of the Universe - Chapter 3 3. Effects of Psychedelic Drugs (I had originally thought to write a chapter on the history of use of psychedelic drugs, but there have already been several excellent books and research papers published in this area, and I have nothing new to add. (1) At the risk of leaving out an important body of substantiating evidence for parts of my theory, including the history of what have been thought to be the various effects of the drugs, I will simply recommend that the reader acquaint himself with the subject from the already prolific selection of works, many of which are listed in the Bibliography. The risk is that a reader who holds some prejudice that psychedelic use has merely been the province of a few oddball tribes, or something that could be safely ignored when theorizing in anthropology or human biological and social evolution, will therefore hold the same prejudice when trying to evaluate my theory. Nothing could be further from the truth. Psychedelic use appears to be the rule, rather than the exception, in every corner of the earth where man has developed. And not just in times we may safely relegate to the stone age: I have already mentioned the strong likelihood that lysergic acid alkaloids were important in Greek Civilization over a period of two thousand years. Once acquainted with the wealth of evidence concerning early use of psychedelic drugs, the reader or researcher who then picks up a new book on anthropology, religion, human evolution and the evolution of consciousness and finds no relevant entries in the index, will have immediate and compelling reasons to question the author's scholarship! The discontinuance of use of psychedelics for most non-Western societies seemed to coincide with the arrival of European "civilizing" influence, yet stubborn traces of psychedelic use persisted widely until modern times, as witnessed by recent studies of Central and South American Amerindian tribes, and of course the widely known use of peyote by members of the Native American Church. The discontinuance of psychedelic use in Western Civilization itself coincided with the rise of the Roman Church as the primary political power in the world. From the early centuries of the Christian epoch, the use of such substances became the occupation of heretics, outcasts, witches, primitives or other similarly uncivilized, satanic elements. (2) The Church, of course, saw no contradiction in the wholesale slaughter of such groups for their own good. Continuing psychedelic use over the centuries in many parts of the world has thus been a carefully guarded secret, and modern estimates of its frequency and importance are probably grossly underestimated.) The extract of Ipomoea violacea that wehad prepared radiated power, just sitting there in its flask. Alight amber, odorless syrup which, in the darkened laboratoryfluoresced brilliantly blue under ultraviolet light, it was anextreme contrast with the series of messy, difficult to purify,dark-colored and discouraging volumes of intermediate sludge wehad treated, and brought to mind the Curies and their arduousseparation of a few tiny crystals of glowing radium from amountain of pitchblende. The difficulties had, however, taught usmuch about ways in which we would modify our processes for futurework. As for the extract, the following day would see the firsttest of its activity, with myself as the guinea-pig. I was bythis time hardly a novice in self-administration of my ownpreparations or in the estimation of what effects they mighthave. I was, in fact, quite adept at taking most any supposedsubstance of enlightenment and avoiding nasty complications ifthe brew turned out to be bogus. On many occasions in New York,more than a little caution had been required to avoid not onlythe classic "rip-off" but also the inevitable dangersthat Prohibition naturally produced. Once, a purported sample ofmagic mushroom I was offered proved to be only a few wastedstore-bought champignons laced with powdered datura seeds.Although hallucinogenic, the experience of datura was not theleast insightful, nor did it leave me with an experience whichhinted at dimensions normally closed to everyday perception. Ispent a few unpleasant hours also with Owsley's famous STP, whichin the original dose was far too potent for human consumption.Fortunately I took only a quarter-dose, there having beenevidence of difficult times for others with this synthetic drug. The morning-glory extract provided not a nastysurprise, but a powerful surprise none the less. It was by farthe most powerful experience I had yet encountered. Perhaps themethods of our extraction had yielded a product morerepresentative of the shaman's recipe than the preparationsobtained by other investigators, who reported only modestpsychedelic effects. The experience of that day was hardlymodest, from the beginning moments it certainly did not fail toinspire reverence and humility, no matter what the direction towhich I managed to guide it. The colors and geometric patterns,the rippling waves so often seen in watching clouds in the sky,the slowing of time and other typical effects so frequentlydescribed in the literature had some time ago become only minorand unattended aspects of psychedelic experience for me.Certainly, I still noticed these effects, if I took the troubleto pay attention to them. But the psychedelic experience hadbecome for me far more an arena for the Herculean task ofattempting to achieve the truly original perspective for viewingthe fundamental questions that man has posed since the beginningof time. It was the task of freeing oneself completely frompreconceptions, from habits of thinking that affected the outcomeof seeking in unknown and unconscious ways. And of course, it wasparadoxical, if not impossible to erase these filters ofcomprehension completely. To a very significant extent,comprehension consisted of these filters. Nevertheless,the psychedelic experience seemed to go quite a good distance inproviding this ability, if one were ready to use it. Particularlythe experience of that day. An additional very serious question that I haveexamined practically every time I undergo an experience is thatof my position in giving a psychedelic drug that I have preparedto another person. The peyote extract, and now the morning-gloryalkaloids would be given to friends, and their friends perhaps,and it seemed necessary to explore where the experience of thesesubstances might lead for others than myself. As I indicatedabove, I would recommend datura for no-one, and Owsley'sinvention I would strongly recommend against. In the case ofproviding a psychedelic that I myself have prepared, it is agreat responsibility, not so much for any immediate risk that anexperience might entail, but rather in the sense that one thusbecomes a shaman who initiates another human being intoawareness of that mysterious something that forever remains justout of reach. The responsibility is to ensure that the oneinitiated shall see the significance of this event, of thisprocess of initiation. If not, the ability of a person to achievesuch insight may be stifled, if not completely eliminated fromthat point on, and it is his shaman who is to blame. It is likesaving someone's life, in the way some oriental philosophiesunderstand it, if the initiation is successful. Many people, ofcourse, are capable of initiating themselves, I certainly had,and so had many others I had known. But to manufacturepsychedelic substances and distribute them widely and at random,as had been done recently in the United States, left somethingimportant out of the equation describing the power of thesesubstances to affect important changes in those who experiencedthem, and in society at large. On the other hand, I could notignore the argument that the Prohibition had denied man one ofhis most fundamental rights, and according to the wisdomexpressed by the American Constitutional scholar AlexanderBickel, We cannot, by total reliance on law, escape the duty to judge right and wrong... There are good laws and there are occasionally bad laws, and it conforms to the highest traditions of a free society to offer resistance to bad laws, and to disobey them. The details of the morning-glory experience thatday had much more to do with my personal idiosyncrasies of thetime than with issues relevant to the present narrative. At ahigh point of the experience, a minor earthquake occurred which,for the life of me, seemed to be provoked by my patterns ofthought, seeking answers to questions that had a certain air ofbeing forbidden, questions that no mortal could support theweight of significance the answers would unload upon him. Thewhole scene would of course be dismissed as an hallucination bymy analyst, if I had one. But the earth tremor was real, and itdid coincide with the climax of certain thoughts I wasentertaining. Although the details of such experiences maysometimes represent battles of the self against its own quirksand limitations, and on a personal level I have quitesatisfactorily concluded what the experiences of that day had toteach, one still gains a cumulative and more generally applicableknowledge from profound psychedelic experience. And I believe itwas the experience of that day which first started me thinkingabout the "effects" that these substances produced,trying to understand how they could be so different from personto person and from experience to experience. (And the experienceof that day seemed to indicate that psychedelics might possiblycause earthquakes!) Some researchers had proposed that the effectsof psychedelics were more the result of set and setting thanof the drug per se. This seemed to be a useful model asfar as it went, but really it didn't go very far in my opinion.The setting of a psychedelic experience was simply thesurroundings, the comfortable living room or beautiful garden tobe contrasted with the sterile and sometimes threateningatmosphere of the hospital wards where some early research hadbeen carried out. The set was defined as the attitudes,motivations, preconceptions, and intentions of the individual, incombination with the introductory ideas and instructions thatwere provided by the researchers or guides, if any. Here is ashort illustrative example: Language, however, may...be used to develop a negative set and setting. Jean Houston (1967) has described one of her initial observations of LSD administration. The subject was told by the psychiatrist that he would have "a terrible, terrible experience" filled with "strong anxiety and delusions." The drug was administered in an antiseptic hospital room with several observers in white coats watching him. As the effects came on, the psychiatrist asked such questions as, "Is your anxiety increasing?" At the end of the experiment, the subject was in a state of panic. The psychiatrist announced to the group that LSD is indeed a "psychotomimetic" substance, which induces psychotic behavior. (3) Now here is a shaman who has failed mostmiserably in his responsibilities. What was so appalling aboutsome of this early "scientific" research withpsychedelics, was that it was structured not with just anignorance, but a willful ignorance of methods used by theaboriginal practitioners of the same curing arts as the modernpsychiatrists professed to practice. Peyote shamans in thewestern states of the US were very likely that same dayconducting psychedelic sessions in a somewhat different manner: The ritual developed by the Native American Church illustrates the use of language to produce a positive set and setting for the ingestion of peyote. A ceremonial leader, the head chief, initiates the singing of songs and co-ordinates requests by individuals for special prayers. The ritual is so arranged and so coordinated to the needs of the communicants that the maximum possible likelihood of a positive spiritual experience is enhanced. (4) If the prospect of singing for his patientswould seem absurd to the modern psychiatrist, he is alsowillfully ignorant of the great many psychedelic studies in whichrecorded music and other aesthetic input was successfully used tocreate positive set and setting. The work of Hoffer and Osmond,or of Masters and Houston are good examples: The LSD treatment is conducted in a comfortable, aesthetically pleasing, spacious room, in no way suggestive of a clinical setting...the therapist wears ordinary street clothes or something more casual, depending on the needs of the patient. No medical or scientific "uniform" should be worn. The session should be presented less as therapy than as educational and developmental experience. The therapist steps out of his role as "doctor" and becomes more the patient's mentor and guide, who will lead him through the unique world of psychedelic experience and enable him to profit from it... The patient should be exposed to a rich variety of sensory stimuli... Objects, when touched may seem vibrantly alive, and when looked at, may seem to breathe or undergo successive transformations. An orange that is handed the patient may appear to be a golden planet; from a piece of cork may emerge a series of striking "works of art." Joyous music usually is played to help direct him emotionally. Typically, the patient will announce that he is hearing music as if for the first time. All the senses are given an opportunity to respond "psychedelically." (5) "Psychedelic drugs, such as LSD andmescaline, give rise to awesome and extraordinary mental changesin which perceptions are so altered from normal human experience,they cannot readily be described." Many similar statementshave been made, this one is by Solomon H. Snyder in his book Drugsand the Brain. (6)If the concept of set and setting as the determining parameter ofthe content of psychedelic experience has only limited value forunderstanding statements such as Snyder's, we need a new modelwhich not only is capable of showing what cognitive andneurological mechanisms could facilitate such experiences, howthe drug might catalyze or initiate a chain of events the contentof which would depend entirely on the individual, but alsoshowing why statements about the psychedelic experience have sofar been themselves awesome and extraordinary yet decidedlylacking in explanatory power. I am going to propose a view that attributingfantastic and indescribable effects to psychedelic drugs is naiveand misleading. From all we know about the complexity,ineffability, and continually surprising nature of the humanmind, attribution of such causal power to a molecule seems a mereprojection, and a symptom of the unwillingness to contemplatethese characteristics of the mind directly. Neither can wejustify attributing such power to mere molecules in view of whatis known about the neurological effects of psychoactive drugs ingeneral. The primary neurological effects of psychedelics, likeother drugs which affect the central nervous system, must berelatively simple, localized, and perhaps only minimallyconnected in time with the supposed fantastic attributes whichfollow. All the facts point toward a simple, quite easilyexplained mechanism for the neurological action of LSD or otherpsychedelics. How the mind reacts to this simple change innervous system operation is another matter, for here it is thecomplexity of mind itself in question. The argument is that what LSD or otherpsychedelic drugs do is simple, what the mind does complex, andif the event of ingesting a psychedelic substance is followed bysome amazing mental events, it must be the case that the mind iscapable of such events all on its own, or under a variety ofdiverse influences. The drug is in no sense analogous to acomputer program, causing the brain and mind to submit to itsinstructions; if it were, the effects of the drug would be farmore reproducible and typical. Before describing what simple mechanism couldallow a psychedelic drug to catalyze the events of psychedelicexperience, let us take a closer look at what have been touted asthe "effects" of psychedelic drugs. My task will be toshow how each of these effects is not strictly an effect of thedrug itself, but one of the many things the mind may dounder various circumstances, one being a certain small yetfundamental change in neurological routines provoked by a drug.The choice of the word 'catalyze' is appropriate, I think, for inchemistry the action of a catalyst is to lower an energy barrierwhich prevents a reaction from happening, not to actually takepart in the reaction itself. As a starting point in my theory therefore, letus think of the effect of a psychedelic drug as eliminative ofsome obstacle, rather than additive: the drug functions as afacilitator of inherently possible processes, a substance whichby its neurological action allows or assists certainnatural processes to occur which might otherwise be rare orimprobable. In the following quotation, let us see if we canunderstand each "effect" not as something that apsychedelic drug does, but as something which wemight do, if only rarely, under certain circumstances. The listbelow, although originally compiled as a phenomenology of ASC's (7) in general (including hypnosis, religioustrance, delirious states, various intoxications other thanpsychedelic, etc.), has been widely agreed to represent the majorcharacteristics observed of the psychedelic state, although someimprovement in their description could be imagined. Whereapplicable, I have edited the descriptions to accord withpsychedelic experience alone: A. Alterations in thinking. Subjective disturbances in concentration, attention, memory, and judgment represent common findings. Archaic modes of thought (primary-process thought) predominate, and reality testing seems impaired to varying degrees. The distinction between cause and effect becomes blurred, and ambivalence may be pronounced whereby incongruities or opposites may coexist without any (psycho)logical conflict... B. Disturbed time sense. Sense of time and chronology become greatly altered. Subjective feelings of timelessness, time coming to a standstill, the acceleration or slowing of time, and so on, are common. Time may also seem of infinite or infinitesimal duration. C. Loss of control. As a person enters or is in an ASC, he often experiences fears of losing his grip on reality and losing his self-control. During the induction phase, he may actively try to resist experiencing the ASC...while in other instances he may actually welcome relinquishing his volition and giving in to the experience. D. Change in emotional expression. With the diminution of conscious control or inhibitions, there is often a marked change in emotional expression. Sudden and unexpected displays of more primitive and intense emotion than shown during normal, waking consciousness may appear. Emotional extremes, from ecstasy and orgiastic equivalents to profound fear and depression, commonly occur... E. Body image change. A wide array of distortions in body image frequently occur in ASCs. There is also a common propensity for individuals to experience a profound sense of depersonalization, a schism between body and mind, feelings of derealization, or a dissolution of boundaries between self and others, the world, or universe. There are also some other common features which might be grouped under this heading. Not only may various parts of the body appear or feel shrunken, enlarged, distorted, heavy, weightless, disconnected, strange, or funny, but spontaneous experiences of dizziness, blurring of vision, weakness, numbness, tingling, and analgesia are likewise encountered. F. Perceptual distortions. Common to most ASCs is the presence of perceptual aberrations, including hallucinations, pseudohallucinations, increased visual imagery, subjectively felt hyperacuteness of perception, and illusions of every variety. The content of these perceptual aberrations may be determined by cultural, group, individual, or neurophysiological factors and represent either wish-fulfillment fantasies, the expression of basic fears or conflicts, or simply phenomena of little dynamic import, such as hallucinations of light, color, geometrical patterns, or shapes. In some ASCs, such as those produced by psychedelic drugs, marihuana, or mystical contemplation, synesthesias may appear whereby one form of sensory experience is translated into another form. For example, persons may report seeing or feeling sounds or being able to taste what they see. G. Change in meaning or significance. After observing and reading descriptions of a wide variety of ASCs induced by different agents or maneuvers, I have become very impressed with the predilection of persons in these states to attach an increased meaning or significance to their subjective experiences, ideas, or perceptions. At times, it appears as though the person is undergoing an attenuated "eureka" experience during which feelings of profound insight, illumination, and truth frequently occur. H. Sense of the ineffable. Most often, because of the uniqueness of the subjective experience associated with certain ASCs (e.g., transcendental, aesthetic, creative, psychotic, and mystical states), persons claim a certain ineptness or inability to communicate the nature or essence of the experience to someone who has not undergone a similar experience. I. Feelings of rejuvenation. ...On emerging from certain profound alterations of consciousness (e.g., psychedelic experiences, ...hypnosis, religious conversion, transcendental and mystical states), ...many persons claim to experience a new sense of hope, rejuvenation, renaissance, or rebirth. J. Hypersuggestibility. …The increased susceptibility and propensity of persons uncritically to accept and/or automatically to respond to specific statements...or nonspecific cues (i.e., cultural or group expectations for certain types of behavior or subjective feelings). Hypersuggestibility will also refer to the increased tendency of a person to misperceive or misinterpret various stimuli or situations based either on his inner fears or wishes. (8) Or consider the following list of effects: LSD and peyote are potent psycho-chemicals that alter and expand the human consciousness. Even the briefest summation of the psychological effects of these drugs would have to include the following: Changes in visual, auditory, tactile, olfactory, gustatory, and kinesthetic perception; changes in experiencing time and space; changes in the rate and content of thought; body image changes; hallucinations; vivid images—eidetic images—seen with the eyes closed; greatly heightened awareness of color; abrupt and frequent mood and affect changes; heightened suggestibility; enhanced recall or memory; depersonalization and ego dissolution; dual, multiple, and fragmentized consciousness; seeming awareness of internal organs and processes of the body; upsurge of unconscious materials; enhanced awareness of linguistic nuances; increased sensitivity to nonverbal cues; sense of capacity to communicate much better by nonverbal means, sometimes including the telepathic; feelings of empathy; regression and "primitivization"; apparently heightened capacity for concentration; magnification of character traits and psychodynamic processes; an apparent nakedness of psychodynamic processes that makes evident the interaction of ideation, emotion, and perception with one another and with inferred unconscious processes; concern with philosophical, cosmological, and religious questions; and, in general, apprehension of a world that has slipped the chains of normal categorical ordering, leading to an intensified interest in self and world and also to a range of responses moving from extremes of anxiety to extremes of pleasure. These are not the only effects of the psychedelic drugs... (9) The authors here do not leave any doubt abouttheir attribution of causes, but to be fair, it must be statedthat the more cautious researchers seemed aware, at least to someextent, of the difficulties in such attributions, althoughwithout taking the trouble to deny the implication. Hoffer andOsmond put it thus: The LSD experience is one about which there can be no argument about priorities between chemical and psychological factors. For there is no doubt whatever the chemical is given first and must cause the biochemical changes which later find expression in the psychological experience... A good deal is known about its [LSD's] phenomenal reactivity. What is not known is which one of its many biochemical reactions is the most relevant in producing the psychological changes. [italics added]. (10) The authors could be accused of semanticprestidigitation here, but I think it was more a matter of thedifficulty of understanding the psychedelic experience ratherthan a conscious effort to make a statement that would be rightno matter what the actual pathway of cause and effect turned outto be. Many researchers of the time show a dawning awareness intheir published works of the unsatisfactory implications of theapplication of classical cause and effect paradigms to many ofthe more unusual findings in psychedelic research. But if someresearchers did not go so far as to state flatly that LSD causesmystical experience, or that LSD causes perceptualtime distortions, or that LSD causes any number of other effectswhich writers are so fond of describing, at most they seemed justto add an additional link in the causal chain, as above. Observe,however, the statements of some (viz., ardent critics ofpsychedelic research) that LSD caused psychosis, or aschizophrenic-like state, or even suicide. Even court-cases,criminal and civil, were resolved on the basis that psychedelicdrugs were a logical cause of various acts or behaviors, or eveninstances of "mental illness". In the press and other popular writing, severalaccounts of hellish, or trivial experiences of an absurd naturewere published by those who considered themselves agnostics,skeptics or clear-thinkers, attempting to minimize or ridiculethe sometimes mystical-sounding claims of those such as AldousHuxley, Gerald Heard, or Alan Watts. These debunking attemptsuniformly portrayed the results of the reporter's psychedelicingestion as a kind of Hollywood movie, as if the drug were someroll of science-fiction film forcibly projected upon hisotherwise quite understandable and controllable life. "Thedrug made me do this, made me see that, caused me to think I wasa..." etc. If someone had a negative experience, especiallyif he were a noted reporter or medical practitioner, then hisreport left no doubt whatsoever about what the cause was, wherethe blame lay. I hope that it is now becoming clear thatalthough the ingestion of a psychedelic drug may be the firstevent of a series of events that culminates in undeniablyprofound perceptual and psychological changes, the simplisticdesignation of the first event as the logical cause of the entirechain of following events makes no more sense than my saying thatpsychedelic ingestion causes earthquakes. The mind-events ofpsychedelic experience, I am suggesting, are in an importantsense just as "exterior" and coincidental to theingestion of the drug as was the earthquake I experienced on theroof of my little bungalow in Guadalajara. It is my view thatattribution of cause and effect along these lines must beabandoned completely, it is a misleading model of psychedelicexperience and must be replaced. Even the idea that a psychedelicdrug causes distortions of perception must be scrapped.The whole idea of causation as it is currently conceived relativeto psychedelic experience is a metaphor, but unlike the model asmetaphor which is a useful device to understand and predict, themetaphor in this case is an impediment to a clear understanding.This is a major reason why the results of psychedelic researchhave been so difficult to interpret, and also a reason why it wasso easy to criticize, even ridicule both the research and theworkers who produced it. When I took the drug myself, I found that I was suffering from the delusion that I had been psychoanalyzed. I had spent seven and a half years on the couch and over $20,000, and so I thought I had been psychoanalyzed. But a few sessions with LSD convinced me otherwise. —Mortimer A. Hartman, Psychiatric Institute of Beverly Hills, 1959 As a first step in my replacement of the trivialmodel of psychedelic experience, I am going to reverse thesituation at hand and ask, not what causes the psychedelicexperience, but rather what causes us to be in our"normal" state of mind most, if not all of the time? Wemight say that the brain in its normal neurochemical state issufficient cause. The champions of reductionism of coursemaintain that the mind and its experiences cannot be anything butstates of the brain's neurons; this is, of course, FrancisCrick's "Astonishing Hypothesis". (11) I, among more notable critics of suchstrong reductive materialism, would call it (at best) a PrematureHypothesis, considering the present rudimentary state ofscientific knowledge about the nervous system. If recentcriticisms and counter-arguments against the reductionistposition have been less astonishing, (12) they have been more accuratein illustrating present limitations in understanding causation atand especially across the various hierarchical levels ofcomplexity between the physics and the biochemistry of neurons atone extreme, and consciousness and mind at the highest levels oforganization. A few paragraphs illustrating the difficulties andparadoxes of the concept causation might be in order, althoughthe topic is hotly debated and I will gain perhaps as manycritics as converts from my personal observations: If, (due to the ambiguity of causation when oneattempts to apply the concept across levels of description orcomplexity), the neurochemical state of the brain is notstrictly and exclusively a cause either of normal orextranormal states of mind, this is of course not to deny thatthere are correspondences between brain processesinvolving neurons, cognitive processes involving systems of brainparts, and conscious experience involving the total organism. Noris it to deny the possibility of learning things about one levelfrom studying another. It is the attribution of causation ofevents between one level of this hierarchy and another which isfraught with difficulties. Processes at one level are simply notstrictly reducible to processes at another, in spite of theirmutual interdependence. The distinction here is important, if seeminglyparadoxical, and may possibly be understood better by theobservation that two entirely different cognitive processesarriving at two entirely different "states of mind",must have the potential to occur from exactly the same originalneurochemical state of the brain. Stated a little differently:exhaustive examination and description of a given brain state orseries of brain states (if it were possible) cannot inprinciple predict the overall conscious experience of theowner of that brain. Conversely, two different dynamic brainstates might well have the possibility of corresponding to thesame conscious experience. If these considerations were not thecase, free will would necessarily be an illusion and absolutedeterminism unavoidable; only the extreme fringe of philosophyseriously believes this to be the true state of mankind. (13) Absolutedeterminism is, of course, the position that everyone, all thetime, is determined by antecedent, irresistible physicalconditions, so that free will becomes as meaningless as the ideathat my computer screen might suddenly decide to exhibit a"P" when I tap "Q" on the keyboard. Althoughcomputers in good repair normally mind their P's and Q's,consciousness does not. I see the error of attribution of causationconcerning psychedelics as representative of the same error onthe larger scale of the whole question of mind-brainrelationships. In most current models of consciousness, of whichthere recently have been many, there seems to me a fundamentalignorance of the logical repercussions of saying, for instance,that the mind, or consciousness, must be caused by thebrain. John Searle, the author of one of the more cautious andmeasured treatises on consciousness (14) nevertheless writes, It is an amazing fact that everything in our conscious life, from feeling pains, tickles, and itches to—pick your favorite—feeling the angst of postindustrial man under late capitalism or experiencing the ecstasy of skiing in deep powder—is caused by brain processes. As far as we know the relevant processes take place at the micro levels of synapses, neurons, neuron columns, and cell assemblies. All of our conscious life is caused by these lower-level processes, but we have only the foggiest idea of how it all works. (15) Searle suggests that objections to brain-to-mindcausation result from a "flawed conception ofcausation", and he attempts to split the concept in two:event-causation (a causal relation "between discrete eventsordered sequentially in time"), and non-event causationwhich he illustrates with the example of the collectiveproperties of the molecules of a table "causing" itsapparent solidity. But I would suggest that these two concepts ofcausation are so radically opposed in their meaning andproperties, perhaps being logically mutually exclusive, that itwould at a minimum be best to avoid using the same term for bothprocesses. Event-causation rests comfortably within the samelevel of description, whereas Searle's non-event causationviolates that comfort. If non-event causation is called instead"facilitation", suggesting that in such a process thereare entities and aspects which arise mutually rather than dependcausally upon each other, we may lose the security of believingthat we know something of the underlying mechanisms of mind-brainrelationships, but gain a more pragmatic basis for furtherunderstanding. Let us view a collection of wood molecules as"allowing" or "facilitating" the propertieswe recognize as "table", in the same sense that avalley allows or facilitates the flowing of a river through it:in neither case is causation meaningful if we wish this term toretain any concrete usefulness. Does the valley cause the river?(Actually, the river has caused the valley through the process oferosion!) Yet without the valley: no river! Without themolecules: no table! The table was "caused" by the menuisierwho built it: to use the same term in the attempt to see howproperties arise mutually with the object or process whichmanifest those properties only confuses. Causation wouldlogically have to operate bi-directionally in such instances, andthus lose its meaning entirely. Again, it is clear thatattempting to apply the concept of causation across differentlevels of description becomes paradoxical at best. Quite obviously the point of view that braincauses mind arises from that argument of poverty, "well whatelse could it be?" (In other words, "don't bring anymystical entities into this discussion or I will dismiss yourview as unscientific"). But if brain causes mind orconsciousness, and we are to understand causation in a reasonablylogical and precise way, then mind and consciousness aresuperfluous and inoperative constructs. The two theorems ofcausation we must agree to are: a cause must precede its effectin time, however briefly, and, because the brain is composed ofdiscrete, non-infinitesimal components, a cause brought about bybrain processes may likewise not be infinitesimal, ordifferential, it must have duration and other measurablecharacteristics. From here it follows that if mind is caused bythe brain, and only by the brain, it may have no properties inand of itself. It is reduced to the status of a gargoyle, or legson a snake. If brain states cause mental states inexclusivity, then consciousness and mind can have no part incausation whatever, since whatever is proposed as an effect ofmind must actually be the result of prior causation by the brain.And according to the great philosophers of both past and present,the whole point of mind/consciousness is that it most definitelydoes have the power of causation. In a non-trivial sense then, itappears at least as valid to say that mind causes brain as to saythe reverse, a paradoxical result to be sure. So we see that across the various hierarchicallevels between the physics and chemistry of neurons of the brainand the human mind, it is very difficult if not impossible toattribute clear-cut principles of causation. Causation seemsto enter the picture at each and every hierarchical level, and isnot wholly reducible to prior causation at another level oforganization. About all that can be said with confidence atthis point is that brain and mind facilitate and reflect eachother, like the valley and the river, but in no logical sense dothey cause each other; that they are parallel processes, and foran analogue of this seemingly paradoxical statement I wouldcompare the mind-brain duality to particle-wave duality inquantum mechanics. The wave attributes of electromagneticradiation do not cause the particle attributes, nor viceversa. The two contradictory and mutually exclusiveproperties always accompany each other, and whether the one isobserved or the other depends entirely on one's point of view, i.e.,the experiment one performs. Once again we see the importance of pointof view, or levels of description. Attribution of causationbetween levels is inherently meaningless. This is so far a veryrudimentary model, I admit, and gives little help for formingtestable hypotheses. But we should not feel there is some cosmicguarantee that we can devise an understandable model inthis case. There is, after all, some paradox in the using of mindto understand mind, and we should expect some limitations. Thus the argument that the normal brain causesnormal mind, or that psychedelics cause expanded mind orconsciousness, are both fallacious explanations. Nevertheless, wecan, and have found changes in neural signaling in the brainwhich are caused, in the classical sense, by thepsychedelic drugs. If we can combine the facts of these changeswith the vastly improved (yet still very rudimentary) knowledgewe now have of the sequential, parallel, and cybernetic cognitiveprocesses that occur in the various brain systems under a widerange of conditions, and test the resulting overall model ofneural signaling against an improved cognitive or psychologicalmodel of the psychedelic state of mind, a new theory may be inthe making. To restate some of the essentials of this theory: itwill have to be a theory of processes, parallel processes thatare complimentary ways of understanding an overall aspect ofreality, of processes of cybernetic control and feedback, ofprocesses in which classical cause and effect may be at best ablurred and uncertain property. If it is objected thatinapplicability of cause and effect seems unreasonable, rememberthat physics had to confront the same kind of paradoxes earlierin this century, and succeeded admirably. There is good reason tobelieve that theories of the ultimate structure of mind andconsciousness will be no less and probably more mired in apparentparadox than theories of the ultimate structure of matter andenergy. But I am getting ahead of myself. As for mytheory, or any theory, being a good explanation of consciousnessor mind, no author should dare such a claim today. A woven web ofguesses with a very imprecise weave would be a big claim. I shalldeal with the implications of my theory for mind, or Mind, onlynear the end of this exposition, and only as sheer speculation.Let me first deal with the cognitive and psychological models ofthe psychedelic experience, for these were the aspects that Ifirst explored, and it was through the construction and testingof these models that I was able to devise models of neurologicalfunctioning which could explain the cognitive processes that Ihad observed. Now the cognitive model I am going to describe willbe for the moment a "naked model" having no structureto support it, and since the model will be a radical departure,in some ways, from the way we currently believe our cognitiveprocesses to operate, it will be easy for the reader to dismissit. Bear with me as the pieces of the puzzle fall into placearound the chosen starting point. Remember that above I asked that the firstconsideration should be: "let us think of the effect of apsychedelic drug as eliminative, rather than additive: the drugfunctions as a facilitator of inherent processes, a substancewhich by its neurological action allows or assists certainprocesses to occur which might otherwise be rare orimprobable." I also mentioned above that the psychedelicexperience seems to provide a certain freedom from habits ofthinking, it almost ensures that one is more sensitive to one'sown prejudicial ways of seeing, hearing, perceiving, acting, andmost importantly, feeling, reasoning and deciding. So far I haveused the term "thinking" (as in habits of thinking),rather imprecisely, including within its domain all sorts ofmental processes. I will presently re-define thinking to denotetwo distinct categories of mental processes, the firstpre-conscious and largely automatic, the second comprising theprocesses we normally think of (!) as thinking: reasoning anddeciding, for example. The necessity to provide some carefuldefinitions is evident simply from the number of ways I have used"think" in this introductory paragraph, as well as theobvious overlapping of meaning with other terms. Starting withthe common usage and understanding of such terms therefore, Iwill try to provide more precise and functional meanings as I goalong. Considering the power of psychedelic experienceto repress in some way, or at least make one more aware of habitsof thinking as they happen, I am unavoidably led to the idea thatsuch habits are a far more important factor in the normaloperation of the brain/mind then has been supposed. But for along time, something (perhaps the Behaviorist legacy that Imentioned previously), seems to have stifled not only the studyof consciousness but also the pursuit of any technicalunderstanding of what a habit is, psychologically andneurologically. The word "habit" is used onlynon-technically in the literature, with few exceptions, since thetime of William James. But it seems to me that a habit, and thereis no denying that we "have" habits galore, mustconsist of something more definable, more describabletechnically, the concept must have a more heuristic value thanmerely leaving the term to fend for itself in popular use. (16) A habit, or as Iwill now call them, Habit Routines, must be something verymuch like a memory, (17)but different from a memory in that it is routinely andautomatically retrieved and employed without any awareness of itspresence or effect. In looking for a possible site for the storageof habit routines, analogous to the idea of memory storage, itoccurred to me that probably the "data" (18) of memory andthe data of habit routine was the same data, but that it wasaccessed in different ways, perhaps by different systems in thebrain. When a memory is accessed, either intentionally or by somerandom cue, what pops into awareness is a scene, a representationin the various sense domains of a specific and time-delimitedevent or series of events. We have a memory of somespecific and bounded fragment of the past, although one memorymay then cue another representing another period of timealtogether. I call this access of memory, Logical MemoryAccess, or LMA. It is logical in that the specificcharacteristics of the memory, the various informationalfragments from each sensory modality which are accessed, arerelated in time and place and represent a sequence of events asthey appear to have happened. (19) When a habit routine is called up foruse, a process I call Habit Routine Search, or HRS, theelements of the routine do not seem to be bound by the same timeand place considerations: they may represent fragments of datathat were recorded at many different times and situations, butwith one or more defining parameters relevant to dealing with thesituation for which the habit routine has been summoned. LMA andHRS are therefore two different means of accessing the data oflong-term memory for two different cognitive results. LMA yieldsa tangible memory, HRS yields an unconscious evaluation pattern. (20) I may now advance the hypothesis that the habitroutine search is a constant and primary process of cognitiveactivity of the mind/brain, and furthermore that it is the mainand essential, underlying and pre-conscious process in theactivity we know as thinking. This part of thinking, (letus call it thinking1), I will define as the unconsciousassociational and evaluative process including habit routinesearch which precedes, by just that fraction of a second, theawareness of what is thought through the use of language or otherrepresentational modalities such as the imagination andmanipulation of visual scenes, the use of gestures, the creationof music and art; these processes are called symbolization. (21) And since themind/brain is cybernetic, current sensory or environmental inputmust always include or be mixed with input from trains of thoughtleading to the instant we are experiencing. Thus the determining parameters for HRS consistof the environmental moment (the total sensory input), plusongoing feedback generated by conscious reaction to the currenthabit routine that has already been generated. We can use theterm "thinking2" to denote and include all thosesecondary processes we would normally call thinking, includingsymbolization, checking and logical analysis, reasoning, decisionand feedback of instructions or modifying parameters to ongoingthinking1. Thinking2 has the properties that some would label asconsciousness, but I would, at least for the moment, like toavoid using the word, if only to simplify my descriptive task. The feedback of instructions and parameters toongoing thinking1 probably uses what is now called workingmemory, a short-term limited-capacity memory buffer or storewhich is the subject of much contemporary research and debate.There are apparently several aspects or domains of workingmemory: one or more short term stores for spatial and visualinformation, another for auditory information, perhaps dividedbetween speech-based and musical functions, and perhaps workingmemory stores for combinations of sensory and cognitive data aswell. I will have more to say on working memory, its variousaspects and functions, and possible brain sites for its operationin the next couple of chapters. For the moment I will hypothesizean "information" storage site in the brain which holdsinstructions provided by one set of thinking functions(thinking2), for the execution of another set of thinkingfunctions (thinking1) which provide the raw material for theprocess as a whole. Thus the habit routine search of thinking1 inthe data of long-term memory is modified and guided byinstructions from the decisions of thinking2 held in workingmemory. These decisions may be deliberate, or largely automaticyet available for introspection. Figure 1 represents a simpleflow chart of the processes described. FIGURE 1. Flow Chart of Cognitive Processes.ENV=Environmental moment, all sensory input at the given moment.HRS=Habit Routine Search function, projects ENV into LTM andretrieves the Habit Routine. LTM=Long Term Memory. HR+S=Assembledhabit routine plus selected Sensory information.ACTION=implementation of habit routine in physical action orapproval of cognitive disposition; may be rejected in"SW", switch controlled by conscious decision. TheHABIT ROUTINE is both a template containing relevant sensory datafrom ENV, and at the same time a prefabricated plan for reactionto ENV and its WM (Working Memory) input. HR+S is delivered toThinking2 for Checking, Analysis, Attention, to whichSymbolization resonates. These conscious processes are then usedfor Decision to accept or reject the habit routine and optionallyprovide input parameters via WM affecting further HRS.Thinking1=unconscious processes not available directly tointrospection. Thinking2=conscious processes, but may beautomatic and unattended unless Attention is active. Decisionbased on either unattended processes, or processes scrutinizedwith Attention and/or Symbolization. Decision may accept, reject,supply parameters, and request further HRS. Decide has adouble-headed arrow back to other thinking2 activities toindicate that there are cycles of thinking2 processes possiblebefore deciding then alters ongoing thinking1 processes. Checkingand Analysis are merely representative of all such functionswhich could be said to consciously deal with ongoing cognition,Reasoning, Calculation, etc., could also be included. Checking,Analysis, Attention, and Symbolization could be said toconstitute components of Perception or Awareness. Note that theprocess of LMA is omitted for the present. To restate the model then, thinking1 is theoverall automatic and unconscious process of the comparison ofcurrent sensory input plus the result of previous symbolization,checking and decision, (thinking2), with information stored inlong-term memory accessed through the process of habit routinesearch. We are not normally aware of the thinking1 processesat all. Decision, which may be active or passive, (and is mostlythe latter), is consequently fed back into the thinking1/HRSprocess as an additional defining parameter for ongoing HRS. Itmay also act as a switch nullifying the implicit actionsrecommended by the ongoing habit routine. This is probably a veryarbitrary and primitive attempt to formulate a schematic flowmodel of some of the overall ongoing everyday processes of thehuman mind. And it certainly, along with all other possiblemodels, must be a great over-simplification. But let us just takeit as a first faltering step in the direction we think(thinking2!) we want to go in our understanding of psychedelicexperience. Let me illustrate the above proposed processeswith a short cognitive story, the kind of scene that happens tous all quite frequently, but which passes with little recognitionof just what is taking place. I live in the mountains in an areathat has seen rural subsistence farming for a thousand or moreyears. During this long period, the mountainside has been dividedand maintained into flat cultivable strips separated by rockwalls put together with no mortar, but a lot of care.Nevertheless, with every prolonged period of rain, the earthswells and a piece of wall somewhere is bound to collapse,needing repair. Occasionally, a rock or two will get rolling andwind up several terraces away from the point of collapse. Thus inmy walks around the property, it is common enough to see a greyirregularly-shaped stone, or several, in the midst of thepathway, even when no immediate point of wall damage is evident. Recently, walking down to the garden, in a moodof simply passively enjoying the walk, thinking not really aboutany particular topic, perhaps on the border of that state knownas day-dreaming, nothing out of the ordinary seems to behappening when... According to my cognitive model above, we couldsay that as I am walking, thinking1 is doing its normal,unconscious and pre-emptive job of actively using all sensoryinput to compare the current ongoing activity of my walk with allthat I have learned and experienced, stored in long-term memory.The component process of thinking1, HRS, is constantly retrievingthe simplest, most readily available, most easily employablehabit routines which match the parameters defined by the totalityof sensory environmental input and my pre-organized intention(walking down to the garden), and these habit routines are thensupplied, firstly, as templates for the automatic regulation ofall ongoing process including the perception and reaction to thesurroundings. Secondly, the habit routine, along with relevantfragments of the sensory data itself, is supplied to thinking2,which at this moment of daydreaming, is doing very littleanalyzing, reasoning, or deciding about the surroundings. Thecomponent process of thinking2, symbolization, is howeverrepresenting the sensory data (most of which is merely theinformation of the current habit routine) and making it availablefor awareness, so that I "see, hear, smell, feel,enjoy..." (and perhaps even explain to myself in language:the mountains are nice today!) my entire surroundings, although Ipay no special attention to anything in particular. There is evenan ongoing, if vague internal dialog occurring, partly about thesurroundings, but also about other matters entirely. This I amnot particularly paying attention to either. Thinking2 isrelaxing, simply passively "enjoying" the stroll.Unless thinking1 gives some extraordinary signal that somethingis amiss, or unusual, thinking2 is quite content to let thinking1supply all interpretations and responses to ongoing activity(action). Thinking2 is therefore interfering minimally, if atall, in the thinking1 processes through the prerogatives ofreasoning and deciding feedback via working memory. ...when suddenly, I spy a grey rock in thepathway ahead. As I said, this is not an unusual occurrence, butsince I have not seen a rock at this spot previously, thinking2goes into action, prodded by the novelty signaled by thinking1,and "notices" the novelty and reviews (checking) theactions of thinking1 which has presented the habit routine that,there before me, just like several times in the past, lies a rockthat has rolled down from some wall up above. This is a habitroutine of interpretation of environmental data (ENV) and carriesthe action recommendation to accept the novel object as"grey rock". The cognitive processes begin to operatefast and furiously now, even though this is no emergency, just aminor novelty. Fleetingly I am aware of the analytical checkingprocess in thinking2 that indicates, yes, it rained quite heavilylast week, (22) sohere is the result. Another thread of checking goes on, seeminglyat the same time, which finds the information that there is awall, two or three terraces up from this point, that is known tobe in poor repair and likely to have collapsed. I am aware thatsomehow this analysis happens at lightning speed, almostinstantaneously, and that the symbolization in language withwhich I can "explain" these positive checks on thehabit routine comes slightly after the fact, perhaps after thechecking process has already told thinking1 that its habitroutine is acceptable, proceed with normal operation. Thus thechecking and deciding function in thinking2 seems to beindependent, and faster than the symbolization of thinking2 whichseems only to resonate to the former operation. I am just about to approve the habit routine asan accurate and true representation of the novelty which liesbefore me when, and this happens so quickly as to be almostsimultaneous with all that has been so far described, somethingseems amiss. Perhaps the color was slightly wrong, or perhaps Idetected some movement in the object, but with a sudden suspicionlike that which one feels when one realizes he has been lied to,thinking2 sends out a strong command to thinking1 (the classicdouble-take!): suspicious interpretation! Find alternate habitroutine! These commands also occur well before any symbolizationprocess can "explain" what is going on. And lo andbehold, with this extra prodding and data, the HRS comes up withthe more accurate suggestion that here lies a dirty, partiallycrumpled plastic bag from the local supermarket. This habitroutine was probably one of several more that could be called up,in a series of increasing complexity and unlikelihood, andindeed, if the bag had been red, rather than dirty white (almostgrey), the "plastic bag" interpretation would have beenthe first accessed, being the most likely given the ENV parameterof the color red. (All the rocks here are grey.) (23) An interesting after-effect occurshere: I notice that during the next few moments I can view theobject and willfully transpose its identity back to that of greystone, but this ability fades and finally I am unable tointerpret the object as anything but plastic bag. The dependenceof perceived reality upon preconceptions, i.e., habitroutines, is especially demonstrated by this residual if fleetingability to see the object as either interpretation. Now if it takes the above amount of words toanalytically describe what occurred in probably a half-second, mystatement that there are limitations in using the mind to explainmind takes on some relevance. And the above is certainly anoversimplification! For instance, I believe that thinking1 andHRS can be multitasking, to use a computer analogy. Thinking1 andassociated HRS can be interpreting the ongoing activity asdescribed above, and simultaneously be working on another threadof material in reference to my internal dialog, which I mentionabove as possibly being about something completely different thanmy walk. I can be actively talking to myself about some subjectin which I have many severe prejudices (which are being accessedas habit routines by thinking1), all the while noticing greyrocks, plastic bags, or whatever, which also require the HRSsystem to interpret. Whether the two threads are simultaneous or"time-sharing", I would not yet care to say. As foreven further aspects of complexity, I have also made no mentionyet of how the factors of significance or value are attached tothe sensory data accompanying a habit routine. More on thislater. Let me postpone further theoreticalconsiderations for a bit to consider how the psychedelicexperience fits with the hypotheses presented so far. The function of a psychedelic drug, accordingto my theory, is to interfere in some way with the Habit RoutineSearch function of the brain, and I will call this the HabitSuspension Model of the effect of psychedelic drugs. Since the habit routine search mechanism hasvery probably several functional neural pathways and brain partswhich support its operation, different psychedelic drugs mayaffect the system by differing mechanisms yet yield very similaroverall results. All further supposed effects of the ingestion ofthese substances are not direct effects of the drugs themselves,but rather are consequences, which very probably are perpetuatedand magnified by cybernetic mechanisms, of the changesbrought about in the HRS system of the brain. Now I do not mean to imply that habit routinesare destroyed by the influence of psychedelics, or that thehabits are completely suppressed or inaccessible during the timeof drug influence. It is much more a process of temporarydelay or change in significance and value of habitroutines and their consequently changed use in ongoing cognitiveprocesses. The strength of the effect seems dose-dependent. Thehabit routines seem to arrive slightly out of phase, if I may beallowed an electromagnetic analogy, and presented thusly tothinking2 do not seem correct or valid recommendations forensuing evaluation and decision. And it is the habit routinesused for perception, analysis, reasoning and symbolization (Iwill call them the cognitive habit routines) (24) that are primarily affected: habitroutines which are used to coordinate movement, such as walkingor manipulating objects, are only slightly affected, if at all.Unlike alcohol or some other drugs, even high doses ofpsychedelics have very minimal effects on physical coordination.As Huxley noted on his first mescaline experience: although hewondered, when it was suggested that he take a walk in thegarden, whether he would be physically able to leave his chair,once launchedinto the act he noticed no difficulty or change incoordination. Now we may state something about the"causes" of the normal state of mind and thepsychedelic state: the normal state of mind is facilitated by theconstant process of HRS which finds appropriate,personality-typical responses for all ongoing activity. A"response" may be an interpretation or complexperception, an attitude, an emotional reaction, a"prejudice", or a pilot for actual physical action.These responses are habit routines representing the summedtotality of ways in which similar situations were dealt with inthe past, and these habit routines are presented to thinking2 aspre-structured ways of perceiving and dealing with the ongoingsituation so as to minimize or practically eliminate thenecessity for thinking2 to doubt perception or alter the responsethrough analytical decision making. Unless thinking2 is signaledof some unusual significance that warrants attention, it may noteven become aware of the decisions made on its behalf bythinking1. The process is cybernetic, an endless loop ofcausation, a process which, after a small delay, may enterconsciousness as language and other reflective activities in theprocess defined as symbolization. The normal delivery of HR's by the HRS mechanismfor use in ongoing cognitive activity is precisely what wecall a normal state of mind, a state in which the checkingability and analysis of thinking2 does or needs to do verylittle. A good analogy would be driving along a well-known roadin light traffic: practically all required actions areautomatically provided for without conscious effort or the needfor evaluation by the analysis and checking of thinking2. Thisapplies to all physical routines needed to steer, brake, etc.,but more importantly to the routines of perception, judgment, andplanning needed to decide, for example, whether the child aheadis probably going to ride his bike too close for safety. Althougheveryone would accept the analogy, I will perhaps not make manyfriends suggesting that the totality of life is also a simplematter of habit routines (sometimes of somewhat greatercomplexity than those dealing with highway driving!), separatedat infrequent intervals by brief bursts of creativity which maybe little more than responses to temporary emergencies.Psychology textbooks may be full of research showing howautomatic most actions and thoughts really are, but the readerautomatically (!) takes the position that the description isrelevant to others, the objects of study, and certainly not tohim who is right then scrutinizing the phenomenon. We may deduce,perhaps, that a very powerful habit routine is the one whichgives us the impression of being constantly and fully aware, inan analytic, deciding, and creative sense, of our surroundingsand thought processes, that habits play only a minor,inconsequential and optional role in thinking. (25) Again, the psychology textbooks arefilled with studies which indicate the contrary. For the moment I must postpone showing thedistinction between physical habit routines on the one hand, (asfor example the physical, learned routines employed in the actualdriving of the car, above), and perceptual and cognitive habitroutines on the other. For now, we could say that cognitive habitroutines, among their other functions, may constitute a pilot forthe selection and implementation of motor routines used toguide and control actual physical movement. I believe that twoquite independent systems of the brain are used to store andimplement the instructions for these activities. This wouldexplain why, according to my model as well as experimentalobservations, cognitive and perceptual habit routines arestrongly affected by psychedelics, but physical coordination ispractically untouched. It is the normal and pre-emptive operation ofthe HRS mechanism which is the impediment preventing the normalmind from interpreting sensory and feedback input as anything butcommon, routine, normal, everyday input. We are very much the slaves of the habit routinemechanism, and this is to be expected from an evolutionarystandpoint. HRS is the mechanism all organisms having evenmoderately developed nervous systems use to deal with any and allsituations which do not present a crisis, situations of normalsignificance and value for ongoing existence. The habit routineis a short-cut, a pre-established pattern allowing an organism tocomprehend and deal with commonly encountered situations quicklyand with a very minimum of neurological, cognitive effort. Moreprimitive animals with very little cognitive ability in reservemust rely strongly upon the HRS system. The habit routinemechanism was probably a very early evolutionary development inthe animal kingdom for it would have conferred obvious importantadvantages over any animal which had to treat every single eventas unique, an animal which would not gain the benefits ofpractice and learning about a wide range of everyday situations. Let us now review the list of"effects" outlined earlier and see how they can beunderstood in terms of the Habit Suspension Model. As anintroduction to the phenomenology of ASCs, I asked, "let ussee if we can understand each 'effect' not as something that apsychedelic drug does, but as something which wemight do, if only rarely, under certain circumstances."Pretend, for the moment, that you have never even heard ofpsychedelic drugs. This may not be easy, but for someone withsome measure of practiced control over his habit routines, inreading the list, I think it would be quite normal to be able tosay, "Yes, I've experienced something like that", or atleast admit that someone they know had had similar experiences.In short, the only thing that makes any of the categories awesomeor strange, is their purported causal connection with psychedelicdrugs. Take the famous alleged time-distorting power ofpsychedelic drugs. If you were having a very busy and interestingafternoon with your favorite hobby, you might look up at theclock and remark, "holy cow, five-thirty already!".But if you heard from some tabloid-reported source that LSD madeyou feel it was only about four o'clock when actually it wasfive-thirty... (or vice versa ). I think it is obvious that we have habitroutines for dealing with the everyday perception of the passageof time, so that when we look at a clock, it is really only toconfirm what we already sense about the time of day. If you lookat your watch, and it has stopped even twenty minutes previous,something seems immediately wrong unless you are particularlydistracted with other tasks. Even upon awakening from a deepsleep in the middle of the night, I quite often find that I knowthe time to the nearest ten minutes, in spite of living far outin the countryside away from hourly chimes or audible trafficpatterns. In the above case of intense absorption in someactivity, we have habit routines available such that we expectit to actually be later than it feels, so that when weexpress amazement that it's already five-thirty, the knowledgethat we have been busily engaged does more than a little to takethe edge off the amazement, so to speak. All this is common knowledge. But where mytheory begins, is in the attempt to describe the data and systemsby which this simple everyday process is implemented, anddrastically changed by various influences including psychedelicdrugs. The hypothesis that it is installed potential habitroutines that deal with everyday perception of time gains somecredibility from the knowledge that time perception was quitedifferent before the advent of widespread mechanical time-keepingdevices. In medieval Europe, daylight hours were longer orshorter according to the season, somethingthat would probablywreak havoc with our modern sense of time until we had longpractice installing the newly required habit routines to dealwith the situation. My theory also departs from simple commonknowledge in its attribution of such fundamental importance tothe use of habit routine; rather than a habit being an occasionaltype of response to certain situations, it is now proposed that the habit routinesearch is the principal operation in thinking1, always aprecedent to awareness and thinking2, and that the habit routinepresented to awareness for decision making always constitutesthe pre-emptive or default response, seldom overruled by theactive analysis and decision of thinking2 except in cases ofemergency or particularly unusual significance of events. Familiarity breeds indifference, as AldousHuxley noted, but the cognitive mechanism by which such anaphorism might operate has until now never been proposed. Allsituations for which a satisfactory habit routine may be summonedare dealt with as automatically, and with as great a measure ofindifference, as possible. The artist, the great composer, thecreative genius in any field may succeed in seeing thesignificant when presented with the merely routine, (26) but this is notthe normal state of brain operation, nor is it the type of brainoperation that evolution has caused to be predominant. And this is why psychedelic drugs appear to beso overwhelmingly powerful. When awareness is effectively cutloose from the normal and reliable flow of habit routine, everythingseems changed, odd, with unusual, sometimes overpowering, but notimmediately explainable changes in significance. And as I haveindicated, this very change is actively recycled and augmented bycybernetic feedback wherein current evaluation and checking ofawareness is fed back into the stream of thinking1 which isseeking out further habit routines, now including parameterswhich instruct it to look for the unusual, and these new habitroutines themselves are then delayed, suspended, or changed insignificance. Item C in the phenomenology of ASC's, the sense orfear of loss of control, can be easily understood from theforegoing. An individual's reality, what he automaticallybelieves to be normal and true in his estimation of the worldaround him, is entirely a matter of the habit routines he hascollected, and himself installed, whether by intentional orunconscious practice. If the individual is not prepared tosurrender his cherished notions, if he cannot overcome theobvious implication that reality, seen without the aid ofpreconceived habit routines, must appear relative and notabsolute, feelings of loss of control are the naiveinterpretation to be expected. (And of course, the lesson beingtaught is, "What control?") As for the other items listed previously as"effects" of psychedelic drugs, it should not now bedifficult to see how they are all the result of an individual'shaving reduced access to his habit routines which define how hesees, thinks, perceives objects around him, perceives his ownbody and state of mind, the meaning and significance he attachesto otherwise ordinary thoughts and perceptions, and so on.So-called perceptual distortions are merely ordinary perceptiondivorced from the normal pre-emptive preconditioning of the habitroutine complex through which such perceptions are symbolized. Tothose who wish to believe that psychedelic drugs causehallucinations and bizarre perceptual effects, the proposal thatperception under the influence of the psychedelic experience isin fact closer to actual reality than normal perception (which isheavily "distorted" by our habit routines) will appearabsurd. But the "habit of thinking" (as in Margolis'analysis, see footnote 16) which prevents a paradigm shiftnecessary to understand the psychedelic experience may well bejust this: the whole of our experience has established theconviction, in reality a lie, that what we perceive isautomatically and without doubt, reality. Although most currenttheories in psychology recognize the lie, as individuals we stillcarry on as if this were a mere scientific technicality whichappears in certain laboratory experiments. The exampleillustrated by the grey stone anecdote shows how misinformed weare in this conviction. Some of the items in the phenomenology of ASC'smay be understood as secondary or cascade effects of the moreprimary results of suspended habit routine: hypersuggestibilitymight be interpreted as a result of the feelings of loss ofcontrol, sense of ineffability, and change of significancewherein the suggestions of the guide or researcher are givengreater weight in the vacuum of normal comprehension of ongoingcognition. Change in emotional expression would likewise be asecondary effect derived from perceived alterations in thinking,feeling of loss of control, etc. The suspension of the normalframework of habit routine for interpreting and symbolizingongoing experience should obviously result in the sense ofineffability. Feelings of rejuvenation may result from suspensionof personality habit routines that have become contradictory orself-destructive, their temporary suspension leading theindividual to realize that they are mere routines, and capable ofbeing reformed once seen for what they are. Here we are led tothe hypothesis that the personality itself can be understood as amalleable and alterable collection of habit routines; some earlypsychedelic research suggested as much, and made use of the ideaby successfully treating many personality disorders withpsychedelic therapy. Indeed, the very existence of what we call"personality" as such a strong, pervasive property of ahuman being argues for the prevalence, importance, andpredominance of habit routines and the HRS as the primarycognitive process. Personality, world view, beliefs, desires,opinions, are all understandable as complex assemblies of habitroutines. What the Freudians have for so long called theunconscious, may simply be the totality of potential habitroutines that can be accessed! (27) A memory is not a memory until it isaccessed, therefore an unconscious memory is an oxymoron. But ahabit routine, (whose elements consist of the very same data), isnot only an unconscious potential pattern for perception,comprehension, and behavior, it is in addition and quitenormally, accessed and employed unconsciously, and the process isnot available to introspection. To return to the pathway for just a moment, frommy own personal experiences with psychedelic drugs, the greystone in question would probably have appeared, at first and verybriefly, as an object of some significance (it was new to itslocation) but without an habit routine to immediatelyidentify it. The first thing my thinking2 would sense would bemystery, the object seen as an unknown. Very quicklythereafter, I think it is common during psychedelic experiencefor the HRS of thinking1 to present multipleinterpretations of the object (hence one or more interpretationswould logically have to be an "hallucination"); I mighthave sensed two or more possible identifications at once,whereupon the relativeness of its novelty and significance mightstimulate further fundamental changes in my interpretation, andso on. As this process is cybernetic, it can quite run away withitself, so to speak, and the ordinary become fantastic throughsuccessive interpretations and alterations of meaning andsignificance. The multiple interpretations, the multiple habitroutines appearing simultaneously, might be the mechanism wherebyit has been noticed by researchers that psychedelic experiencecan assist in the "recovery and eliciting of vast quantitiesof unconscious material." It is as if thinking2 issignaling, in the absence of a dependable habit routine,"quick, send me all the habit routines you've got, there's abig mystery going on here." And then the habit routines thatdo arrive are also out of whack... (but also potentially veryrevealing of the personality and the "unconscious"). Atthis stage there is little to be done except to relax and observethe process as it unfolds. It is instructive to the personalityto be shown how dependent it is on normal and perhaps quiteartificial automatisms, and it is instructive concerning theunderlying nature of reality to observe first hand how itsinterpretation is also totally dependent on preconceivedstructures of the mind which may be more or less arbitrary, ifnot outright deception. If this be madness, schizophrenia,psychosis, or folly, a moderate dose of it is certainly more thana homeopathic remedy for the far greater sickness which quiteobviously afflicts modern man "in this century ofholocaust." To conclude this chapter, I will quote at lengthanother account of psychedelic experience and the"effects" as noted by the experiencer. The narrative isthat of Aldous Huxley, probably the most famous and widely-readaccount of psychedelic experience to date. I took my pill at eleven. An hour and half later I was sitting in my study, looking intently at a small glass vase. The vase contained only three flowers—a full-blown Belle of Portugal rose, shell pink with a hint at every petal's base of a hotter, flamier hue; a large magenta and cream-coloured carnation; and, pale purple at the end of its broken stalk, the bold heraldic blossom of an iris. Fortuitous and provisional, the little nosegay broke all the rules of traditional good taste. At breakfast that morning I had been struck by the lively dissonance of its colours. But that was no longer the point. I was not looking now at an unusual flower arrangement. I was seeing what Adam had seen on the morning of his creation - the miracle, moment by moment, of naked existence... [I was seeing] a bunch of flowers shining with their own inner light and all but quivering under the pressure of the significance with which they were charged...[And] the books, for example, with which my study walls were lined. Like the flowers, they glowed, when I looked at them, with brighter colours, a profounder significance. Red books, like rubies; emerald books; books bound in white jade; books of agate, of aquamarine, of yellow topaz; lapis Lazuli books whose colour was so intense, so intrinsically meaningful, that they seemed to be on the point of leaving the shelves to thrust themselves more insistently on my attention... At ordinary times the eye concerns itself with such problems as Where?—How far?—How situated in relation to what? In the mescalin experience the implied questions to which the eye responds are of another order. Place and distance cease to be of much interest. The mind does its perceiving in terms of intensity of existence, profundity of significance, relationships within a pattern... From the books the investigator directed my attention to the furniture. A small typing-table stood in the centre of the room; beyond it, from my point of view, was a wicker chair and beyond that a desk. The three pieces formed an intricate pattern of horizontals, uprights and diagonals - a pattern all the more interesting for not being interpreted in terms of spatial relationships. Table, chair and desk came together in a composition that was like something by Braque or Juan Gris, a still life recognizably related to the objective world, but rendered without depth, without any attempt at photographic realism. I was looking at my furniture, not as the utilitarian who has to sit on chairs, to write at desks and tables, and not as the cameraman or scientific recorder, but as the pure aesthete whose concern is only with forms and their relationships within the field of vision or the picture space. But as I looked, this purely aesthetic Cubist's-eye view gave place to what I can only describe as the sacramental vision of reality. I was back where I had been when I was looking at the flowers—back in a world where everything shone with the Inner Light and was infinite in its significance... Mescalin raises all colours to a higher power and makes the percipient aware of innumerable fine shades of difference, to which, at ordinary times, he is completely blind... Visual impressions are greatly intensified and the eye recovers some of the perceptual innocence of childhood, when the sensum was not immediately and automatically subordinated to the concept. Interest in space is diminished and interest in time falls almost to zero... Though the intellect remains unimpaired and though perception is enormously improved, the will suffers a profound change for the worse. The mescalin taker sees no reason for doing anything in particular and finds most of the causes for which, at ordinary times, he was prepared to act and suffer, profoundly uninteresting. He can't be bothered with them, for the good reason that he has better things to think about... 'This is how one ought to see,' I kept saying as I looked down at my trousers, or glanced at the jewelled books in the shelves, at the legs of my infinitely more than Van-Goghian chair. 'This is how one ought to see, how things really are'... for the moment, mescalin had delivered me [from] the world of selves, of time, of moral judgments and utilitarian considerations, the world (and it was this aspect of human life which I wished, above all else, to forget) of self-assertion, of cocksuredness, of over-valued words and idolatrously worshipped notions... [T]he investigator suggested a walk in the garden. I was willing; and though my body seemed to have dissociated itself almost completely from my mind—or, to be more accurate, though my awareness of the transfigured outer world was no longer accompanied by an awareness of my physical organism—found myself able to get up, open the French-window and walk out with only a minimum of hesitation. It was odd, of course, to feel that 'I' was not the same as these arms and legs 'out there,' as this wholly objective trunk and neck and even head. It was odd; but one soon got used to it. And anyhow the body seemed perfectly well able to look after itself. In reality, of course, it always does look after itself. All that the conscious ego can do is to formulate wishes, which are then carried out by forces which it controls very little and understands not at all. When it does anything more—when it tries too hard, for example, when it worries, when it becomes apprehensive about the future—it lowers the effectiveness of those forces and may even cause the devitalized body to fall ill. In my present state, awareness was not referred to an ego; it was, so to speak, on its own. This meant that the physiological intelligence controlling the body was also on its own. For the moment that interfering neurotic who, in waking hours, tries to run the show was blessedly out of the way. (28) What a wonderfully poetic way of describing thenormal collection of habit routines that rendered the worldordinary, plain, of merely routine significance: Huxley calls hishabit-routine governed personality "that interferingneurotic who, in waking hours, tries to run the show." Henotes that his awareness "was not referred to an ego",i.e., that the habit routines ofpersonality that preserveself-image, self-importance, selfness, were no longer available,his awareness "was, so to speak, on its own." And thefollowing line: "All that the conscious ego can do is toformulate wishes, which are then carried out by forces which itcontrols very little and understands not at all," is nothingbut a poetic description of the operation of checking anddecision of thinking2 feeding back instructions as parameters forfurther habit routine search operations via working memory. If wedo not control them, at least we may now understand them somewhatbetter. And note the number of times that increased"significance" is mentioned... ... for the moment, mescalin had delivered me [from] the world of selves, of time, of moral judgments and utilitarian considerations, the world (and it was this aspect of human life which I wished, above all else, to forget) of self-assertion, of cocksuredness, of over-valued words and idolatrously worshipped notions... In a word, mescaline had delivered him fromhabit routines. If the Habit Suspension Model of psychedelicexperience is correct, we may begin to see the enormous power ofthe HRS mechanism to shape our every impression, our every wordand deed, for if the profound changes of psychedelic experienceare nothing but reduced access to acceptable habit routines, wewould have to say that habit routines are the cognitive water weswim in, omnipresent and supportive of our every intellectualmovement, yet (until now) perfectly transparent and undetectableto ordinary scrutiny. At the risk of seeing habit routines everywhere,for a new theory often incites such excesses in its newlyacquired adherents, I think it safe to say that most of the"effects" noted by Mr. Huxley, and in the precedingexamples as well, can be adequately understood in terms of theHabit Suspension Model. In Mr. Huxley's case, considering hisgreat personal interest in art, the Perennial Philosophy andmystical and spiritual matters, his compassion for the humansituation, and his humility, the effects he describes demand suchan interpretation. (1). An excellent and recent entry,complete with 121-page bibliography: Pharmacotheon:Entheogenic Drugs, their Plant Sources and History, JonathanOtt, 1993, Natural Products Co., Kennewick WA. (back) (2). see for example "The Role of Hallucinogenic Plantsin European Witchcraft" by Michael J. Harner, in Hallucinogensand Shamanism, Michael J. Harner, editor, Oxford UniversityPress, 1973. This overall if brief survey is a classic of thepsychedelic literature, not to be overlooked. (back) (3). "The Effects of Psychedelic Experience on LanguageFunctioning", Stanley Krippner, in Psychedelics,Aaronson and Osmond, Doubleday & Company 1970. (back) (4). Ibid. (back) (5). "Toward an Individual Psychotherapy", Masters& Houston, Psychedelics, (Ibid.) (back) (6). Drugs and the Brain, Solomon H. Snyder,Scientific American Library 1986, p2. (back) (7). Where the author refers to an ASC, it is an AlteredState of Consciousness. (back) (8). edited excerpts from "Altered States ofConsciousness", Arnold M. Ludwig, in Altered States ofConsciousness, Charles T. Tart, Doubleday & Company 1972pp15-19. (back) (9). The Varieties of Psychedelic Experience, Mastersand Houston, Holt, Rinehart and Winston 1966, p5. (back) (10). "How does LSD Work" in The Hallucinogens,Hoffer and Osmond, Academic Press 1967 p211. (back) (11). Francis Crick, The Astonishing Hypothesis,Charles Scribner's Sons 1994, see page three for example. (back) (12)> See for example Stairway to the Mind, AlwynScott, Springer-Verlag 1995 (back) (13). I am for the moment ignoring the hypothesis thatquantum indeterminacy may be the source of the brainindeterminacy necessary for philosophically-real free will. (back) (14). The Rediscovery of the Mind, John R. Searle,Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1992. (back) (15). "The Mystery of Consciousness", in The NewYork Review of Books, November 2, 1995, p60. (back) (16). In The Oxford Companion to the Mind forinstance, although "instinct" and other terms frownedupon by Behaviorists have generous entries, "habit" hasno entry whatsoever. On the other hand, Howard Margolis, astudent of Thomas Kuhn, has written two admirable booksconcerning "habits of mind" and how they governperception, judgment, and even scientific beliefs. See Patterns,Thinking and Cognition, 1987, and Paradigms and Barriers,How Habits of Mind Govern Scientific Beliefs, 1993, bothUniversity of Chicago Press. (back) (17). When speaking of memory here, I refer to what is nowgenerally called "long-term memory." (back) (18). I enclose the word in quotes to denote mydissatisfaction with the current computer-oriented models of muchof cognitive science. In using such words as data, information,computation, etc. when speaking about mind and consciousness, onedoes less of explaining than "conjuring away the barriersbetween man and machine, between consciousness andmechanism." (Raymond Tallis in Psycho-Electronics).But it is very difficult not to use such terms today, soingrained is the idea of some equivalence between mind andmachine. I hope that the reader will see that as my theorydevelops, along with new ways to understand the important differencesbetween man and machine, the use of such terms will slowly bereplaced by new concepts which obviate their need. Thus I willfrom this point in the text suspend the tediousness of quotationmarks provided the reader will keep in mind the limitations Ihave expressed. (back) (19). Recent terminology as well as theory in the field ofmemory research has blossomed. The process of LMA which I definehere would be said to access autobiographical or episodicmemory; additionally there have been proposed the terms procedural,semantic, implicit and explicit, short-term, long-term, andworking memory to describe other aspects of memory. I shalldefine and use these terms as the model develops. (back) (20). Perhaps an analogy would be helpful here. We mightthink of a unit of memory as like a single frame of a motionpicture. In LMA, a sequence of frames is called up, andexperienced as a sequence or "film clip," in temporalorder, and with conscious reference to the time and conditionswhere the frames were recorded. This is not to say that theprocess may not become degraded, with loss of data, loss ofreference to time and place, erroneous mixing of differentmemories, etc., the ideal expressed merely illustrates the typeand mechanics of the process to be understood. HRS, however,would access a variety of single frames recorded at differenttimes and places, a sort of collage of single frames, associatednot as a temporal sequence, and not consciouslyexperienced, butunconsciously selected and employed according to a thematicagenda specified by subject content corresponding to currentperception. Thus if stopped on the highway by a "lawenforcement officer" for no apparent reason, we may berather hurriedly accessing, in the data of all memories ofdealings with the police (our own and knowledge of such dealingsby others gleaned from friends, newspapers, etc.), for everypossible habit routine that might assist in estimating what isgoing on. Specific memories of similar scenes might appearfleetingly, but far more important would be the unconsciousevaluation patterns supplied by habit routine search that wouldallow and assist our judgment to calculate just how to react toany eventuality, given the particular parameters of the currentsituation. Thus if he has just gotten off an excessively chromedHarley, has black ray-bans, razor-sharp creases on his shirt anda penetrating snarl we will automatically react somewhatdifferently than if he was a school-crossing patrolman, tips hishat and says he thinks our signal light might be out. Nodeliberate calculation or access of actual memories via LMA isnecessary, yet the "data" of many memories is obviouslybeing employed, unconsciously and automatically, to guide ourreaction to the situation. (back) (21). The model described here has parallels to ideassuggested by C.H. van Rhijn, see "Symbolysis: Psychotherapyby Symbolic Presentation" in The Use of LSD inPsychotherapy, Harold A. Abramson, editor, Josiah Macy, Jr.Foundation, 1960. (back) (22). This process must also use a habit routine, thinking2feeding instructions to thinking1 to search for justificationthat its previous interpretation of "grey rock ahead"is possible. A habit routine is then found which relates thecause and effect pattern learned previously about rain andout-of-place rocks. I do not specifically remember as memoriesthe rainy days and the displaced rocks encountered, but use only"frames" of these memories to obtain the fact that rainhas recently occurred on a scale which is known from experienceto produce grey rocks in pathways. (back) (23). This knowledge must also have been retrieved and usedthrough HRS as a parameter ensuring that a grey object beinterpreted as probably a stone, and an object of decidedlynon-grey hue as not-a-stone. (back) (24). And here I think that we are dealing with two classesof habit routines, some simple habit routines of perception areprobably called up by the arrangement of sensory environmentaldata itself, i.e., in thinking1, whereas habit routines ofanalysis and symbolization must be habit routines that are calledup by thinking1 on behalf of thinking2. I will thereforesometimes refer to a habit routine complex, signifying acomposite habit routine comprising multiple aspects and multipleinterlocking recommendations for action. (back) (25). This might be understood as a habit routine whichthinking2 installs in memory through the process of constantlyseeing its power to alter the surroundings. The habit routine isthat thinking2 is in control, while the reality is that, most ofthe time, it is on vacation. (back) (26). The question presents itself:Who can be best trusted to decide what is, and what is notroutine, the creative genius or the bored assembly-line worker? (back) (27). Warning! The reaction to suchideas must also be primarily a matter of habit routinesrepresenting one's investment in previous theories. (back) (28). Aldous Huxley, The Doors ofPerception, 1954, Chatto & Windus. Quotation assembledfrom various sections of the essay. (back) Table of Contents Chapter 4 WT01-B36-11IA087-000632-B029-172http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065042 text/html 110982HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:50:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:19:38 GMTContent-length: 110762 The Center of the Universe - Chapter 4 4. The Neuromechanics of HRS — Introduction Being an outlaw does have its share of suddenand tragic surprises. The moralist (if he has read this far, outof a taste for voyeurism or some other vice curious to those whoknow what is right and hesitate not to coerce others to theirviews), shall now have permission to gloat. Yet it has been mylife experience that sudden misfortune occurs to us all, mostunexpectedly and just when we thought we were going along quitenicely. Moralists and fanatics of all kinds get their share quiteas much as the outlaw, the iconoclast, or the revolutionary, butmoralists seem rarely to commit their misfortunes to pen andpaper. The worst of misfortunes that men suffer is in my view theslow, life-long and silent tragedy of those who do not, or willnot abandon so-called security when opportunity knocks. To besimply dragged along by the responsibility to safety may beinstinctual, but it is hardly creative nor does it lead to thefulfillment of the more precious potentialities of being human.To arrive safely at the stage of life where it is certain thatthe halfway point has passed, yet not even have an interestingstory to tell, would be for me a far greater tragedy than theseveral which awaited. During the later stages of our morning-gloryresearches, news reached us that two friends, who had beenmissing for a few days, had been ambushed and shot dead while onan expedition into the mountains of Michoacan. Several timespreviously they had brought back with them the most amazinglypotent cannabis for us to sample; in those days seedlessmarijuana, or sinsemilla, was almost unknown. I rememberintroducing sinsemilla from one of their mountain foraysto a few friends in New York who were well acquainted with allthe varieties of hashish and pot that international smugglingcould bring to market. With the exception of that rare piece ofespecially strong Lebanese Red, the sinsemilla won allcontests. In spite of the new climate of liberalism onboth coasts of America, for several marijuana smoke-ins hadoccurred and were mostly tolerated (it even seemed likelegalization would not be too long in the offing), in Mexicoassociation with any aspect of marijuana classed one immediatelyas a contrabandista, and subject to the same wild-westoutlaw-style of justice as any train robber, or trafficker ofguns, hard drugs, slaves, or revolution. The fate of ourmild-mannered hippie friends was adequate proof of this. A fewweeks previous, we had been invited to a luncheon in celebrationof I-was-never-certain-exactly-what, and around the great tableof Mexican haute-cuisine sat the chief of police of Guadalajara,a couple of army generals charged with controlling, among otherthings, the local drug traffic, a half-dozen other governmenttypes, a whole tribe of the most authentic-looking contrabandistasone could imagine, including the major marijuana and hard-drugbroker of the state of Jalisco, and three disguised hippies (wehad cut our hair short north of the border to ensure ease ofentry into Mexico). Well it was a merry time indeed, I am ashamedthat I had not then learned enough Spanish to relate here thedetails of the merriment, but the machine guns were casuallyreposing along the entire length of the dining room wall in amanner surpassing even Hollywoodian depictions of 1920's Chicago.We hippies, of course, came unarmed. Perhaps the JohnWayneian fables we had beennourished on from early youth inured us to such signs ofimpending catastrophe, but the loss of our friends suddenlytransformed the mythology of good guys versus bad guysinto a sobering lesson. It was not the type of sobriety themoralist will now blame me for not embracing, for that is thesobriety of capitulation to a lie, a lie which is not even one'sown. It was more the type of sobriety gained by the hard woncontest in which a small bit of wisdom is wrested from the ritualof initiation which fate so generously supplies in response toboldness. All the ancient tribes had structured their societieswith elaborate and demanding ritual contests whereby the young,expressing their natural and new-found boldness, might gainwisdom with minimal risk, but our own advanced Western societyhad dispensed with such superstition, with the feeble exceptionof First Communions and Bar Mitzvahs, and so the young found itnecessary to express prowess through automotive inanity,alcoholic one-upmanship and other silly sport, the corporal andspiritual fatalities of which seldom prompted scholars to bemoanthe demise of ancient ritual. If anything, new layers of laws andregulations, and a few new prisons were expected to do the trick.But I digress. What the tragedy prompted me to do was not beata penitent retreat from my errant ways, disobeying laws that werewritten for my own good, but to remove to safer climes andcontinue on my researches with redoubled enthusiasm. Since theoutlawing of all use of LSD in 1967, the predictable hadhappened. Clandestine manufacture and distribution had flourishedas had bathtub gin several decades before, and parallel tobathtub gin incidents, not all clandestine LSD was of goodquality, nor manufactured by those intending that its use beaccomplished intelligently. (And as for parallels between alcoholand psychedelic drugs, this is as far as it goes: either, orboth, may be legal or illegal, used or abused.) As a chemist, itseemed a worthwhile project to experiment with the variouspublished synthetic methods it was possible to use in themanufacture of LSD and other psychedelics, in order to developthe most efficient processes possible. Efficiency here would meanthat the process had to employ a minimum of equipment, easilyobtainable chemical precursors and reagents, and still produce aproduct of more than just acceptable purity, and in maximumoverall yield. And as a shaman concerned with the existentialhealth of my tribe, it was also my duty to discover and relateall possible knowledge to the people who would need suchinformation to use the psychedelic substances wisely. This aspectof my work turned out to be by far the more difficult, for notonly had we lost touch with (eradicated, actually) much ancientwisdom gained over millennia by the shamanic traditions, but themodern political, social, and even scientific climates made itpractically impossible to recapture much of that early wisdom inthe natural way. The modern situation colored and distorted ourabilities to reproduce the mindset that would naturally see thepsychedelic experience as sacrament: the modern orientation hadfirst suspected the diabolical, then the insane, and soonthereafter was trying to discover how to use psychedelics asweapons of war and subterfuge. Luckily, my friends, who were experienced inthat sort of thing, were able to import my laboratory back acrossthe border no questions asked. And so I found myself, back inSomewhere U.S.A., (still a draft evader), and with an interestthat attracted over the next several years various groups ofpersons wanting to promote the clandestine use of psychedelicdrugs, for reasons which seemed to change from noble to pecuniaryin proportion to the success achieved. Unfortunately the prohibition of psychedelicshas for the last quarter-century prevented much progress frombeing made on elaborating the details of the neurological effectsof LSD and other psychedelics in the human brain. As I mentionedpreviously, the very modest amount of work that has beendone was with laboratory animals, or in vitro cultures ofnerve cells, and has in general been directed towardtoxicological or forensic ends. Thus there is not alot ofreliable data available on how normal doses of psychedelicsubstances affect normal neurochemistry in normal human subjectsexperiencing the more valuable and interesting aspects ofpsychedelic experience. If for the past several years experiments couldhave been performed using volunteers, especially experiencedpsychedelic users, in the attempt to accumulate some reliabledata, the task I will now attempt would be far morestraightforward. For example, I suspect that if the new andpowerful scanning techniques of PET and MRI were combined withthe experimental ingenuity of some of the top cognitiveneuroscientists to illuminate the brain mechanisms parallelingcognitive processes altered by psychedelics, we would ratherquickly find out alot more about not only the mechanisms ofaction of psychedelic drugs, but many other neuro-psychologicalrealities as well. If mere speculation about the psychedelicexperience has led me to discover a major new brain function(assuming that the HRS mechanism is as important as I suspect,and corresponds to various discoverable patterns of neuralsignaling in the brain), imagine what a little serious researchis likely to turn up. Needless to say, even the undergroundscientist of independent means is unlikely to have access toPositron Emission Tomography equipment. Nevertheless, I have gleaned enough data fromexisting research to at least advance a few preliminary guessesas to the neuromechanics of the Habit Suspension Model ofpsychedelic experience. But before I venture into this minefieldof complexity I must discuss some further implications andillustrations of the habit routine search cognitive process thatI have hypothesized. In proposing the habit routine searchmechanism as a fundamental but previously undiscovered brain/mindprocess not only out of necessity to explain psychedelic effects,but also from the perspective of other psychological,anthropological, and evolutionary viewpoints, I hope to buildsome badly needed bridges between these disciplines utilizing thenew model. The phenomena discussed below, when viewedthrough the new lens of the HRS model, start to be understandablein a new way. But in addition, since current discipline-specificmodels leave much to be desired in attempting to explain at leastsome these phenomena, they demand a new and global way ofunderstanding them. The habit routine interpretation is not justan alternative model for aspects of reality already well modeled,but a viewpoint which may be able to unite poorly understood anddiverse phenomena under a common theoretical outlook. All of thetopics I will mention deserve more space than I can give themhere, some would require a lengthy analysis, but at the risk ofover-simplification, I don't believe I need an exhaustivetreatment to show just how wide the application of the habitroutine model might conceivably be. My attempts to proposeneurological models also will require reference back to thesemany topics: Anthropology In anthropology, our understanding of thephenomenon of shamanism and the ability of shamans to temporarilydivest themselves of their culture-bound cognitive limitationsusing psychedelic preparations suddenly becomes much more thanthe drugged delusions of the primitive mind as some havesuggested. The historian of religion Mircea Eliade wrote in 1951,"But we have seen that, in shamanism itself,narcotics...represent a decadence and that, in default of trueecstatic methods, recourse is taken to narcotics to inducetrance." (1)Naturally, if one's whole viewpoint concerning"narcotics" has been shaped by the Prohibitionist Idealof Twentieth Century Western Civilization, it would have beendifficult indeed in 1951 to recognize the true significance ofthe use, not of narcotics, but psychedelics by tribal peoples.But Eliade's view is stillclung to today by more than a fewso-called scholars, yet paradoxically their own"culture-bound cognitive limitations" strikinglyrevealed in the mentioned Prohibitionist Ideal are as in need ofcure as were those of the tribal peoples they see as decadent. The great importance of shamans and psychedelicdrugs to so many early societies can now be seen much more interms of the temporary yet cumulative cognitive advantages thatpsychedelic experience would have conferred. The success ofshamans in curing some of the diseases of tribal members undertheir care takes on new meaning, as does the use of psychedelicagents in rituals for initiation into adulthood, for devinationand the making of important decisions, and more. Psychedelicexperience as habit suspension unites the understanding of manyaspects of the life and evolution of Early Man. And far frombeing a decadent substitute for "true ecstatic methods"as some insist, I will show that psychedelic use was and remainsthe genuine article for which many less efficacious substituteswere tried and abandoned. The stability, longevity and ecology ofmany ancient societies could only have been a by-product ofcultural wisdom; if limited and narrow from our modern point ofview, such wisdom certainly was not accidental, and in somerespects represents ideals which modern industrial civilizationhas not even pretended to espouse. Our knowledge of ancientpsychedelic plants and their use is the subject of many excellentbooks and reviews now available (2); the knowledge represented in theseworks goes far beyond the primitive views that were prevalent in1951. The transformation of shamanism into organizedreligion, a much discussed though poorly understood process, wasmost certainly a process which was paralleled by thediscontinuance of the use of psychedelic preparations. Insofar asthis transformation has also been one in which doctrine and dogmahave not only replaced, but forbidden direct individualexperience of spiritual realities, it would be difficult tomaintain that the change worked for the benefit of the individualin need of spiritual fulfillment. It seems obvious that thetransformation was a political one, brought about by thoserequiring control over their subjects through the creation andmanipulation of cognitive habit routines, and especially theprevention of the use of methods enabling the individual tobypass the limitations imposed on him. The transformation was certainly not arefinement which led to peace and harmony among earlycivilizations having organized religions and priesthoods. Lack ofpeace and harmony among nations and civilizations has, in fact,become the most important behavioral characteristic of the humanspecies insofar as it threatens that species with extinction.Individuals, robbed of their access to direct experience ofreligious truth (and here there is no substitute: religious truthis something that must be personally experienced), becomemembers of a society which can be coerced by petty tyrants intoall sorts of collective insanities. In a future chapter I willextrapolate the importance of early shamanism and the use ofpsychedelic plants in two directions: firstly to show that a verysignificant role for psychedelics can be hypothesized in theearly evolution of man; and to supply yet one more sermon on thefaults of modern civilization and what might be done about it. Meditation and Other Techniques The understanding of meditation techniques, sensorydeprivation, religious ecstasy provoked by various insults to thebody, and the panoply of other methods that human individualsseeking enlightenment and self-transcendence have employed downthrough the ages becomes unified by the present model of habitroutine search and suspension. I propose that all these diversetechniques are more-or-less effectivemethods for achieving whatthe psychedelic drugs do more efficiently and directly, viz., tosuspend one's programming as represented in the personalcollection of habit routines. If there is something to be saidfor the "naturalness" of non-drug methods, methodswhereby the individual is purportedly gaining the ability toachieve transcendent states at will, there is even a strongerstatement to be made by the obvious unnaturalness of the moreviolent and self-destructive methods of certain religiousascetics: extreme fasting and mortification of the flesh, suchtechniques must be seen as quite primitive substitutes for theuse of natural psychedelic plants, quite benign by comparison. Note that I do not propose that these varioustechniques affect brain operation through exactly the samemechanisms: the outcome of altered or suspended habit routinesmay be realized by quite different mechanisms and points ofintervention in neurological operation, both neurochemical orself-induced, as I have already suggested. The hypothesis of theHRS system being the fundamental and primary cognitive operationof the nervous system upon which all the ensuing processes ofthinking are based, fits well with the proposal that there wouldlikely be many diverse ways to alter the system as a whole,especially considering the cybernetic nature of most if not allbrain processes. Instinct The operation of what have been called instincts,both in animals and man himself, may now be understood in a newway. Although the capacity and characteristics of memory inanimals are generally agreed to be very limited compared withman, the use of data implanted by experience, as well as thegenetically-expressed data of the collective experience of aspecies, not as long-term memory in LMA, but as data for theoperation of HRS, seems a promising new approach in ethology.Chapter 6 will explore some of this territory. Personality and the Unconscious In psychology and psychiatry we may begin tounderstand better what the personality is, where and how theneurological data that result in observed personality traits isstored and accessed. A more physiological and operationalunderstanding of the properties of the "unconsciousmind" may now be possible, and may extend to understandinghow the prevalence of irrational belief can coexist in the samesociety, even the same individual, with logic and rationality. Wemay be able to apply the new concepts to the understanding ofphobias, neuroses, and personality disorders, the power ofpropaganda and the phenomenon of crowd madness, theneurocognitive correlates of prejudice, and the practice ofmethods by certain individuals which seem to render them muchless susceptible to these major human weaknesses. Human - Animal Dichotomy The fundamental difference between man and animalis an ancient question, still debated from the perspective ofmany opposing viewpoints. The habit routine model may provide anew assessment of man's uniqueness in his ability to suspend ormodify the operation of habit routine at will, (with practice),and so develop and cultivate the ability to be creative. I thinkit is safe to say that animals have the ability to be creative,at least in a simple way, but they exhibit such ability only whenthere is little alternative, as in a crisis, or in experimentsdesigned to elicit such behavior. They do not do so out of theexercise of free will, so much is obvious. Man can, however,cultivate and practice the art, and dwell in a creative state bychoice, but this is not to say that most human beings make therequired effort to do so to any significant extent. Thus proposeddifferences between man and animal have to date always seemedmerely a matter of degree rather than substance, animalsexhibiting any suggested trait simply on a less complex level.Tool-making, language, music and dance, and other examples couldbe cited. Understanding the difference as a major reorientationfrom a habit routine governed mode of existence to at least apotentially Creative-Individual Mode (3) may be the characteristic which is moreof substance than degree. Further exploration of this topic mustalso await future chapters. The Binding Problem The so-called binding problem in philosophy andpsychology, the lack of an adequate psychological or neurologicaltheory to explain how unitary consciousness arises out of themultiplicity of sensory signals which arrive at the brain, (andthe multitude of independent channels of sensory processing thathave recently been demonstrated), may have a solution using theideas I have suggested. With the recent elaboration of ParallelDistributed Processing models of brain function, where it is noteven suggested that there is a central structure"responsible" for consciousness, the binding problemhas become even more mysterious, to philosophers at least. But ifour unitary conscious experience is not the experience orawareness of the totality of sensory input (and mentalreflection) itself, but rather the after-the-fact experience ofour own habit routines activated by the sensory data, andoverlaid with only a sparse sampling of the sensory data relevantto the habit routine complex called into play, the bindingproblem disappears. The relative absence of brain structures whichassociate all the sensory data from the various sensory inputsand intermediate processing areas to produce overall unitary or"bound" awareness is no longer a mystery, becauseunitary experience of external reality is an illusion. What weexperience are the cognitive or perceptual structures provided byour own habit routines which enable the evaluation of only themost salient or attended to aspects of external reality; we see,hear, and understand only what we have already seen, heard, andunderstood, plus a small fragment of new sensory data whichrelates agreement or disagreement, the presence of novelty orsameness. It is through this deceptively small window upon theexternal that we exercise our apparently powerful abilities offree will and creativity. The power over external events whichresults, although demonstrably quite limited, seems great, greatenough to install in us an illusion of control far greater thanthe evidence warrants. If one of the fundamental questions in cognitivescience has been whether perceptual data for which there is noconscious awareness can influence behavior, then from the aboveit can be seen that not only is this possible, but since thetotal sensory input is used primarily (almost exclusively) toselect habit routine complexes in thinking1, which is entirely apre-conscious operation, then the conclusion is that sensory datais primarily unconscious and the primary "causative"agent in behavior! I will return to the binding problem during mydiscussion of the brain systems which enable the construction ofhabit routines. The Experiments of Benjamin Libet The time delay between sensory signaling and thesubjective conscious perception of sensation which has socarefully been demonstrated by neurosurgeon Benjamin Libet andother experimenters may also have a simpler explanation thanthose proposed so far. Libet and others have shown that apin-prick of the finger, for example, transmits a signal to thecortex of the brain via the thalamus, which arrives in a fewthousandths of a second. All sensory signaling except olfactionis similarly transmitted: first to the thalamus which acts as asort of relay-station distributing the signals to the appropriatedomains of the cortex. Yet conscious perception of the pin-prickcan by various experimental techniques be shown to be delayed byup to a half-second, while "cerebral neuronal adequacy"is achieved. (4) Itis proposed that there is then "a subjective referralbackwards in time, after neuronal adequacy is achieved, whichantedates the [perception of the] experience to correspond to thetime of early cortical responses..." [the onset of signalingmeasured after a few thousandths of a second]. The alternative view that I propose is that theoriginal sensory signaling, passing through the thalamus, isprojected to all the appropriate areas of the cortex, and it isthis signal, by comparison with all the stored data representingthe frames of memory, which generates the habit routine complexwhich is then used in the thinking2 processes of perception andsymbolization. The time delay corresponds precisely to the timenecessary for all the thinking1 (pre-conscious) comparisons ofcurrent sensory signals with LTM (long-term-memory) to assemblethe habit routine complex to be presented to thinking2. According to my view then, the original signalsfrom the periphery of the body, projected upon the cortex by thethalamus, are not at all the "data" of which we becomeaware. This original sensory "data" will be selected,trimmed, and mostly eliminated during the process of HRS (habitroutine search), and only details from the data which arerelevant to the habit routine complex brought to awareness willbe included. Thus the greatest part, by far, of the"data" which is experienced, the supposed "boundawareness" of external reality, is merely the data thatalready existed as LTM. The problem of how experience is referredbackwards in time is also neatly resolved since what isexperienced is the habit routine complex generated from sensorydata received at the time of the pin-prick or otherperipheral input: the habit routine complex represents thesensory data at the instant of reception into thinking1, not atthe (up to) half-second later instant of perception in thinking2.The variability of the time delay may represent the level ofcomplexity of the HRS process required in each case, a strongsensory signal is perceived more rapidly than a minimal onebecause less cognitive effort is required to construct a habitroutine when the salient data is stronger than the backgroundsensory information. Remember that both strong and weak signalsarrive at the cortex with the same small time delay ("a fewthousandths of a second"). The idea that "perception is a function ofexpectation" (5)is, of course, not new. But the dependence has so far been seenmore as a minor imperfection or inconvenience, easily over-riddenby careful observation especially by he who is in the act ofstudying such phenomena. The new view provided by my theory showsthat very attitude to be a product of the "minorinconvenience", the magnitude of its influence beingdirectly proportional to the certainty of its negligibility. Irepeat: in a very literal sense, we see what we have alreadyseen, hear what we have already heard, think what we have alreadythought, believe what we have already believed, and I'm afraid inmost instances in most people most of the time, little else.Illusions to the contrary may well be provided and sustained byinstalled habit routines! Disagreement with this analysis maywell provide evidence for its accuracy! Further Experiments In a further series of investigations, Libet wasable to show a similar and apparently much more mysteriousanomaly. A carefully executed series of experiments seemed tocall into question the operation, perhaps even the existence of"free will" as we know it. Again, the results wereindicated by the existence of various time delays in neuralsignaling relative to tasks that the subject was asked to carryout. Here is an abstract of theoriginal article: Voluntary acts are preceded by electrophysiological "readiness potentials" (RPs). With spontaneous acts involving no preplanning, the main negative RP shift begins at about -550 [milliseconds]. Such RPs were used to indicate the minimum onset times for the cerebral activity that precedes a fully endogenous voluntary act. The time of conscious intention to act was obtained from the subject's recall of the spatial clock position of a revolving spot at the time of his initial awareness of intending or wanting to move (W). W occurred at about -200 ms. Control experiments in which a skin stimulus was timed (S), helped evaluate each subject's error in reporting the clock times for awareness of any perceived event. For spontaneous voluntary acts, RP onset preceded the uncorrected Ws by about 350 ms and the Ws corrected for S by about 400 ms. The direction of this difference was consistent and significant throughout, regardless of which of several measures of RP onset or W were used. It was concluded that cerebral initiation of a spontaneous voluntary act begins unconsciously. However, it was found that the final decision to act could still be consciously controlled during the 150 ms or so remaining after the specific conscious intention appears. Subjects can in fact "veto" motor performance during a 100-200-ms period before a prearranged time to act. The role of conscious will would be not to initiate a specific voluntary act but rather to select and control volitional outcome. It is proposed that conscious will can function in a permissive fashion, either to permit or to prevent the motor implementation of the intention to act that arises unconsciously. Alternatively, there may be the need for a conscious activation or triggering, without which the final motor output would not follow the unconscious cerebral initiating and preparatory processes. (6) Although Libet himself commented in the closingsection of his paper, "...it is important to emphasize thatthe present experimental findings and analysis do not exclude thepotential for 'philosophically real' individual responsibilityand free will", several writers have, at least in popularpresentations, rather exaggerated the possible implications ofthe experiments: ...The conclusion is that we are deluded in believing that each of us is a free agent who may decide to take an action. Such a decision is an interpretation we give to a behavior that has been initiated someplace else by another part of ourselves well before we are aware of making a decision at all. In other words, the decision has been made before we are aware of the idea to even make a decision. If "we" are not pulling the strings, then who or what is? The answer is, it is an unknown part that is unfathomable to introspection. (7) ...Here we have physiological confirmation of Ambrose Bierce's definition of 'intention' as apprehending the imminence of an action. Behind the scenes the blind brain-mind is determining what action to take, and when to initiate it. And as it sends out messages to the muscles to move, so it also initiates processes that may end up as a conscious prediction of the act that is already on its way. Consciousness, however, ignorant of its own foundations, takes this prediction, and re-interprets it as control. (8) Actually there are some elements of truth inthese observations, as I hope to show below, but they do notsupport the implied positions of the authors. The peer commentaryin the same journal as Libet's original article, it must be said,did not at all suffer from the same exaggeration, but presented arange of quite perceptive criticisms of the methodology of theexperiments and suggested several less extreme psychological,neurological and philosophical conclusions, yet Libet was in myopinion able to support his position effectively. But none of thecommentators seemed able to simplify the experimental results andtheir implications with a new modelof what might actually betaking place. Let me first describe some further details of theexperiments: Each experimental subject was asked to observe akind of TV monitor on which was projected a spot of lightrotating around the center of the screen. This was the timingdevice: psychological and sensory events were timed by observingtheir occurrence relative to the clock-position of the spot oflight. The subject could then relate, for example, the timing ofa pin-prick or other event such as a decision, to the position ofthe spot at say, three o'clock. The subject was then asked, at acompletely random moment chosen by himself, to suddenly flex thefingers of his hand, and observe the clock-position of the spotof light at the moment of his being aware of having made thedecision to flex his fingers. What was consistently found wasthat an electrical signal in the cortex of the brain, the"readiness potential", would appear about four-tenthsof a second before the subject signaled his awareness thathe had made the decision to flex, and that the actual flexing ofthe muscles appeared about two-tenths of a second afterthe apparent time of the decision. The fact that these wereconsidered startling and unexpected experimental results isillustrated by the depth and intensity of controversy that ensuedin trying to explain the results within the framework of thevarious critics' paradigms. What was debated by all was thequestion of volition. How could the decision to take a voluntaryact, which in anyone's book must certainly be a consciousevent, be preceded by an unconscious event of suchregularity that the timing of the ensuing muscle movement couldbe predicted from it? The answer, according to the habit routinemodel, is that there was no volition whatsoever concerning thedecision to flex the fingers. This was a "decision"pre-programmed to take place as an instruction in working memoryfor the selection and implementation of habit routines that wouldlead to the desired movement. The trigger for this decision wasanother instruction in working memory, the instruction to "choosea random moment". The volition involved in the overallprocess consisted of the voluntary programming of working memoryby the subject to carry out the instructions of the experiment,nothing more. And nothing less, especially, for in this processwe observe quite unambiguously the operation of free will: thesubject chooses quite freely to follow the instructions of theexperiment, and consciously programs his working memory with therecipe for carrying out the desired sequence, viz., choosea random moment, notice the position of the timing device, andthen flex the fingers. Owen Flanagan has expressed a similarinterpretation of the experiment. But his philosophical intentseems to be to argue against any idea that mind might be anythingother than something caused by physical,observable-in-principle brain processes. He calls his position onthe mind/brain debate "constructive naturalism", butseems to fall into the same trap concerning causation that Imentioned previously: I conclude that Libet's results, far from offering solace to the suspicious epiphenomenalist, are precisely the sort of results one would expect if one believes that conscious processes are subserved by nonconscious neural activity, and that conscious processes play variable but significant causal roles at various points in different cognitive domains. (9) The first proposition, "conscious processesare subserved by neural activity", is in logicalcontradiction to the second, "conscious processes playcausal roles". If the first proposition is taken to meanthat for every conscious process that may be defined orintuited to exist, then there is necessarily a real, durational,and logical sequence of neurological operations in the brainwhich precedes and causes the conscious activity (causation musthave duration and precede the effect which results), then theconscious process of the second proposition must beincluded: it must also be caused by neurological activity, and soits apparent causative power is only a reaction to previousneurological causation. As I stated above, the mind, orconsciousness, is thus reduced to having no actual causativepower at all, it becomes an inoperative concept. I must also reiterate my own position that thisargument does not automatically make me a "suspiciousepiphenomenalist" nor a closet mysticist. The mind/bodydebate has, like so many other debates, become polarized into abinary reductionism: if you're not in the one camp, you must bein the other. If you don't believe that the physicalmanifestation of the brain "causes" all the mental,intentional, qualitative, subjective, and yes, spiritualmanifestations of the human (to say "organism" wouldalready be admitting to the reductionism I am questioning), thenyou must be an advocate of mysticism, i.e., unscientific. My previous analogy to the dual nature ofelectromagnetic radiation is apt, I think, for it illustrates thesame debate that occurred in physics long ago: is light aparticle or a wave? Or both simultaneously? Does the particlenature of light cause its wave aspects? Or vice versa?All these questions may only be asked from the point ofview of classical physics, they only have meaning from theclassical view. Once quantum mechanical physics enters the scene,no one even attempts to answer the questions on the classicallevel. If my guess that brain and mind are parallel aspects of amore fundamental reality is nebulous, perhaps it will take onsome relevance when a "quantum mechanics of philosophy"will be available. Whether a process of mind studying mind willaccomplish such a feat is still an open question. I hope I may be forgiven for having divergedconsiderably from my analysis of Libet's findings to repeat anargument of the previous chapter, for I think that the argumentand the logical inconsistency it points out lend some credibilityto the use of the habit routine model as a way to resolve manyaspects of current debate. The habit routine model is far frombeing a mystical proposition, yet it seems that many questionswhich previously forced opinion into either the reductionist ormystical extremes are now moot. If the habit routine model doesnot itself show how mind and brain might be parallel andcomplimentary aspects of the same thing, it at least weakens somearguments that such a view must be unscientific. To continue withthe habit routine view of Libet's results: I would propose that the time of the onset ofthe "readiness potential" corresponds exactly with theimplementation of the instruction in working memory to"choose a random moment", and that the ensuing delaycorresponds to the time necessary to activate the habit routinesearch process to produce a pattern which seems to the subject tosatisfy the instruction, "choose a random moment." Atthis point, the second and third pre-programmed instructions tonotice the time, and then flex the fingers is launched, and theensuing delay again corresponds to the time necessary to selectand activate the various habit routines necessary to implementthe physical action. The subjective timing of the intention tomove the fingers occurs when it does because it must await thesuccess of the first instruction to choose a random moment. Whenconscious awareness is satisfied that this criterion has beenmet, it "approves" the continuation of the instructionsequence in working memory. Notice that I have adhered to myintuition that mind and brain are simultaneous, not causative ineither direction; in this example the readiness potential is thephysical attribute of the larger process which is implementingthe instructions of free will. Hallucinations I have already alluded to the idea that theso-called hallucinations resulting from psychedelic experienceare not "real" or strong hallucinations at all. In thiscase, normal sensory data, perceived without the usual frameworkof acceptable habit routines to organize and categorize theperceived sensations, becomes itself seemingly hallucinatory (inthe naive subject) because it is perceived "as is".And, as I mentioned previously, the perception of such sensoryinput, especially if the set and setting of the experience arethreatening (as in the above account of a hospital-setting LSDsession), will through feedback to further thinking1 habitroutine search produce even more bizarre results, greaterfeelings of loss of control, etc. Classical hallucinations produced by brainpathologies and various diseases are a quite differentphenomenon, as was noted by many of the early psychedelicresearchers. It was in fact the widespread dissatisfaction withthe term "hallucinogen" (and also"psychotomimetic") which led to the coining of the term"psychedelic" as a properly descriptive name for thesesubstances. Classical hallucination produced by brain pathology(or as manifested in the delirium tremens of end-stagealcoholism, for example), is probably outside the domain of thehabit routine model, although the psychological and cognitiveresults of certain nervous system diseases may assist in devisingthe neurological model of habit routine search. In the nextchapter I will discuss some types of brain damage which providesuch evidence. Subliminal Perception Many diverse psychological experiments have beenable to show that information from a briefly encounteredexperience, although not subsequently accessible to normal recallof memory, nevertheless provides data which the subject uses"unconsciously". (10) In recent studies, the terms"explicit memory" and "implicit memory" areused to denote sensory information which can, or cannot beconsciously recalled. The terms correspond roughly to what I havecalled LMA, or logical memory access (explicit memory) and theoutput of the habit routine search system (implicit memory). Butdefining the two as different types of memory obscureswhat the habit routine model makes clear: the memory"data" is the same, it is the method of access which isdifferent. A typical experiment would run something likethis: Subjects are given a brief exposure to a word presented ona screen. A 30 millisecond showing is not long enough for thesubject to recognize that he has seen anything at all, yet insubsequent testing the word will be identified more frequentlyfrom lists of random words than statistics would predict.Research on subliminal perception had been motivated by studiesof amnesic-syndrome sufferers, who had often been observed tohave intact implicit-memory function despite gravely affectedability to recall autobiographical events. A patient afflictedwith amnesia might be taught a procedure, for example, and shownby testing to have retained at least some information that he hadlearned. Yet he would have absolutely no memory for the time orplace nor the procedure in which he had learned this information. Daniel L. Schacter (footnote 8) has identifiedfive types of evidence for the dissociation or independence ofthese two memory processes and concluded, "Taken together,the...studies constitute solid evidence for a fundamentaldifference between implicit and explicit memory." Theevidence, I believe, fits the Habit Routine Model like a glove,but it is not at all necessary to propose independent memorysystems to explain it. The Habit Routine Model proposes that thesame memory "data" from exactly the same distributedsources in the various domains of the cortex, are accessed andassembled by two different processes, one automatic, ongoing, andpre-conscious (HRS in thinking1), the other voluntary,deliberate, and accomplished by feedback of cues assembled fromconscious analysis and evaluation of thinking2 (LMA). The model illustrates how HRS can retrieveinformation from the briefly perceived, subliminal exposition,yet LMA, which must have reference to a process of duration,cannot access the same data. The film frame/clip analogy isuseful here: the 30ms exposure is recorded, just like all sensorydata, but it represents only a frame of a film. LMA must access asequence of frames during recall, a series of time-related framesof a certain duration, a "film clip". This may be aresult of the nature of the cues which are used in LMA, orperhaps just the inherent operating characteristics of the brainsystem which reconstructs conscious memories. Or it might behypothesized that the memory of an instantaneous cross-section intime, like the 30ms. exposure, would simply not register inconsciousness, thus no process of cue-construction necessary toretrieve a memory would be possible. An interesting experiment suggests itself toattempt to show the operation of information collected anduseable as habit routines, but not accessible in LMA. A series ofimages is shown, all subliminally, demonstrating one of severalpossible logical relations between several different genericobjects depicted in the images. By "generic" I meanthat the objects do not have individual or "personal"characteristics, but denote a type, or a class. Numbers orletters in a non-descript font would be a good example, as wouldsimple geometric figures. In each image is also a prominent andunchanging "reference" object which does have intrinsicspecific characteristics, a photograph of Jack Nicholson perhaps.The images may be interspersed with other images, both subliminaland perceptible, or they may even be inserted in a short film,for instance. Afterwards the subject is asked to deduce apossible logical relation between the several types of genericobjects, now shown continuously, in one case with thereference object shown, and in another case without thereference. To deduce any one of the several possible logicalrelations between the generic objects requires a logical sequenceof brain/mind operations, including attention and decision,reference to previously learned knowledge of similar cases, itrequires deliberation of a complex nature. The logical relationbetween the generic test objects implied by the series ofsubliminal frames, if deduced preferentially over other possiblelogical relations when the reference object is included, wouldindicate that habit routines had been installed by the data inthe images; the co-presentation of the reference object shouldreinforce the habit routine learned about the logical relationindicated by the images. And not only would the routines beinvisible to LMA, but even recall of the objects themselves wouldbe nil. Note that some preference for the requiredlogical relation should be present even without the referenceobject. The prediction is that a small preference should be foundwithout, and a larger and much more significant preference withthe reference object present. This is because the referenceobject has obvious and strong individual characteristics whichwould be expected to activate the assembly of habit routines inwhich it played a part, whereas the test objects have little orno specific characteristics. The experiment would demonstratethat even complex logical decisions, supposedly made on the basisof consciously applied information and calculation, arenevertheless guided by invisible and pre-emptory patternsinstalled in memory in perhaps involuntary and illogical ways.(What would be logical about preferentially choosing one ofseveral relations among geometric figures based on a picture ofJack Nicholson being present?!). Context - Dependent Memory This proposed experiment is a reduction to thesubliminal perception level of a more general phenomenon called Context-DependentMemory, which was described as long ago as 1690: The British associationist philosopher John Locke refers to the case of a young man who was taught to dance. His lessons always took place in the same room which contained a large trunk. Alas, it subsequently proved to be the case that: "The idea of this remarkable piece of household stuff had so mixed itself with the turns and steps of all his dances, that though in that chamber he could dance excellently well, yet it was only while the trunk was there." (11) Experimental studies of context-dependent memoryin recent years have established the importance of the effect,but no general cognitive model has been proposed which mightexplain its operation. The application of the habit routine modelmay consolidate understanding of several currently studiedaspects of memory. Baddeley reports a particularly interestingstudy, the results of which lend themselves directly tointerpretation using the habit routine model. This interpretationof context-dependent memory will additionally lead us intoanother question of importance for understanding HRS and LMA andhow these processes are initiated: Is it actually necessary for the subject to return physically to the same environment for context-dependent effects to work, or is it sufficient to imagine the original environment? This was explored in a study by Smith (1979) who had his subjects study 80 common words in a distinctive basement room on the first day, and then attempt to recall them on a second day in either the same room, or in a fifth-floor room with very different contents and furnishings. Subjects who recalled in the original basement room tended to remember about 18 words, significantly more than those who remembered in the different upstairs room, who recalled only about 12. Of particular interest however was a third group who were tested in the different upstairs room, but instructed to try to recollect as much as possible of the original learning environment before starting to recall. They remembered an average of 17.2 words, not significantly different from those who had physically returned to the learning environment. (12) The habit routine interpretation of theseexperimental results would be as follows. The original session inwhich the 80 common words were studied was, like all ongoingcognitive activities, organized around and facilitated by habitroutine complexes which each individual has developed over hislifetime of conscious activity. They would be roughly similar forall the subjects, but not identical, some persons obviouslyhaving developed routines for study (the memorization of a listin this case) which are somewhat different and more or lesseffective than those of other individuals. Nevertheless, for agiven subject, habit routines typical for that subject are usedfor the learning process, and the information learned isincorporated into memory as further habit routines based on thelearning routines. Thus the learned data is itself organized intohabit routines related to those used in the learning. We mightthink of the learning routine as a sort of template on which thedata to be learned is imbedded. But more than just the"data" of the words is recorded! All habit routines arepotentially re-assembled from the entire sensory and cognitiveinput of the moment (including the habit routines brought to bearin implementing the ongoing process): if the words were printedin red ink, if Beethoven's Fifth Symphony were playing at thetime, if one had an annoying itch, all these, including thegeneral surroundings of the room and the emotional"feel" thus elicited in the learner, are part of thehabit routine which contains the information concerning the wordsstudied. In the above experiment, recalling the wordslater is improved if the subject is tested in the same room; herethe word information embedded in the habit routine created at thetime of learning is accessed more reliably by the presence of thesensory input of the room (which matches elements of the originalhabit routine). But improvement is also noticed just by askingthe subject to imagine the original learning location. Inthis instance, the habit routine is activated by thinking2imagining the original scene and supplying this as an inputparameter to HRS via working memory. It has been noticed in many studies that if thewords to be learned can be organized in some way, eitherintentionally with a mnemonic or categorization process, or"unconsciously" by the influence of context, as is thecase here, then subsequent recall is much improved. We may viewthis effect as the production of habit routines having aninternal organizational structure, a cross-linking betweenelements of the routine, so that recall or recognition may bebrought about by more numerous cueing situations. The context inwhich the learning is taking place, the basement room, providesan organizational framework, as would more intentional orcontrived methods such as relating the words to certaincategories or classes. This brings us to the related question of thedifference between recall and recognition. In word learningexperiments, a subject can be tested for his recall ofwords, i.e., the words that he can remember on demand; orfor recognition, wherein he is given a list of words onlysome of which were words to be learned. The subject then goesthrough the list and replies yes or no to each entry. Baddeleydiscusses the many experiments that have been done and themethods used to correct for various errors inherent in theprocedure. (13) Ithas been shown that, as a rule, recognition is far better thanrecall, scores for the former being typically twice or more thescores for recall. A single case study (of myself) illustratesthe disparity and suggests also that using the experimentalparadigm of learning and recall of words (as opposed toimages, or composite sensory patterns) may not tell the wholestory: In the 1950's and 1960's I often frequentedsmall record shops to buy cheap (I was a student) and usuallyout-of-print jazz record albums. Album cover design, even then,was crucial in promoting records that were not expected to be bigselling items, and so many were quite original in appearance.When sifting through the bins, I almost never erred in knowing ifI had already bought an album, yet a printed list of titles wasmuch less helpful. To this day I can look at an old jazz album ondisplay, and tell immediately if I already own a copy in mycollection of well over a thousand. A list of titles is much lesseffective. And if asked to recall the cover art from a well-knownalbum, I will usually fail for most items. Out of a thousand, Ican right now bring to mind the cover of perhaps twenty orthirty, yet somewhere in my head is the "data" requiredto recognize them all. I predict, on the basis of my ownexperience here, that if experiments on recall vs.recognition were performed using visual and perhaps audiomaterial, as well as composite sensory input, the disparitybetween recall and recognition would far outpace the resultsfound for word study tasks. Baddeley notes, "The question of how recalland recognition are related is one of the oldest in the study ofmemory. It is also one that remains complex andcontroversial." I think that the Habit Routine Model mayhave some ability to simplify the controversy, for thedistinction between recall and recognition parallels closely thedistinction I have made between LMA and HRS. In recognition, theresult comes about automatically and rapidly through HRS, theeffect of context being entirely "pre-conscious", anoperation of thinking1 processes; whereas in recall, the contextcan be consciously recreated to assist in the process as in theexperiment above. Thus in the recall of words learned in thebasement room, the subject can improve his score by simulatingthe context, using LMA to intentionally reconstruct the look andfeel of the basement room. In the experiment that I have proposed(showing a series of subliminal images containing the constantcontext or non-generic item), the context item automaticallysupplies access to habit routines which produce the response. Inthe basement room experiment the working memory is intentionallyprogrammed with a reconstruction of the context (in the case ofthe upstairs recall), which then as a parameter for ongoingthinking1 assists in recall. Filling In Another phenomenon of recent interest and debatewhich may benefit from a habit routine interpretation is fillingin. In its simplest aspect, it has long been known that dueto the particular structure of the eye, there is a small blindspot on each retina at the position of its attachment to theoptic nerve. The portion of the visual scene projected here istherefore not represented in the visual cortex of the brain, yetwe have no awareness that there are two blank spots in our fieldof view. (A simple experiment that all children are taught showsthe reality of the blind spot.) The process whereby the brainnevertheless produces an apparent continuous field of view iscalled filling-in, and some examples of recent research andcontroversy are nicely summarized by Francis Crick. (14) Although thefilling-in of the blind spot may be a quite simple process innormal persons (the retina itself may play some supporting role)a more extensive and higher-order kind of filling-in is known tooccur with brain-damaged patients. Crick reviews the research ofRamachandran (15)and his colleagues and concludes, Filling-in is probably not a special process peculiar to the blind spot. It is more likely that, in one form or another, it occurs at many levels in the normal brain. It allows the brain to guess a complete picture from only partial information-a very useful ability. (16) The Habit Routine Model agrees entirely withthis assessment that only partial information arrives atconscious awareness, yet an apparently seamless perception ofreality results. But the model goes even further in saying thatmost, or nearly all, of the data we believe we are perceiving isthe data produced by the "filling-in" that the habitroutine search process has provided. It is not surprising thenthat such a powerful system can fill in the minor amounts of datalacking due to the characteristics of the retinae, or even ofdamage to the visual cortex of the brain. Synaesthesia Along with the renewal of interest in consciousnessand the mind/body problem in the wake of the demise ofbehaviorism has come a wave of new theories about long-known yetlittle-understood phenomena such as synaesthesia, the cross-overor confusion of two or more sensory domains. Popular books aboutsuch long-standing enigmas have reached a wide audience. Inobserving the disparity of proposed theories attempting toexplain some of these phenomena, it becomes evident thatpsychology and the study of the mind is still in its infancy. Butalso, due to the breakneck pace at which research is noweliciting important if uncoordinated results, it seems ofparamount importance for some part of this wide area ofexploration to devote its efforts to providing linkages betweenthe various disciplines, attempting to design overall theoreticalframeworks which deal with all the phenomena on a unified basis.If not, I fear we are in for even greater overall confusion,disagreement, and controversy. In reaction, a new brand ofbehaviorist, mechanistic, nothing-but-ism is likely to take holdto again stifle creative approaches in man's study of himself. Imake these comments here because a recent book on Synaesthesia (17) illustrates thelack of coordination in recent theoretical approaches. I shouldnot single out this book from the many others which havepurported to "explain" consciousness or various aspectsthereof; reading several of these is more like watching asporting match than an exposition of a deliberate researchundertaking. The quotation from The Man Who Tasted Shapes above,in the section on Benjamin Libet's time-delay research,exemplifies the point, I believe. One-upmanship contests, perhapsencouraged by editors and publishers, take precedence overaccurate representation of others' work. As for synaesthesia,Cytowic presents interesting theoretical ideas, but limits themby inaccuracy of presentation of supporting evidence. This iscertainly the case where he attempts to present results ofpsychedelic research to support his ideas. (18) Reported synaesthesia duringpsychedelic experience has occurred frequently enough to warrantattention. Yet scientific attention is so severely limited byresearch restrictions that it is certainly a dubious conclusionthat psychedelic synaesthesia has anything more than coincidentalparallels to naturally-occurring synaesthesia. Cytowic remarks, Ethical considerations guarantee that 1950s-era government research into the effects of LSD on humans will never be repeated. While no contemporary research exists, however, the older data about the drug's general effects on the nervous system are reliable. The statement reveals, I fear, a dual ignorance.If the unethical 1950s-era research he refers to is thatundertaken by the CIA, (and highly unethical it was, along withmuch if not most other CIA "intelligence" activities),then Cytowic displays a glaring unawareness of the research ofthe dozens of workers who administered many thousands ofpsychedelic experiences in which ethics were not only respectedbut a primary consideration. But if Cytowic is ignoring this muchgreater body of highly ethical research for the abominablefumblings of the weapons and mind-control crowd of MK-ULTRA/CIAfame, it is highly questionable to then express confidence about"older data being reliable." It is simple enough to explain psychedelicsynaesthesia in terms of habit routine suspension, (I will leaveit as an exercise for the reader!), but I believe that the habitroutine model may also succeed quite well in explaining naturallyoccurring synaesthesia. Cytowic states that synaesthesia is aproduct of the limbic system, not the cortex, and with this thehabit routine model is in moderate agreement. I will show in thenext chapter the interplay between the cortex and various centersof the limbic system which brings about the various habit routinecognitive operations. But rather than having to postulate anenhancement of limbic activities, or the actual crossing-over atsome point of sensory signals as others have done, (both of thesehypotheses depend on the supposition that it is the boundawareness of all the sensory domains which consciousnessperceives), a simple and small change in the limbic activitieswhich access and apply habit routines is the only hypothesisnecessary. Once again we see that if it is not boundsensory awareness of which we are conscious, but rather our ownhabit routines, the mechanism underlying the phenomenon is easilyimagined, rather than requiring several hypothetical nervoussystem operations unsupported by any existing research. And onceagain I think, the habit routine model shows its capability tomoot certain questions of controversy by providing an overallstructure in which previously misunderstood or misinterpretedphenomena are now brought together. The Newly - Sighted Another such phenomenon recently discussed in apopular book (19)concerns persons who have been blind for many years and whosesight is then restored, the "newly sighted". OliverSacks relates the rare yet typical case of Virgil, a man blindsince early youth due to heavy cataracts. At the age of fifty, heundergoes the relatively simple and risk-free operation forcataract removal. All are hopeful for wonderful results, yet, ashas been noted in the handful of cases with other newly-sightedpatients, curious and difficult problems arise and persist, andthe final result has often been disappointment and tragedy: Notbecause sight is not restored, but as Sacks relates in a lengthyand fascinating account of Virgil's tribulations, sight seems tobe extremely difficult to understand and interpret in such asituation. According to the habit routine model, we could saythat firstly, Virgil had no available perceptual habit routinesto be activated by visual stimulation, therefore what he"sees" is only color and motion in a practically randomand significance-less pattern. With effort and practice, he isable to interpret some of the visual data in terms of the worldas he has known it through his other senses, but he has immensedifficulty in learning these interpretations: they must berepeated each time anew. For instance, visually he cannot tellhis dog from his cat. The instant he touches one or the otherhowever, its identity is obvious. Relating the visual data to thetouch is not retained however, for the next time he encountersthe animal visually, again he is lost. Secondly, cognitive aspects of the habit routinecomplexes are also lacking. This was illustrated by Virgil'sinability to see photographs and pictures as anything but randomif interestingly colored surfaces, even after he had beenpracticing with his new vision for awhile. Along with previouscases, he could not see people or objects in the pictures, evenafter he had learned to recognize them in the flesh. He simplydid not comprehend the idea of representation for there were nocognitive habit routines available which would allow andfacilitate such interpretation. And thirdly, since all Virgil's existing habitroutines consisted of structures building upon his previouslyavailable senses, (it had been remarked how his sense of touchand smell were acute, and far more developed than in normalpersons), there was no possibility of intuitive or automaticcross-modal association between his new vision and hisestablished cognitive schemes for understanding the world aroundhim. With a cane, he could walk up a stairway easily, yet thevision of the same stairway gave no comprehension of itsthree-dimensional structure and how one might navigate it. This,in spite of knowing for certain that what was being viewed wasthe same object that could be climbed with ease bytouch alone.There were no cognitive habit routines enabling a connectionbetween the reality as perceived by the two sensory methods. I refer the reader to Sack's description ofVirgil's symptoms (which one might call them in the sense thatthey are the result of a deficit, in this case a deficit of habitroutines of perception and cognition necessary for the functionof meaningful vision). With the elaboration of each strangeeffect, the habit routine interpretation is easily andeffectively summoned to organize and understand the situation asa whole. In one sense, Virgil was in the situation of a youngchild, trying to learn and establish the habit routines necessaryfor interpreting a strange and colorful visual world around him.Yet in another sense, since his brain and cognition had alreadyfully developed in other directions, taking account of hisdeficit, he could not hope to achieve what the child doeseffortlessly. In the young child, the entire cognitive structureof habit routines is nascent and plastic; at fifty years of agethis structure is rigid, established, and not amenableto radicalchange such as the sudden introduction of a new sensory pathway.In such a case as Virgil's we can see that the total absence ofhabit routines enabling the interpretation of vision renders thevisual sensation incomprehensible; visual data arriving inthinking2 awareness without any organizing habit routinestructure results only in a profound and, in the end, oftentragic confusion which becomes a liability rather than a gift. Perception of Language I believe it is difficult, if not practicallyimpossible in some situations, to experience raw sensory data; wecannot avoid experiencing external reality in terms of our ownhabit routines. Consider what happens when we hear someone speaka few words. If the words are in a language which we ourselvesspeak, they are immediately and unavoidably transformed intomeaning! Try studying some difficult subject while a conversationis going on, or worse, an abusive TV advertisement is running. Weare practically incapable of hearing such auditory sensory dataas just noise, the meanings of the words keep attracting ourattention. But the meaning is not inherent in the sound! If thelanguage is not a familiar one, no meaning is produced! What isthe difference? We experience our own habit routines, as I havestated, and when we hear auditory input which calls forth habitroutines of meaning, it is these habit routines which arepre-emptively experienced, not the pure sound of the words. Evenfor a foreign language, our habit routine search process is stillactive (if less insistent), trying to pick out short successionsof syllables which might have a correlation to our own language,in the attempt to get at least some fragmentary meaning out ofthe noise. The point is, we are practically incapable of justlistening to speech as pure noise, the habit routine searchsystem simply overrides the will to do so. The habit routinesturn the sound of speech into meaning, automatically,unavoidably. (Interestingly, in meditation, one practices the artof "quieting the internal dialog", of experiencingreality without analyzing it, without attaching one's ownsemantic interpretation to it. As I mentioned above, meditationseems to be a method for suspending the significance and use ofhabit routine in ongoing awareness.) Now it is not conscious episodic memory, or LMAwhich gives us the ability to understand language; we do notactively recall the many instances in which we learned themeanings of the words and their combinations. Yet the data thatwas installed by these instances is certainly being used. For aparticular word I may perhaps be able to recall the event oflearning its meaning, but this is not what is used for presentunderstanding. Rather, the sum total of all instances in whichthe meaning took on relevance for me is accessed (to continuewith the analogy of a film), asa collection of frames, by thehabit routine search process, and this collection of frames isthe habit routine called forth through which meaning is producedin awareness. The fact that one can use a word in conversationquite accurately, yet find it difficult to produce a satisfactorydefinition of that word upon demand, illustrates the twocognitive processes. Providing a definition requires LMA, (or atleast considerable conscious analysis of context to deduce whatthe meaning must be), whereas the automatic use of a word inproper and meaningful context is entirely controlled by the habitroutines generated in the thinking1 processes. If it is easy to see how auditory input oflanguage results overpoweringly in the experience, not of thepure sound, but of the meaning of that sound, (and hencethe habit routines which produce that meaning), I would ask thereader to go back over my arguments concerning the other sensorymodalities. The experience of vision, for example, must beparallel to audition of language: we do not experience the rawsound, nor the raw visual scene, but rather the meaning towhich we habitually attach that sensory input. I cannotstress enough, we experience what we have already experienced;the view, if it has been stated in many contexts down through theages, now represents a new and radical paradigm shift forunderstanding perception and psychology, for understandingourselves in a radically new and more complete way. Illusions There are textbooks full of examples of visual,cognitive, and even auditory illusions. How do they work? One ofmy favorites, since I started playing around with a video cameraand learning how to control the "white balance" so asto achieve accurate color representation in my films, is the LandEffect, named after the inventor of the Polaroid Land Camera. Theabsolute values of colors as perceived by a standard measuringinstrument, like the charge-coupled-device (CCD) in the videocamera, change radically according to the color balance ortemperature equivalent of the ambient illumination. As I film mywife in the shade of a north-facing wall, thence to walk out intofull southern-exposure sunlight, the colors of her costumeundergo a radical metamorphosis in the final film, if I have notcorrectly regulated the characteristics of the CCD of the camera,the "white-balance", in order to take account of thechange in illumination. If I film her in close-up, and set thewhite balance to automatic, then the costume colors remain fairlytrue to what we expect, but at a price: the background colorschange alarmingly. If I film her little walk from further away,with the white balance locked to the setting which produces thecorrect background, then it is the costume colors which change.But as I observe the same scene with my normal vision, noapparent metamorphosis takes place: blues are blue, reds are justas red no matter where she walks, the background and thecostume are perceived without significant change even though thecolor balance of light actually striking my retinae is changingjust as radically as it is at the surface of the CCD. Am I toassume a "white-balance" feedback signal to my retinae,adjusting their characteristics? There are no such neuralpathways in the brain. And any such regulation would not beexpected to correct for the costume and the backgroundsimultaneously. Whatever mechanism is producing this colorconstancy effect must therefore be in the brain itself, in theprocesses of cognition, although some preprocessing of"data" has been hypothesized to occur in the retinae ofthe eyes. Edwin Land and other researchers of the effect havecome up with a mathematical model of how various nervous system"computations" of intensity information from the entirevisual field might allow constancy of color perception, but Isuspect that mathematical computation theories of brain operationare all, in some sense, artifacts which may have good predictivepower, but are not really good models for understanding what thebrain is actually doing. I, for one, am quite certain that mybrain is not calculating integrals or differential equations dueto its demonstrated failure to do so on my final"diffy" examinations! Admittedly, due to the verylimited and tentative knowledge about the mind that theneurosciences have so far been able to provide, mathematicalmodels may be all we have, in some cases. Computer analogies formind processes all suffer more or less from this same failing,which is why I may (as noted previously) enclose "data"and "computations" in quotes when discussing mindprocesses. Land's experimental findings can be summarizedby stating that the perceived color of an object in the visualfield does not depend solely on the color of light entering theeye from that object, but on the entire spectrum of lightarriving from all locations in the visual field. The applicationto the habit routine model of perception is obvious, I think. Wewould say that the habit routines for the constant perception ofcolor values overrule to a large extent the actual signalsrelayed by the retina. But if habit routines can counteractactual color changes with such efficiency that we are not awarethat any correction is taking place, why then doesn't it happenwhile I watch the curious effect in the film of the scene whichlive, caused no such drastic change? Actually, I have noticedthat after watching such a distorted film many times, as whenediting it, that I do begin to get used to the odd change incolor values, and correct for it, or at least ignore it (whichmight be practically equivalent). Such habit routines can and areinevitably developed to some degree in artificial situations suchas the film editing, but are strong and well-developed for theexperiences of daily life situations since they have beenpracticed and reinforced since early childhood. In agreement withLand's theory, we do "calculate" the color of theobject perceived by comparison with the entire visual field. Butwe do so through the use of habit routines which define whatcolors to expect when we see sky, grass, stone wall, tree, etc.,and such habit routine information is only weakly established, ifat all, when divorced from natural three-dimensionalsurroundings, as in the case of watching the TV film. There are parallel situations concerning theperception of the constant size of objects. Some very interestingillusions have been produced to confuse our nervous system'sability to tell us the absolute size of an object in spite of thewildly varying size of image projected on the retinae, if theobject is moving for example. Again, I believe we can improveupon mathematical models of how size constancy is accomplishedwith the habit routine model. Constancy is again produced fromthe constancy of the habit routines in use by the perceptualsystem. The habit routines are what is perceived. A Cognitive Illusion Another quite fascinating illusion that has beenaround for quite some time was discovered by J.S. Bruner and LeoPostman in 1949. (20)I will quote Thomas Kuhn's account of the experiments for itsconcision, and also because he raises a couple of interestingpoints: In a psychological experiment that deserves to be far better known outside the trade, Bruner and Postman asked experimental subjects to identify on short and controlled exposure a series of playing cards. Many of the cards were normal, but some were made anomalous, e.g., a red six of spades and a black four of hearts. Each experimental run was constituted by the display of a single card to a single subject in a series of gradually increased exposures. After each exposure the subject was asked what he had seen, and the run was terminated by two successive correct identifications. Even on the shortest exposures many subjects identified most of the cards, and after a small increase all the subjects identified them all. For the normal cards these identifications were usually correct, but the anomalous cards were almost always identified, without apparent hesitation or puzzlement, as normal. The black four of hearts might, for example, be identified as the four of either spades or hearts. Without any awareness of trouble, it was immediately fitted to one of the conceptual categories prepared by prior experience. One would not even like to say that the subjects had seen something different from what they identified. With a further increase of exposure to the anomalous cards, subjects did begin to hesitate and to display awareness of anomaly. Exposed, for example, to the red six of spades, some would say: That's the six of spades, but there's something wrong with it-the black has a red border. Further increase of exposure resulted in still more hesitation and confusion until finally, and sometimes quite suddenly, most subjects would produce the correct identification without hesitation. Moreover, after doing this with two or three of the anomalous cards, they would have little further difficulty with the others. A few subjects, however, were never able to make the requisite adjustment of their categories. Even at forty times the average exposure required to recognize normal cards for what they were, more than 10 per cent of the anomalous cards were not correctly identified. And the subjects who then failed often experienced acute personal distress. One of them exclaimed: "I can't make the suit out, whatever it is. It didn't even look like a card that time. I don't know what color it is now or whether it's a spade or a heart. I'm not even sure now what a spade looks like. My God!"... [italics added]. (21) The first italicized sentence raises thequestion of what kind of illusion is actually happening here. Thereaction to the anomalous card is so automatic and reliable thatone is tempted to say that it is a perceptual illusiontaking place, that the subject actually perceives the anomalouscard as a normal card. But unlike many perceptualillusions, in which the illusion persists even when knowledge ofdeception is gained, here, as shown by the second of theitalicized sentences, the illusion tends to disappear after thetrick is discovered. It seems therefore that the illusion iscognitive, having to do with the analysis or evaluation ofperception rather than perception itself. A perceptual illusionmay rely on habit routines that are fundamental to thefunctioning of the perceptual system they involve, and thus bevery difficult to counteract. An example would be the now famousline drawing which can be seen alternately as a vase, or as twofaces in profile, but never both simultaneously. (22) An illusion depending on the analysisor higher processing of perception, as I believe the anomalouscard trick shows, can be overcome almost immediately by theinstallation of new or modified habit routines via workingmemory, which are supplied as parameters for further habitroutine search which then takes into account the new data thatanomalous cards are likely to be presented. It would beinteresting to know more about the few persons mentioned in theexperiment who had difficulty seeing through the trick even afterthey knew about it. At this point it might be useful to recall myview in the last chapter that at least two different categoriesfor habit routines are postulated, although since a habit routineis a composite of data from many sources, in multiple sensory andcognitive domains, the categories will certainly overlap or besimultaneously applicable in some situations. But as far as it isuseful, we may refer to habits of perception, and habitsof cognition. The latter will be understood as the habitroutines which are used for analytical and reasoning tasks, orthe production of meaning from language as discussed above, whilethe former produce such things as the visual illusions mentioned. I have suggested the term habit routine complexto denote that the unitary habit routine which is constantlyconstructed and presented to the awareness of thinking2 consistsof all these types or aspects simultaneously. Thus if we canusefully isolate a part of an overall habit routine and see it asa habit of cognition, or a personality trait, such a dissectionwill be only a theoretical operation for heuristic purposes. Theactual habit routine complex is an entity constructed from alllevels of brain/mind operation from simple perceptual tasks tocomplex intuitive, deductive and associational processes such asthe expression of personality. Personality as Habit Routine The very existence of strong, purportedlyinalterable "personality traits" seems to me a perfectillustration of the prevalence and importance of habit routinesin producing the range of reactions to the daily life process. Aswith the language example above, we do not use LMA to consciouslysearch our memories for the data revealing how to act in atypical situation, consistent with our established"personality". We react typically, but automatically tocertain situations, if not practically all situations, as anobserver who knows us well will attest. Others know us by ourpersonality, which when seemingly a bit different due to unusualtroubles or a very bad mood, will invite sincere inquiries of"what's wrong? You're not yourself today!" People who know us certainly do not expectradical or even moderate personality change from meeting tomeeting; if encountered, someone will surely recommend a fewsessions on the couch, or medication. The most startling andtragic event of diseases like Alzheimer's is perhaps not thegradual loss of memory and function, but the loss and/or changeof personality which accompanies the disease. For thefamily relative who loved the person as expressed through personality,we may hear the lament, "he's just not himselfanymore." What could the personality be, if not a largecollection of routines suitable for automatic use; what datacould personality arise from if not the very same data from whichwe extract conscious memories, yet accessed in an unconscious,rapid and automatic fashion by a cognitive/brain system not underconscious, analytic and deliberative control? Thethinking1/thinking2 model outlined in the previous chapter is afar more descriptive and operational framework than simply sayingthat personality is a property of the "unconsciousmind," as if there were some separate compartment, someindependent source of data wholly other, completely independentof the conscious mind. It is the same data. It is themethod of use and the neurophysiology of access which isdifferent. Cognitive illusions and intellectual traps aremore difficult to explain than visual illusions, no matter whatthe theoretical model. But why shouldn't our opinions andbeliefs, our prejudices and expectations, our ideas aboutreality, our personal metaphysical outlook, the very patterns weuse to evaluate what we believe to be truth or lies, also be notonly governed by habit routines, but actually be identical withhabit routines modified only slightly, in the ongoing perceivednormality of daily existence, by the precise monitoring of one'spresent intellectual intentions? I don't deny that extensiveself-evaluation ever takes place, but in most individuals it maytake a life-crisis to stimulate it, while the creative genius andartist may dwell there frequently. But since we all need to swimin some kind of water, the normal everyday joe haspractically no awareness of his habit routines, and the artistlittle realization that partial immunity to habit routines is hisown peculiar suspension medium. But if cognitive, evaluativeaspects of habit routines are as important as we see the visualones to be, psychiatry may be a far more primitive endeavor thanhad been suspected even by the pessimistic. As so often happens when one invents a model, orattacks some problem with a new way of thinking, a search of theliterature reveals that someone has already covered the territoryand proposed something very similar. But the habit routine modelis itself applicable here: in having re-invented the idea from anew perspective, without having previously been acquainted witholder work, I may have avoided falling into certain traps orhabit routines that the original work would have installed in theprocess of learning it. Thus I discovered, long after coming upwith the idea of habit routine suspension as the mechanism ofpsychedelic experience, that Sir Frederick Bartlett in 1932 hadproposed that memory and learning were represented in the mind bybeing embedded in large scale structures which he called schemasor schemata, "...an active organization of pastreactions, or of past experiences, which must always be supposedto be operating in any well-adapted organic response". (23) But in havingdeveloped my own approach first, I arrived at a view of thefunction of schemas, or habit routines in my terminology, whichattributes to them a more fundamental and primary importance thaneven recent developments of schema theory imply. Daniel Schacternotes that, "Although Bartlett's notion of a schema israther fuzzy..., and his experimental results have not provedeasy to replicate..., his approach has exerted a strongtheoretical and experimental influence on cognitive research...Mandler...provides a useful summary of the cognitive conceptionof a schema: . . . [a schema] is a spatially and/or temporally organized structure in which the parts are connected on the basis of contiguities that have been experienced in space or time. A schema is formed on the basis of past experience with objects, scenes, or events and consists of a set of (usually unconscious) expectations about what things look like and/or the order in which they occur. The parts, or units, of a schema consist of a set of variables, or slots, which can be filled, or instantiated, in any given instance by values that have greater or lesser degrees of probability of occurrence attached to them. Schemata vary greatly in their degree of generality-the more general the schema, the less specified, or the less predictable, are the values that may satisfy them. (24) Baddeley summarizes the characteristics ofschemas shared by the various recent interpretations of schematheory. The parallels to my own idea of habit routines will beobvious, but I shall presently point out the importantdifferences in the two conceptions. (Baddeley is here summarizinga paper by Rumelhart & Norman): Schemas have Variables Schemas are packets of information that comprise a fixed core and a variable aspect... Schemas can Embed One Within Another Schemas are not mutually exclusive packages of information, but can be nested... Schemas Represent Knowledge at all Levels of Abstraction The concept of schema is broadly applicable, from abstract ideologies and concepts such as justice, to very concrete schema such as that for the appearance of a face. Schemas Represent Knowledge Rather than Definitions Schemas comprise the knowledge and experience that we have of the world, they do not consist of abstract rules. Schemas are Active Recognition Devices This is very reminiscent of Bartlett's original emphasis on effort after meaning. (25) With a little editing, both of these sets ofcharacteristics could be used to define the nature of habitroutines. I have in fact learned much about what I expect ofhabit routines from a study of modern research on schemas. Butthere is a fundamental difference between the two concepts.Schemas were hypothesized as hierarchical structures residentin the mind/brain which provided an organized template onwhich knowledge and memory was stored, as well as for theincorporation of new knowledge or learning. Habit routines, bycontrast, do not have any independent or inherent existenceuntil they are called up, actually manufactured and assembledfrom LTM data by brain systems which I shall define in the nextchapter. Although in speaking of habit routines, I continuallyrefer to them being accessed or called-up for use, theterminology is only a convenience, for I do not wish to implythat habit routines have any independent a prioriexistence in the storage medium of the brain, which stores onlythe frames of memory; a habit routine is constructed, inmy view, each time anew as required by the current ongoingcognitive state. HRS is thus a process of reconstruction ratherthan something akin to looking up a reference in a library. Also,it must be remembered that Attention does not refer back tohabit routines after having received sensory information in needof organization. Quite the contrary, for the information which isat any moment available for Attention has already beenconstructed from habit routine data via unconscious thinking1processes. In addition, much of the research that has beenconducted in the effort to illustrate the characteristics ofschemas has used language oriented material in the experimentaltests. The accuracy of memory in the recall of stories recountedto subjects was studied, for example, to explore how the learningof the story was superimposed upon schemas about typical aspectsof stories in general. But since I have proposed that language isitself only a resonance to thinking1/2 processes,(symbolization), occurring well after and only in reaction tohabit routine search and resulting thinking2 processes ofchecking, analysis, and so on, then of necessity habit routinesdo not themselves exist in terms of linguistic structures.Language itself is not what is stored in LTM, although the means(the data for the construction of habit routines) to produce orreconstruct it most certainly are. I have proposed that the HRSprocess is one of the earliest to have been evolved in the animalnervous system, and this would certainly not agree with thehypothesis that the data of habit routines was stored in terms oflanguage (an error and abuse-prone, add-on option only availableon the very latest models of animal life!) The study of themanifestation of habit routines through experiments utilizinglanguage therefore misses their essential character. If we canobserve the effects of habit routines through the study ofsymbolization processes we must not overlook the fact that we arenot eliciting the properties of habit routines themselves, onlytheir effect upon subsequent mental events. An argument of economy supports the contentionthat habit routines are constructed rather than accessed insitu. If schemas or habit routines existed already structuredin LTM, then a particular important bit of information thatrelated to many different habit routines would have to be storedin many different ways, redundantly, in order to be present inthe very many habit routine structures requiring it. If the habitroutine is manufactured afresh each time it is needed, the bit ofinformation need only be stored once. This is anoversimplification however, since it is debatable whether thestorage of "data" in the brain can be conceived of onthe computer model of the storage of "bits" or"bytes" of "data". Nevertheless I stillbelieve the argument of economy above is significant. My belated discovery of schema theory as such aclose fit to my own model was in one sense a disappointment. Itis always gratifying to believe that one's work has originality.But I also found an encouragement: If I had proposed the habitroutine model of cognition as a deduction from observations ofthe effect of psychedelic drugs, (and in this I was sure to havemany, many critics), yet the model proposed had so manysimilarities to a theory which "has exerted a strongtheoretical and experimental influence on cognitiveresearch" in Schacter's words, then my ideas aboutpsychedelic experience might not be too far off the mark. I hadarrived at a theoretical viewpoint from my study of psychedelicexperience which replicated current thinking in cognitivescience, about which I had studied very little. I hope I have been able to convey the cognitivenature of habit routines as I understand them. If"Bartlett's notion of a schema is rather fuzzy", Iexpect that it will also be said that my own notion of habitroutines is also somewhat nebulous. But the same could be said ofmany current theoretical approaches to the working of the humanmind. The controversies and radically opposed paradigms in thisendeavor are a sure sign that our knowledge is yet primitive andintroductory, but also that a fruitful and rapid evolution ofunderstanding is imminent. In this chapter I have triedtherefore, not to propose a precise definition of what a habitroutine may be, but rather to illustrate some of the things it maybe in relation to several known phenomena. I am intentionallyleaving the concept of a habit routine open to furtherdevelopment and more precise elaboration. If the habit routinesearch and suspension model is in fact useful and widelyapplicable, it will take more time and better minds than mine todevelop the idea satisfactorily. It is an ongoing effort on mypart to study the great volume of theories, models, opinions,data and sheer speculation that has been advanced in the verydifficult task of understanding the human mind and how it works,but professionals in this field who spend their lifetimes in theuniversities and laboratories are far better equipped than I tocontinue this work. Necessarily, I have omitted mention of manyresearch studies about phenomena which seem to fit well with mymodel, but which would have overly encumbered the present text todescribe. If at the end of the last chapter I mentioned the riskof seeing habit routines everywhere, the reader will now seethat, if they are not omnipresent, my model at least intimatesthat they are pervasive in a way that has not at all beensuspected in theories of the operation of mind/brain. I believethat habit routines are fundamental, that HRS is the primarycognitive operation of the brain/mind, coming before andproviding the very structure for the operations of mind of whichwe have everyday awareness; and very importantly, due to thesecharacteristics, that the HRS process is greatly obscured byits own operation. Only in the modification of its operation(gradual and unsurprising in the case of meditation, for example,radical and unmistakable in the case of psychedelic experience),can we even suspect its existence, and attempt to understand itscharacteristics and functions. In the next chapter I will attempt to postulateneurological mechanisms of the brain which might be associatedwith the formation, use, and modification of habit routines, aswell as some of the other functions of mind that I havediscussed. Due to the present state of our knowledge of thenervous system, my attempt will certainly be fraught with error,not least because my own knowledge of neuroscience isself-taught, and only (so far) a year in the making. But Ithought it would be useful to at least define some neurologicalpossibilities for the habit routine model, and it has been quitealot of fun to do so. If professional neuroscientists will findit child's play to show where I have erred, I would ask theirindulgence to suggest better neurological models rather than usemy admitted status as a novice to reject the whole theory ofpsychedelic experience. In the act of too facile a dismissal ofthe new ideas, (as has repeatedly happened in the history ofscience), they might in the present case be providing evidencefor the very theory they are rejecting out-of-hand! "...Psychedelics actually break habits andpatterns of thought. They actually cause individuals to inspect thestructures of their lives and make judgments about them." —Terence McKenna (1) Shamanism, Archaic Techniquesof Ecstasy, Mircea Eliade, Princeton University Press 1951,1972 p417. (back) (2) See Richard Evans Schultes andAlbert Hofmann, Plants of the Gods, McGraw-Hill 1979;Schultes and Raffauf, Vine of the Soul, Synergetic Press1992; and the numerous references therein. (back) (3) This is a term I shall employ inlater chapters. (back) (4) See "Neuronal vs. SubjectiveTiming for a Conscious Sensory Experience", and otherreprinted papers of Benjamin Libet in Neurophysiology ofConsciousness, Benjamin Libet, 1993, Birkh�user Boston. (back) (5) References here could be citedback to ancient Greece, I suspect. But a very cogent example isJohn R. Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind, 1992, MITPress, p136. See also Nicholas Humphrey, A History of theMind, 1992, Simon & Schuster, chapter 14. Both of these,and other recent popular treatments give a good overview of suchhypotheses in 20th Century research, and what they might indicateabout the process of perception and the nature of consciousness. (back) (6) Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10(4), (1987) p781. The original article and extensive peercommentary appeared in ibid. 8 (4), (1985)pp529-566, "Unconscious cerebral initiative and the role ofconscious will in voluntary action". (back) (7) Richard E. Cytowic, M.D. in TheMan Who Tasted Shapes, p170, 1993, Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam (back) (8) Guy Claxton in Noises from theDarkroom, p224, 1994, Aquarian/HarperCollins (back) (9) Consciousness Reconsidered, OwenFlanagan, 1992, MIT Press, pp136-138. (back) (10) See Michael I. Posner, Foundationsof Cognitive Science, MIT Press 1989, pp695-697"Memory", by Daniel L. Schacter for a summary andfurther references of original research papers. (back) (11) Quoted from Human Memory,Theory and Practice, Alan Baddeley, 1990, Allyn and Bacon,p268. (back) (12) Ibid., p270 (back) (13) Ibid., p271ff. (back) (14) The Astonishing Hypothesis, FrancisCrick 1994, Charles Scribner's Sons, in chapter 4, "ThePsychology of Vision" pp54ff. (back) (15) Crick lists the references:Ramachandran, V.S., "Blind Spots" ScientificAmerican 266:86-91; "Perceptual Filling In ofArtificially Induced Scotomas in Human Vision" Nature 350:699-702; and "Filling In Gaps in Perception: Part 2,Scotomas and Phantom Limbs" Current Directions inPsychological Science 2:56-65. (back) (16) Ibid., p. 57. (back) (17) The Man Who Tasted Shapes, RichardE. Cytowic, M.D., 1993, Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam (back) (18) Ibid., p128-129. (back) (19) An Anthropologist on Mars,Oliver Sacks, Alfred A. Knopf , New York 1995. See the chapterentitled, "To See and Not to SEE". (back) (20) Bruner and Postman, "Onthe Perception of Incongruity: A Paradigm," Journal ofPersonality, XVIII, (1949), 206-23. (back) (21) Thomas S. Kuhn, TheStructure of Scientific Revolutions, Second Edition, 1970,The University of Chicago Press, pp62-64. (back) (22) See Francis Crick, TheAstonishing Hypothesis, 1994, Charles Scribner's Sons,chapter 4, "The Psychology of Vision" for some nicelyillustrated examples of the vase/profiles and other visualillusions. (back) (23) F.C. Bartlett, Remembering,1932, Cambridge University Press, p201. (back) (24) J.M. Mandler "Categoricaland Schematic Organization in Memory", 1979, quoted byDaniel L. Schacter in Foundations of Cognitive Science,Michael I. Posner, ed., 1989, MIT Press, Ch 17,"Memory" p692. (back) (25) Ibid., pp 336-337 (back) Table of Contents Chapter 5WT01-B36-12IA087-000632-B030-7http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065105 text/html 108609HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:50:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:19:20 GMTContent-length: 108389 The Center of the Universe - Chapter 5 5. Neuromechanics — The Minefield Proposing a reasonable neurological model forthe operation of the habit routine search process is not thefirst minefield that I have had to navigate. Back in the U.S.A.it seemed a straightforward thing to continue the research whichso few seemed to have the motivation for; several people hadoffered varying degrees of support for such projects, but as Imentioned previously, motivations are a funny thing. My ownseemed at the time to be relatively uncomplicated, and inretrospect, although I may tend to tidy up my autobiographicalact with a few convenient omissions and over-telling of some ofthe high points, je ne regrette rien. Coincidences, mysteries, personal lessons, andstrange experiences of the most diverse character, as significantand soul-searching as the Mexican earthquake experience,continued with a very suspicious frequency. I have previouslymentioned my ability to bear up under the influence of any drugor shamanic potion, and I sometimes found this ability of evengreater value in dealing with the people and day-to-day eventsplaying a part in the unfolding of my work. The idea that theshaman himself must deal with forces and destinies on a far morefundamental level than the members of his tribe is, of course,the very spirit and tradition of shamanism. If powerfulpsychedelic experiences were to benefit members of the tribe, theshaman must have already explored the same territory, and gonewell beyond to the very limits of his abilities. In the presentcase where the shaman not only administers the powerfulmedicines, but actually creates them with the tools of modernscience, his knowledge and intentions are perhaps even moreimportant. Thus, in the case of what turned out in someways to be a rather successful collaboration between myself and atrio of avowedly enthusiastic partners, the passage of time andthe achievement of some degree of success seemed to distort therelations between us in a way very reminiscent of a kind ofvicious parody of the psychedelic experience itself. Meetings anddiscussions of plans and goals at first were nothing less thaninspiring. Between us we had the connections and ability toobtain the necessary raw materials, manufacture a high-qualityproduct, and distribute it in such a way that it would reach theright people. We certainly did not advocate or intend any sortof mass distribution of psychedelics resulting in their misuse orignorant use, which would only call attention to a situationeasily besmirched by adverse publicity. Sensational,fear-mongering publicity had already made it much more difficultto properly initiate or introduce a newcomer to the psychedelicexperience. There was certainly a case to be made that manynegative experiences were a direct result of the adversepublicity itself, for in the early, pre-publicity days ofpsychedelic research, "bad trips" were a rarity, evenamong alcoholics and psychiatric patients. With normal researchvolunteers, the statistics noted by the many researchersindicated the astonishing safety of psychedelic drugs, notrisk. Now the publicity made it seem that, although an AldousHuxley or Alan Watts might get through a psychedelic experienceunscathed, the normal member of society should realize that thepotential risk was overwhelming. And this kind of officialattitude weighed heavily on the person interested to undergo anexperience: even if such a view could in principle be seen forthe hysterical, prohibitionist, puritanical mindset that it inreality was, the slightest lingering doubt had the possibility topoison a person's trust in himself and his shaman. It is perhaps easier to see demons where thereare none to be found. And if demons are encountered, theidea that they are exterior, real, and caused by somethingother than oneself is certainly not conducive to understandingtheir meaning. As the Habit Routine Suspension modeldemonstrates, the psychedelic experience is no roll ofscience-fiction film projected upon consciousness from theoutside. If demons are encountered, they are in reality oureveryday friends seen without the normal range of categorizationswhich render them ordinary and insignificant. The demons which appeared to disrupt oursuccessful enterprise were therefore more real than those of theimagination. I can only suspect a hidden agenda on the part of myco-workers, but the nature of their intentions at the end was soat odds with the honest enthusiasm of the beginning that Isuspect that the hidden motivations must have developed overtime. From the original enthusiasm there seemed finally to haveevolved a plan to demonstrate once and for all that thepsychedelic experience was, in fact, illegitimate, or at leastunnecessary, its insights illusory, its history merely primitiveself-delusion. To arrive at the establishment reactionaryposition through first having professed a more universal andenlightened view seemed to me altogether impossible. This demon wasreal. And what was I going to do about it? The final scene was quite surreal. The nightbefore, one of my partners presented me with a five-hundreddollar banknote, subtly making sure that I noticed the portraiton the face of the bill, that of the "assassinatedleader", William McKinley, twenty-fifth president of theUnited States. At most, I felt only the slightest premonition ofthe events the next day would bring, for which we were planning aday of skiing, and restaurant to follow. Whether the banknote,and perhaps other similar but unrecognized intimations wereapparent I do not remember, but in the morning I decided to takea small dose of LSD, to appreciate a day in the high snowymountains from a different perspective. In retrospect, I findthat I instinctively tended to undergo a psychedelic experienceat points in my life where a certain crossroads was about to bereached, when perhaps only vaguely realized intimations ofimportant changes to come had appeared. Without fail, theexperience would precipitate whatever it was that was pending,and ignite the insight and decision that would usher in a newdirection. My friends were newcomers to skiing, and I hadpromised to help them get their sea-legs, so to speak. Uponarriving, I sent them off to the rental shop to secure theirequipment, and I took a test-run on the nearest slope. It wasexhilarating! Although there was quite a crowd that day, thescene was magnificent. Arriving at base, my friends had not yetreappeared, so I continued on up again to the irresistibleheights. The next time down the crowd was getting thick enough tomake locating my friends problematic, and in my present state ofexhilaration I couldn't begin to devise a sure-fire method forfinding them. I had to assume that, although our original planseemed to be going astray, they would nevertheless have suited upand found some incidental help with their first few glides onskis. After a few more runs I began to feel, in contrast to myexhilaration, a gnawing guilt that I had ignored my friends, evenif through a concurrence of events which I could not haveforeseen. The LSD experience, despite the very modest dose that Ihad taken, was attaining a peak more spectacular (in more waysthan one) than those amongst which I was gliding. Suddenly my friends appeared, and I knew that myneglect had ruined their day. But the intensity of my feelings,and their reaction as well, seemed all out of proportion to thereality of the situation. There was far more significance afootthan a simple evaluation of the day's events would warrant. Myapologies, and their subdued yet somehow exaggerated insistencethat it didn't really matter, were a mere facade for the emotionthat was all too evident in just a glance. Somehow aspects of theentire relationship in our joint involvement in the psychedelicproject were metaphorically represented here, and they werethreatening a tumultuous final act upon the stage whose playershad to date seemed so reassuringly without calculation orsubterfuge. The situation while driving back continued tointensify. I began to see through the cracks in reality, thephysical manifestations of which became more and more a flimsyveil affording less and less protection against immediatedissolution into the hidden dimensions beyond. If my friends wereworried about my driving on the slippery roads, I think that theytoo must have sensed, more importantly, that loyalties andintentions concerning our collective enterprise was the realissue that was coming to a head. At the restaurant, under theinfluence of good food and wine and associated conversation, theelectricity subsided somewhat, and it seemed that things might bepatched up with a resulting return to a situation that we all nowrealized had more of deception than honesty. If we could returnto business as usual, we all now knew that on a more fundamentallevel, all was changed. This is not, and never has been, asituation from which effective shamanism can work its benefits tothe full. Later at their house, in front of a warmlog-fire, I continued to ponder on this last point. So far,absolutely nothing explicit had actually been discussedconcerning the impending crisis that we each knew to be imminent.An outsider could not have detected that anything more than thesuperficial was transpiring, yet in each others' presence, a mereglance was like a trumpet fanfare announcing major discoveriesabout a hidden side of our co-involvement. It must have been pastmidnight when in walked partner number three, whom I had seenonly a few times. He lived quite far away, and I was surprised tosee him at this late hour, but the others apparently had expectedhis arrival. After some lengthy and private discussion in thekitchen, they reappeared, and, very tentatively at first, beganto suggest to me a most surprising plan. I had recently been working on some advancedtechniques for making our product in a more purified form, andhad been meditating about my experiments probably as a way tosuspend thinking about the more serious implications of the day'sevents. At my partners' first mention of LSD I immediatelylaunched into an attempted discussion of my recent experiments,perhaps also hoping to repair the situation: At every stage of mywork it was of primary importance to me to be able to continue,even if this involved having people associated with the projectwho neither knew nor cared about the larger implications. If apartner was interested in nothing but the cash-flow, for example,I tried to cope with the deficit temporarily until somethingbetter presented itself. But something was seriously wrong here. One ofmy partners was now saying to me that he didn't like the effectof LSD, it seemed dirty to him, made him sick rather than givinghim inspiration. Despite the day's events and the suspicions thathad been aroused I was quite shocked, and speechless. Graduallythe hidden agenda was presented: what I was to do, was to preparea large batch of placebos. Make up what I would say was a batchof the purest LSD that had ever been made, give them away free toall my contacts for distribution, and pass along the message thateveryone was to wait until the vernal equinox, then take the newpsychedelic together. The trick was, they would be entirelyinactive, blank doses with nothing but an implied message from...Yes, from whom? Who was the author of this message? Was this ideaa brainstorm of my partners, suddenly having seen a vision thatdrugs were the tools of the devil? The apparent honesty of ourrelationship so far in contrast to the way that the plan waspresented, and the things that were said that night, includingthe implied threats (the McKinley banknote was burning in mypocket), and also the implied promises of new and greaterprojects and responsibilities for me if I could only see thewisdom of this plan, made it plain to me that the tiger I had bythe tail was rather larger than I had heretofore suspected. Well, the activation of my consciousness by thedose I had taken, and these astounding changes of identity mademanifest that day, made the indoctrination as effective as alengthy torture and brainwash session in North Korea. I quiteforced myself to believe the idea had some merit, and for thenext few days, more than half-heartedly prepared a large batch ofchocolate covered placebos in line with the master plan. Thechocolate coating was to prevent anyone examining the underlyingsubstrate and possibly suspecting that there was less than meetsthe eye about this plan for a glorious first-day-of-springcelebration. I carried through with the lie to the bitterend, I don't think there were any suspicions, and I myselfboarded a train for the Grand Canyon to be (1)out of reach whenthe chocolate hit the fans and (2)in a nice spot in case of thehighly unlikely event that the Millennium was actually going tobegin that day. It didn't, and the feedback from the experimentwas less than respectful. My former partners disappeared from thescene to cope with more petty problems and new coincidencesmaterialized out of nowhere to enable the next stage of myongoing quest. There is an old Negro Spiritual that was in the1940's made into a "Jazz Soundie", the equivalent oftoday's rock video as seen on MTV. I have a wonderful 3-minuteversion of "Dem Bones" by the Delta Rhythm Boys, sungin close four-part harmony; it starts with the refrain, Ezekiel connected dem...DRY BONES, Referring of course to Chapter 37 of the OldTestament Book of Ezekiel in which the prophet is commanded to"Prophesy upon these bones: and say unto them, O ye drybones, hear the word of the Lord." Whereupon, as in therefrain of the song, Oh, de toe bone connected to de...FOOT BONE, De foot bone connected to de...HEEL BONE, De heel bone connected to de...ANKLE BONE, And so on up to "de HEAD BONE". Ihadn't watched my collection of "Soundies" in quitesome time, but humming in the shower late one night, meditatingon my recent neurological studies and lack of satisfaction oftheir power to explain processes of mind except in a veryrudimentary manner, the tune suddenly popped into my headbone. Itoccurred to me that current neuromechanical models of how thecollection of parts in the brain is supposed to produce mind,behavior, thinking and perception, was very much a Dry BonesModel of Neuromechanics. (Substituting brain part names into thesong quite ruins the rhythm however: de caudate nucleus connectedto de...CEREBELLUM, de locus coeruleus connected to de...ANTERIORCINGULATE GYRUS, you get the point.) The textbooks carefully told the student whatwas connected to what, and suggested sometimes that a particularpart "was thought to be involved in" some function orother. And to my further dissatisfaction, slowly compiling againand again my own map of brain connections, my studies hadrevealed that practically every brain part was connected to everyother brain part: each brain map I plotted quite soon becamefilled up with arrows, and quite useless. It seemed thatmainstream neuroscience, in spite of its great and rapidlyincreasing wealth of assuredly precise data, had little to sayabout the functions of all these parts on a systems level;understanding how to get to psychology from neurology, how to getmind out of brain, was still at the level of expecting dry bonesto suddenly, as the song's second verse goes, after "dembones" have been connected, Dem bones, dem bones gonna'...WALK AROUN'... The neuroscientists, without such divineintervention as Ezekiel had access to, simply were not able toshow decisively how connections of the nervous system couldproduce even simple psychology, much less consciousness itself.My own efforts to suggest brain systems and connections thatmight allow the operation of the habit routine search cognitiveprocess would therefore be no less tentative and imprecise,certainly due for major revisions as new evidence was discovered. In the case of memory, so fundamentallyimportant to everyday life and to the operation of my proposedhabit routine system, it is therefore still very much a matter ofdebate as to how information is stored in or associated with theproperties of the neurons in the central nervous system. The"data" representing the various types of memory,including habit routines, must in some sense be "in thebrain" and by extrapolation must somehow be associated withthe properties of neurons and their connections, but the widediversity between current theoretical viewpoints illustrates moreour lack of precise knowledge than an emerging paradigm. Perhapsthe most popular model of information storage at present is thatof the adjustment and long-term maintenance of the strengths ofthe connections between neurons. This is supposed to occur by themodification of the neuron's synapses, the junctions by whichneurons communicate using chemical neurotransmitters. This "neural network" or"synaptic weight" model lends itself to readysimulation on a computer and is probably on one end of a scaleranging from extreme reductionism, to another extreme whichreductionists usually brand as mysticism. An example would be theideas about memory advanced by Rupert Sheldrake, that the actualmemory information is resident in some quasi-independent memoryfield which may allow such phenomena as telepathy, apparentreincarnation and so forth, the physical brain being merely thesender-receiver of memory to the common field by a process ofmorphic resonance. (1)In looking at the broad range of sometimes very enigmaticproperties of memory, and the admitted uncertainty and disparityof views by the experts, no model should be routinely dismissedif it has any explanatory power whatsoever. The synaptic-weight model probably owes itsstatus to the power and success of computer science, the enormousinvestments and hence large number of talented scientists workingtherein providing a momentum of opinion which may unduly limitthe credibility of other well-constructed but competing models.It cannot be denied that very impressive mathematical models andcomputer simulations of "intelligence" have beendemonstrated, and shown to have similarities to the ways in whichwe believe human intelligence to operate. It has also been welldemonstrated that synapses between neurons (as well as the sizeand connectivity of the neurons themselves) can and do changetheir characteristics for varying lengths of time under theinfluence of learning processes. The power and sophistication ofneural network models (see for example descriptions of theoperation of the Hopfield Network as a mechanism for thestorage/retrieval of information) (2) are certainly impressive. Thefundamental question which remains to be resolved, however, iswhether the brain works anything like a computer. There iscurrently raging a most entertaining debate on this subject, someof the most powerful intellects of our time are joining thebattle, (see, among others, works by Churchland, Claxton, Crick,Dennett, Edelman, Flanagan, Fodor, Freeman, Gazzaniga,Hofstadter, Humphrey, McGinn, Penrose, Searle, Tallis, Tulving,the list is so long there is no recourse but to leave out mentionof many more. Some titles are listed in the Bibliography). Steven Rose, himself a veteran of many years ofresearch attempting to identify brain sites involved with storageof engrams or memory traces, has recently summarizedcriticism of the computer-like, information-processing model ofbrain operation. (3)Particularly of interest, as Rose points out, is a critique bythe neurophysiologist Walter Freeman, for it is solidly based onresearch findings: Freeman insists that, although changes tovarious individual neurons can be observed to happen as a resultof learning, the "information" that is learned does notsubsequently exist as "bits of data" recorded in theseneurons (the computer paradigm). Rather, the memories of thelearning exist as fluctuating dynamic patterns of electricalactivity generated by the entire brain. As Rose puts it, [The] experiments say that it, the engram, is not confined to a single brain region. But I want to go further than this, and to argue that in an important sense the memory is not confined to a small set of neurons at all, but has to be understood as a property of the entire brain, even the entire organism. (4) An intriguing suggestion has been that thestorage of information in the brain is analogous to the storageof information in a hologram, a model which was first developedby the neurosurgeon Karl Pribram in the 1960's. (5) The idea that brain activity might benon-local, a process of the generation of distributed waves ofactivity which interact to form interference patterns, had beensuggested in 1942 by Karl Lashley, whose pioneering research onthe brain had inspired Pribram during their collaboration atYerkes Laboratories. Freeman's experimental findings, as well asthe observations of Steven Rose above, are exactly what one wouldexpect from a brain operating on holographic principles. The viewof memories existing as "fluctuating dynamic patterns ofelectrical activity generated by the entire brain", couldnot embody holographic principles more strongly. Although criticism of the so-called holographicparadigm has come from many directions, the parallels between themathematical and physical facts of optical holography and manyknown properties of memory and the brain suggest that furtherresearch will tend to support rather than discredit the model. Ina recent paper Pribram elaborates on some of these parallels: The following properties of holograms are important for brain function: (1) the distribution and parallel content-addressable processing of information — a characteristic that can account for the failure of brain lesions to eradicate any specific memory trace (or engram); (2) the tremendous storage capacity of the holographic domain and the ease with which information can be retrieved (the entire contents of the Library of Congress can currently be stored on holofische, or microfilm recorded in holographic form, taking up no more space than is contained in an attache case); (3) the capacity for associative recall that is inherent in the parallel distributed processing of holograms because of the coupling of separate inputs; and (4) the provision by this coupling of a powerful technique for correlating (cross-correlations and autocorrelations are accomplished almost instantaneously). (6) It is a curious fact of the history ofneuroscience that Pribram's work during the 1960's and 1970's wasalmost unanimously rejected by the mainstream: he was for twodecades practically the only proponent of the theory ofdistributed representation of memory (distributed coding) in thebrain. At the time, nearly all theoretical work leaned stronglytoward the assumption of detector-cell coding, (7) a model strictly analogous to computer,bit-storage processes, with a precise location in the machinebeing responsible for the storage of a uniquely defined unit ofinformation. Today the mainstream neuroscientists have taken theopposite tack: distributed processing and storage is theirbyword, yet Pribram's holonomic theory is still widely rejected,even though in an important sense it is part of the foundation ofrecent theory. Francis Crick's assessment is typical: This analogy between the brain and a hologram has often been enthusiastically embraced by those who know rather little about either subject. It is almost certainly unrewarding, for two reasons. A detailed mathematical analysis has shown that neural networks and holograms are mathematically distinct. More to the point, although [artificial] neural networks are built from units that have some resemblance to real neurons, there is no trace in the brain of the apparatus or processes required for holograms. (8) To state that neurosurgeon Pribram and hisrecent mathematician colleagues "know rather little abouteither subject" is a bit stiff, and the observation thatthere don't seem to be any lasers or such holographic equipmentin the brain itself demonstrates ignorance of the two subjects.Pribram counters such criticism with the warning, "It isimportant to realize that holography is a mathematical inventionand that its realization in optical systems...is only one productof this branch of mathematics." In other words, opticalholography is merely a special case of a wider and morefundamental process for the encoding and reconstitution ofinformation. For this reason it was suggested that the term holonomic(9) be used inreference to brain/mind properties, a term I shall adopt here.The term holonomic as used in physics, also indicates that theprocess is not a static, frozen-in-time representation as is ahologram, but a dynamic, continuous one. Further rebuttal, including a short history ofthe criticism of the holonomic theory can be found in a recentpaper by Pribram and his colleagues. (10) The most recent and completeexposition of holonomic theory is presented in a book coveringthe 1986 John M. MacEachran Memorial Lecture, (11) delivered by Pribram. The bookdemonstrates that the holonomic theory has progressed bothconceptually and mathematically far beyond its introductoryposition of the 1960's; it is the original and necessarilysimplistic exposition of the theory which is still attacked bythe critics of today who remark (along with other trivialcomplaints) that "there don't seem to be any lasers in thebrain". Other criticism of the holonomic model of memorystorage and retrieval has been derived from the perceivedcontradiction with the accepted dogma that regulation of synapticweight must certainly be the only possible storage mechanism inthe brain. Synaptic weight distributions are quite amenable toneural network, viz. computer-like models of brain/mindfunction, but it was very difficult to see how synapses couldfunction as a storage medium for the interference patternsimplied by holonomic models. Yet the idea of learning and memorystorage by neural networks is itself by no means universallyaccepted. Concerning the much-touted ability of computeranalogues of neural networks to learn, Jerry Fodor remarked:"Much has been made of this, but, in fact, it's a tautology,not a breakthrough." (12) A very promising idea which would obviate someof these objections to the holonomic model has been the recentsuggestion that the site for storage of information is not thesynapse per se, but associated with the microtubulesmaking up the cytoskeletal structure of the neuron itself. (13) (The synapse isknown to be in indirect yet intimate contact with the microtubulestructure of the neuron.) This model has the immediate advantage,as Hameroff points out, of increasing the potential effectivecomplexity and storage capacity of the brain by about sevenorders of magnitude, (14)but there are many other attractive aspects to the model as well. It would seem that the synapses are concernedprimarily with the large-scale systems of the brain, they are thefunctional units enabling coordination and signal transferbetween distinctly separate, sometimes distant locations. Forexample, they enable the experimentally-demonstrated phenomena ofthe sequential processing of sensory information from primarysensory cortex through several levels of associational cortex.Another example would be a neuron in a brain-stem nucleus such asthe locus coeruleus: it may project the entire distance to anarea of the cortex before synapsing on another neuron. As a firstconsideration, the synapses thus seem involved with the switchingand transfer of information (analogous perhaps to the transistorsor switches in the central processor of a computer). To assignthem the double duty of also being the storage site forthe information which they manipulate seems merely a defaultposition (the synaptic-weight model). There is more logic to theidea that the information that is manipulated via the synapticconnections has been accessed in structures or locationsindependent from the synapses, otherwise the duty of the synapsein one function would seem to necessarily limit its capacity forthe second function. Having looked into the neural network models ofbrain function, I realize how easy it would be to reject theforegoing argument if one is convinced of the validity of such amodel. But it is my own view that, although neural networks seemto simulate brain/mind operation in some trivial respects, the"connectionist" paradigm as it is called is asprimitive and misleading a model of the human brain/mind as isthe planetary model of the atom (discussed in chapter 2). Fromthis viewpoint, neural networks may be useful for modeling"intelligent" processes up to the level, say, ofcreating robots for assembly-lines or for playing chess, but toextrapolate from there to say that by adding a few more bells andwhistles, or even many additional layers of mechanical orelectronic complexity to these beasts, we will then haveduplicated the human mind in a machine... Well, to me and manyothers that is sheer folly. I am all for letting theconnectionists connect, and the AI (Artificial Intelligence)crowd continue their quest to reproduce themselves asexually, butthey do tend to pummel the less-well financed competition withepithets worthy of the flat-earth advocates of a bygone age.Hence the present riposte. The combination of the holonomicstorage/retrieval model with the hypothesis of micro-tubule basedstorage sites thus seems even more promising: Hameroff's papereven suggests that the microtubules of neurons might provide alocation where coherent photons would operate (viz., thekind of light necessary for optical holography). In constructingmy own model of brain operation, I have tried not to dependirrevocably on any particular view now contending, including themore conservative ones. Yet due to the wide disagreement betweenthe positions of the several groups of theorists, I have feltjustified to freely use some of the more speculative suggestionssuch as holonomic operation and storage, if only as temporaryvisual, heuristic devices. Since my intention is merely tosuggest a possible mechanism for the operation of thehabit routine system, (and at the present stage of neuroscience,it would be unrealistic to hope for more), my overall theory ofpsychedelic experience would not be damaged by further researchindicating the brain had many further tricks up its sleeve. Theholonomic, microtubule hypothesis, although it may well be foundto describe the actual operation of the nervous system, will formy purposes merely provide a convenient conceptual modelfacilitating the understanding of the operation of the brainsystems responsible for habit routine search and suspension andother proposed operations involved with psychedelic experience. Ithought it valuable, however, to introduce the holonomic model ona level which would show that it was far more than "New AgeTechno-Babble", an implied if not explicit critical view nowprevalent. Figure 2 illustrates the location of just a fewof the major brain-parts for the benefit of the general reader.But in the interest of brevity and concision, I will not attemptto diagram or explain entry-level details of the model I shallnow present, either in the case of the properties of neurons, orthe general views concerning the functions of the various braincomponents taking part in my own theoretical view. For thelayman, the Glossary will be of some help, but a survey of atextbook such as Principles of Neural Science (Kandel,Schwartz & Jessell), would be indispensable for evaluatingthe proposed model in detail, and comparing it to standardtextbook views representing current paradigms. FIGURE 2. The Right Half of the Human Brain. Viewed from a vertical plane bisecting the brain into its left and right hemispheres. A through F: Areas of the cortex. A: Prefrontal area. B: Anterior Cingulate Gyrus. C: Frontal Lobe. D: Parietal Lobe. E: Occipital Lobe (primary visual cortex). F: Temporal Lobe: most of this area of the cortex is on the outside of the far side of the brain, hidden in this view. G: Cerebellum. H: Thalamus. Encircling the Thalamus are the Hippocampus, the Amygdala, the Basal Ganglia and other parts of the limbic system. I: Pons. J: Midbrain, area in which are found the various brain stem nuclei including the Raphe Nuclei, the Locus Coeruleus, the Substantia Nigra, etc. K: Medulla. L: Spinal Cord. (Modified from Nieuwenhuys, et. al., The Human Central Nervous System). I have mentioned that most brain areas areconnected to most other brain areas, the multiplicity ofconnections between parts becoming obvious and soon quitebewildering when one starts examining the various brain"maps" in Nieuwenhuys' book, for example (the source ofthe diagram in figure 2). In addition, it is found that nearlyall of the connections are two-way, the connections between thethalamus and the primary sensory areas of the cortex, forexample, being reciprocated by nerve pathways (backprojections)in the opposite direction. It is problematic therefore toconstruct a diagram for the supposed "flow ofinformation" in the brain: if the retina of the eye, forexample, sends its "visual data" to the thalamus (whichhas been likened to a relay-station for sensory data), and thenthe thalamus sends this signal to the primary visual cortex forthe first stages in the processing of visual information, whyshould the primary visual cortex send a nerve pathway directlyback to the same area of the thalamus from which it has justreceived the data? The backprojection is not insignificant:recent findings indicate in the case of vision that there are tentimes as many nerve fibers in the "backwards"direction as in the direction in which "information" issupposed to flow! The size and importance of the variousinterconnections (15)seems to indicate that the actual sensory"information", the environmental data ENV in figure 1,constitutes only a minor part of what is being"processed" in the brain! Current computer"data-flow" models of brain operation cannot explainthe facts of the existence and relative importance ofbackprojections, as even the best workers in the field willadmit. But this is exactly what one would expect for abrain architecture that operated according to the habit routinemodel of cognitive function. The environmental data merelyprovides cues for the elaboration of the far more complexinformational entity of which we become aware, the habit routinecomplex. It is far more complex, because it is generated from theentirety of previous experience stored in memory, whereas theactual environmental data is quite limited in scope not least bythe limits of the sensory organs themselves. In size andcomplexity, the nerve pathways carrying the primary sensoryinformation to the cortex are among the less importantconnections of the brain. To be sure, the environmental input isnecessary: when you shut your eyes, vision promptly ceases. Butthis effect itself may be heavily dependent upon the operation ofhabit routines. We are all absolutely and automatically certainthat vision must cease when we close our eyes, and wouldbe profoundly confused, (if not shocked into psychosis!), were itto be otherwise, even for a few seconds. There is a computer analogy that could be madein the attempt to account for the curious facts of neuralreciprocating connectivity, that the signaled area must send backa return signal indicating that it has received information, liketwo modems do as they talk to each other. But this would notexplain why return pathways are so much larger. I would proposethat something much more interesting is taking place. In the caseof the nerve pathways from the thalamus to the primary sensorycortex areas (and back again) for the various sensory modalities,I believe it is useful to hypothesize that a reverberation isbeing established with the two-way signaling, and that thisreverberation is a dynamic informational entity havingholonomic properties. The thalamo-cortical reciprocating nerveconnections set up for each sensory domain a dynamicreverberating holoprojection of information, which isconstantly updated and modified with the newly arriving signalsfrom the sensory organs. It would require a much higher densityof nerve pathways to set up and maintain such reverberation thanto feed in the flux of newly arriving ENV data, thus explainingthe relative importance of the brain connections between thesensory receptors, the thalamus, and the areas of the sensorycortex. The suggestion of similarity to the projection of aholographic image is intentional, for I believe that, not onlyare the mathematical principles which predict and describeoptical holography applicable to memory storage, but also to theongoing operation of many of the systems of the brain. Incomparison to optical holography, it can also be maintained thatthe relation between a given unitary nerve signal (the electricalaction potential of a neuron) and the overall holoprojection towhich it contributes, is analogous to the relation between theunitary nature of one grain of photoemulsion making up a hologram(the "photograph" of the interference patterns producedin optical holography), and the resulting projected holographicimage. The single grain of emulsion on the photographic plate mayonly be either "on or off" like the neuron, yet ittheoretically represents the entire holographic projection, (16) albeit with aresolution of zero. It is the same for a single action potential:it represents the entire holoprojection, but with zeroresolution. Someone familiar with holography would certainlyask, but how and where are interference patterns produced,certainly any holonomic process implies their existence, for itimplies the interference of two or more signals? Dropping onepebble into a still pond produces concentric waves, but droppingtwo pebbles produces an interference pattern between the two setsof waves. So it may be with the nerve signals of the brain. It iswell known that neurons in their various nerve pathways have a backgroundrate of firing which, for all intents and purposes, seems to bemerely random noise. Here is pebble number one. Pebble number two(in the case of the primary sensory holoprojections), is theimpinging signal from ENV (of figure 1), the signal coming fromthe sensory receptors. Thus the resulting holoprojection is the productof a dynamic interference pattern resulting from at least twodistinct signals, and is amenable to expression as mathematicaltransform coefficients analogous to the mathematical operationswhich describe optical holography. In the nerve pathwaysmaintaining a primary sensory holoprojection, the microtubules ofthese neurons record and dynamically maintain the transformcoefficients which represent the information necessary for theneuron firings to maintain the reverberation. The coefficientsare constantly updated with the sensory signal from theenvironment, which also exists as a transform of the interferencepatterns actually received by the sensory receptors. Thus thereare two sets of coefficients representing the two signals,together they contain the information necessary to maintain thedynamic holoprojection in time. It will be seen that even thebackground firing of the neurons, the resident signal, is notmerely random noise, for it is generated from the coefficientsresident in the microtubules and represents the holoprojection intemporal cross-section. The constant arrival of the ENV signalproduces the dynamic aspect of the primary holoprojection. But the combination of signals to produceinterference patterns does not end with the primary sensoryholoprojections, for as I shall explain below, holoprojections themselvescombine and overlap, they become superimposed under the guidanceof certain brain components so as to produce further interferencepatterns and thus further composite holoprojections. Itcan be seen that the "processing of information" in thebrain is therefore accomplished using entire simultaneous fieldsof bound "data" from several, or even the entirety ofall ongoing processes. The hypothesis of such a process conflictsradically with the computer, neural network model of the brain inwhich the serial processing (in parallel pathways) of discretebits of information is the proposed mechanism. If experimentalresults begin to confirm the holoprojection model of brainoperation, they will be a significant argument against thepursuit of strong Artificial Intelligence as it is presentlyconceived. Let us see how the fields of information I have calledholoprojections might function in stages of brain operationbeyond the primary sensory realm. First let us take a closer lookat the thalamus, which plays so central a role in generating theprimary sensory holoprojections which are the data fields uponwhich all further brain activity is based. The thalamus itself is composed of manydifferent nuclei, widely connected to other brain areas andinterconnected as well. Thus in discussing the various functionsof the thalamus, it must be kept in mind the great diversity ofindependent yet interrelated parts and functions comprising thiscentrally-important component of the brain. In the case ofvision, after the signals have passed from the retinae throughthe optic chiasm which combines and distributes the visualsignals from both eyes to the left and right hemispheres of thebrain (the thalamus also is divided bilaterally), the visualsignal that is to be used for updating the primary visualholoprojection enters a thalamic nucleus called the lateralgeniculate nucleus, or LGN. The LGN then signals the first stageof the part of the cortex involved with vision, the primaryvisual cortex, and it is from this area that we note the veryimportant nerve pathways which return directly to the LGN. It ismerely a convenience to say, for example, the signal is"passed" from here to there, and "then"passed...etc., for we must remember that all these processes aredynamic, continuous, and as I have proposed, reverberating andholonomic. The function of the LGN of the thalamus thusappears to be as a "driver" for the reverberationbetween the LGN and the first stage of the visual cortex. As Ihave suggested, this reverberation may be thought of as aholoprojection which has at least two functions. Firstly, thisinformational entity is the first stage in the generation of (thevisual aspect of) the habit routine complex, it contains theinformation which will activate from the frames of memory (storedin distributed manner in the same visual areas of cortex), theactual information which makes up the habit routine presented tothinking2 processes. Secondly, since this holoprojection carries,at least potentially, the original or "genuine" visualinformation, it will be used under certain circumstances togenerate aspects of the visual scene that are detected assignificant and to which the attention is directed. This willoccur by a comparison or superimposition of the primary visualholoprojection with another holoprojection set up by the habitroutine search system. (As explained below, significancedetection may use the primary sensory holoprojections, orthe memory data activated by these holoprojections instead). An additional function of the primary visualholoprojection results in the phenomenon of iconic memory,the very short term visual memory trace that has beenexperimentally demonstrated. (17) An informational fragment of theprimary visual holoprojection, since the entire holoprojection isbeing constantly updated with new visual data, would be expectedto have a very short "half-life" comparable to the 200to 500 millisecond iconic memory (up to three or four secondsunder certain experimental conditions). Experiments with iconicmemory have shown that it persists for greater periods whenpreceded and/or followed by a simple dark field containing littleor no new visual information. Likewise, it may be interfered withby the process of masking in which a bright field of view,or interfering patterns are shown. This is exactly what would beexpected for the visual holoprojection model. A paucity of newvisual data arriving to update the holoprojection would allow thereverberation to persist "as is" for a greater lengthof time. Data intentionally designed to confuse or interfere withthe iconic memory would have the effect of overwriting therelevant aspects of the holoprojection (the transformcoefficients stored in the microtubules of these neurons). The extraction of the iconic memory must occurby other systems involved with thinking2 processes, againprobably by the comparison or superimposition of holoprojections.There is more than speculation in the idea that such projectionsmight be superimposed and compared to show similarities anddifferences, for the same kind of process can be carried out withoptical holograms (in practice, I am informed, there aretechnical difficulties to overcome, but no theoreticalrestrictions). Two slightly different optical holograms, forexample, could at least theoretically be projected so that theycancel each other except for the aspects in which they differ:only the differences would appear in the projected image.Likewise, two radically differing holograms having just a fewidentical features could be projected to emphasize their commonfeatures. In the brain, the process might be as simple as theaddition and subtraction of the transform coefficients stored inthe microtubules of the contributing neural systems. This wouldproduce another set of coefficients representing thesuperimposition. At the same time that the primary visualholoprojection is being generated, of course, all the othersensory systems are generating their own holoprojections, bysimilar mechanisms involving sensory receptors, the thalamicrelay nuclei concerned with those senses, and areas of thecortex. Thus for hearing we get an audio holoprojection fromwhich can be extracted echoic memory (analogous to iconicmemory). The audio holoprojection is used to activate the audiodomain of the frames of memory going into the generation of thehabit routine complex. Tactile sensations and proprioceptionlikewise produce their reverberations, and so forth. The binding and superimposition of all theprimary sensory holoprojections is accomplished by a scanningmechanism only recently detected by neurological experiments. (18) This scanningoperation is also carried out by a nucleus of the thalamus, theintralaminar nucleus. Now what is scanned is not the actualprimary holoprojections themselves, but the memory informationwhich they activate in the various regions of the cortex. Thisactivation occurs as the holoprojection signal transits throughthe pyramidal cells of the several layers of the cortextaking part in the reverberation. The sum total of all ongoingsensory holoprojections, impinging on the memory data distributedin the same areas of the cortex that take part in the set up ofthe various holoprojections, activates this memory data such thatthe intralaminar nucleus, acting again as a driver for thegeneration of a holoprojection, creates the habit routine complexholoprojection. The memory data in this process is thus analogousto the role of primary sensory data in the generation of theprimary sensory holoprojection. Remember that we arehypothesizing that this memory data is associated with themicrotubules of the neurons in the cortex and not their synapses,so while the neurons and their synapses in the circuit betweenthe thalamic relay nuclei and the cortex are maintaining theprimary holoprojection using the signals from the sensoryreceptors, the holoprojection itself, as an interference pattern,is resonating with the stored interference patterns in memoryresident in the microtubules. The habit routine complex holoprojection is thebound informational entity presented to thinking2 processes,having the various properties already described in chapter 3. Thememory information used to generate the habit routine is, as justproposed above, analogous to the original sensory information:the sensory signals are used to set up the primary sensoryholoprojections, and the activated signals from memory are usedto set up the habit routine holoprojection. In each case we havea thalamic nucleus acting as the driver for the process, using aninput of transform coefficients to produce the holoprojection.But the intralaminar nucleus scan which sets up the habit routineis deriving its input from the entire cortex, not just theprimary sensory areas. The habit routine complex is much morethan just primary sensory information taken from memory, forremember that a habit routine contains pre-programmedassociations with ideas, with habits of thinking, and it alsocontains recommended actions (including not only physicalresponses but thoughts, opinions, implied value judgments, etc.),that represent the sum total of ways in which similar situationswere dealt with or reacted to in the past. The higher domains of the cortex itself areusing the primary sensory holoprojections to derive associationalinformation such as that concerning depth perception, for example(from both audio and visual sources in combination), as well asperception of motion, types and categories of perceptions, aswell as cross-modal associations. Thus the primaryholoprojections generate far more from the memory data than justelementary sensory information. This is why the ILN scan cannotbe simply of the primary holoprojections themselves, but of theresult of the entire sequential associative process they generatein the cortex. The process extends over the entire cortex. Forinstance, at the most advanced level of associational processesin the frontal cortex regions, you have a bound, unitary, andmulti-sensory short-term-memory of events (and your reaction tothese events) that just happened a moment ago, produced bysuccessive stages of associational cortex operation. This memoryinformation is also scanned and becomes part of the habit routinecomplex. In this sense even current experience is very much likea reverberation, for current evaluation of reality is based uponthe interpretation of reality just experienced which has beenre-injected into the ongoing habit routine complex. Thus thesignificances that thinking2 decides to examine more closely byextracting information from the primary holoprojections areactively perpetuated. Using this mechanism we can increase theproportion of "raw reality" in the current habitroutine to override the "interpretation" of realitythat would be supplied by the unmolested habit routine alone. Andhere is where the psychedelic experience comes in. The processwhich is so startlingly activated by psychedelic drugs, is thevery same process that we can accomplish, if on a more limitedlevel, as just described. Let us look closer at this overallprocess, for it involves the generation of additional compositeholoprojections which have more to do with conscious thinking2operations, including free will, than with automatic sub- orpre-conscious thinking1 processes and their holoprojections. The nuclei of the thalamus are also importantfor the generation of these composite holoprojections, but atthis stage, other brain nuclei become partners with the thalamusand cortex. Again, these older, more "primitive" partsof the brain act as drivers in dialog with the cortex to producethe composite informational fields. (19) Among the brain components takingpart are the locus coeruleus and raphe nuclei of the brain stem,the amygdala, hippocampus, the basal ganglia and cerebellum,among others. It is certainly an ambitious statement to say thatI will attempt to explain the role of some these brain areas, buthere goes: First let us consider the role of the locuscoeruleus and the raphe nuclei, for it is the nerve pathwaysconnecting these two brain areas with the cortex and with eachother that are the primary site of biochemical action of thepsychedelic drugs. It is with these nuclei that I must show howsignificance detection and the suspension of habit routine isaccomplished. I would propose that the locus coeruleus is themaster functioning body, the driver which through dialog withessentially all brain areas but particularly the thalamus, theraphe nuclei and the cortex, produces the compositeholoprojection containing information about significance or saliencenot only in the environment, but also even in the ongoingprocesses of thought leading to ideas, opinions, etc. I willrefrain from presenting a diagram of the connecting nervouspathways between the various brain areas cited as it is extremelydifficult to do so meaningfully at this stage. Certainly, as Ihave already said, there are plenty of connecting pathwaysbetween all of these brain parts, there are rather too many, itwould seem. Now the statement that the connections betweenthe raphe nuclei, the locus coeruleus, and their connections tothe thalamus and cortex are the primary site of biochemicalaction of the psychedelic drugs is based quite solidly on recentbrain research. (20)We know that LSD and other psychedelics, for example, exertpowerful influence on the operation of neurons emitting andreceiving at their synapses the neurotransmitter, serotonin.There remains considerable mystery as to how the drugsreact with these neurons, whether they activate or inhibitserotonin receptors, which types of serotonin receptors areaffected, and so forth. There is also considerable mystery as to howthese affected neurons might bring about the overallpsychological result. The first question remains, at the presentstate of research, very difficult to answer. But it is with thesecond question that I believe we should start, for there seemsto be enough information now available to formulate a model. It is generally agreed by neuroscientists todaythat the locus coeruleus acts as a kind of novelty orsignificance detector, its activation (in animals) has been shownto increase in response to stressful or noxious stimuli,preferred food and other complex arousing events, and even tochanges in body systems such as the level of oxygen or carbondioxide in the blood. The psychedelic drugs have been repeatedlyshown to greatly increase the activity of the locus coeruleus,but not when applied directly to the cells which make up thenucleus. Thus it has been hypothesized that the state of thelocus coeruleus must be influenced by another nucleus or systemwhich itself is directly affected by psychedelics. Some relevantfacts concerning the locus coeruleus: The locus coeruleus (LC) consists of two dense clusters of noradrenergic neurons located bilaterally in the upper pons at the lateral border of the 4th ventricle. The LC, which projects diffusely to virtually all regions of the neuraxis, receives an extraordinary convergence of somatic, visceral and other sensory inputs from all regions of the body and has been likened to a novelty detector. Thus, the LC represents a unique nodal point both for the detection of significant changes in the internal and external environment and for relaying this information to the remainder of the central nervous system. It is not surprising that hallucinogenic drugs, which produce such dramatic changes in perception, would alter either directly or indirectly the function of LC neurons. (21) In keeping with the holonomic model, I wouldpropose that the locus coeruleus is the driver which produces acomposite holoprojection consisting of the superimposition andcanceling of primary holoprojections including the habit routineholoprojection to yield a field of information concerning significancesin the ongoing experience of the organism. The detection ofsignificance, or salience, normally is derived from the samememory data from which the habit routine complex is generated,and is merely a repeat detection of salience that has occurred inthe past. When the test animal mentioned above is shown apreferred food, for instance, and its locus coeruleus is shown toincrease in activity, the salience detected is obviously relativeto memory data of the preferred food. But when I am the testanimal in a French restaurant, when some unknown yet succulentdish is placed before me, I begin to extract information directlyfrom the primary sensory holoprojections to try to deduce thecomposition and possible methods of preparation of the mysteriousdelicacy. Memory information in the habit routine will still bethe primary source of information in these deliberations, but myAttention will guide the process to actual examination of the"genuine" sensory data contained in the primaryholoprojections. As I mentioned above in introducing thefunctions of the primary holoprojections, we see that saliencedetection may use the primary data, but normally, androutinely, salience is merely a repeat performance of previousdetection, based on the habit routine complex itself. The connections of the locus coeruleus whichaccomplish the detection of normal salience from the habitroutine data may be simply the interconnections with the cortex.The locus coeruleus receives a modest input from only one area ofthe cortex, the prefrontal cortex, but it sends its output to theentire cortex. We see again (as in the case of the pathwaysbetween the thalamus and the primary sensory cortex) thesituation where the "return" signal is far moreimportant than the "input" signal, and this suggests,as in the nervous pathways taking part in the generation of theprimary sensory holoprojections, a reverberation, in this casethe salience detection holoprojection. (22) The signal from the prefrontal cortexis the final stage of the entire process of association, so itwill obviously represent the complex associational memory data ofpast salience detection that was experienced. The return pathwaysto all cortex areas might also be thought of as facilitating thecancellation or ignoring of all features of the habit routineexcept for the salient entities, so that the resultingholoprojection contains only information about these entities.Thus the Attention is directed to the salience which practicallyjumps out of its surroundings. The locus coeruleus has severalinputs besides that from the prefrontal cortex, but these inputsfunction to modulate the holoprojection generation in variousways. A particularly important control of the process isaccomplished by the raphe nuclei. The raphe nuclei of the brain stem areparticularly important to salience detection and to thepsychedelic experience because they contain the great majority ofneurons of the brain which use serotonin as a neurotransmitter.Some of the earliest work on the effect of LSD in the brain foundthat "LSD and other indoleamine hallucinogens...have potent,direct inhibitory effects upon serotonergic neurons located inthe raphe nuclei of the brainstem." (23) Now it has been well established thatthe serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei project heavily tothe locus coeruleus, and likewise that serotonin inhibits thefiring of the type of neuron found in the locus coeruleus. (24) As mentionedabove, studies have also confirmed the psychedelic agents have astheir target at least some of the many types of serotoninreceptors on neurons both of the areas signaled by the raphenuclei, and on the raphe serotonin neurons themselves(autoreceptors). The raphe neurons also project widely throughoutthe brain, to all areas of the cortex, (strongly to theprefrontal cortex from which the locus coeruleus derives itsinput), the thalamus, the amygdala, virtually the entire nervoussystem. Thus I would propose that the raphe nuclei are theprinciple mechanism of control, the driver which guides the modeof function of salience detection, as well as the manner in whichthe detection is used and subsequently stored in memory. Itappears that Attention and other thinking2 process use theserotonergic system of the brain, based in the raphe nuclei, todirect the detection and use of salience, but not simply by"inhibition" as would be implied by the observed"inhibitory" action of serotonin on the neurons of thelocus coeruleus, or the observed "inhibition" ofserotonergic neurons by LSD. It is a curious fact of the human brain, thatfully 75% of the neurons therein are supposedly "inhibitoryneurons", whereas in the monkey the figure is 45%, and inthe cat a mere 35%. (25)Clearly these facts must have some tremendously importantsignificance, not only for the type of functioning they imply ofthe brain, but in some sense they must tell us something veryimportant about the psychological differences between man andanimals, particularly the great disparity of intellectualcapacity. A not very convincing speculation has been that thelarge proportion of inhibitory neurons allows a"streamlining of thinking" in which groups of braincells are more quickly returned to a state of readiness aftersome operation. (26)I would propose that the inhibitory neurons do not"inhibit" in such a literal manner, but rather areconcerned with the superimposition of holoprojections in which a cancellationor subtraction of information results, such as themanner in which all peripheral information from memory going intothe generation of the salience holoprojection is removed so as toyield a composite holoprojection consisting of only thedetected entities. It might be said that human mental powers, asopposed to that of lower animals, reside primarily in the abilityto discriminate between and detect widely differing types ofsignificance not only in the environment but within thoughtpatterns of abstractions and concerning ideas andconstructs of the intellect. These human feats, I would propose,are accomplished using the wide network of inhibitory neuronsfunctioning to produce composite holoprojections derived throughthe comparison and subtraction of informational fields onefrom another, to reveal patterns the complexity of which faroutstrips the power of lower animals to detect. There are probably several brain operations,brought about by combinations of brain parts including a nucleusof the midbrain or brainstem as a driver, which generate suchcomposite holoprojections. The detection of emotional content, orvalence, is probably accomplished using the amygdala as adriver in dialog with the cortex and other nuclei, superimposingthe same primary holoprojections as are used for saliencedetection. But the salience detection of the locus coeruleus,controlled and modulated by the raphe nuclei connectionsthroughout the brain, generates what is probably the mostimportant holoprojection of the brain/mind, (or in any case,second only in importance to the habit routine holoprojection).And it is upon the generation of this salience detectionholoprojection that the psychedelic drugs exert their effects. Now it was soon noticed, after the inhibitoryeffect of LSD and similar psychedelic drugs on the raphe nucleiwas discovered, that other psychedelic agents such as mescalineand the phenethylamine family did not produce the inhibition. Theindirect effect on the locus coeruleus was, however, asimportant as with LSD. The effect is indirect, for asmentioned, the application of psychedelic agents to locuscoeruleus neurons themselves fails to alter their activity. Butsince the locus coeruleus salience detection system involves theentire cortex, and the serotonergic neurons of the raphe nucleiproject to the entire nervous system, it is evident that thecontrol of salience detection would be alterable at manydifferent sites of potential psychedelic drug action. A directchange in the raphe nuclei is the possible primary action in thecase of LSD, whereas a change in the effect of thesignaling by the raphe neurons, either in the locus coeruleus orpossibly the cortex itself, might be the mechanism for mescaline.The overall effect is in both cases a change, which appears to bean increase, in the rate and type of salience detected by thelocus coeruleus system. I am tempted to repeat some of Huxley'sobservations about significance quoted at the end of chapter 3,but instead will quote Alan Watts, here writing about his firstexperiment with psychedelic drugs: "I have said that my general impression of the first experiment was that the "mechanism" by which we screen our sense-data and select only some of them as significant had been partially suspended. Consequently, I felt that the particular feeling which we associate with "the meaningful" was projected indiscriminately upon everything, and then rationalized in ways that might strike an independent observer as ridiculous—unless, perhaps, the subject were unusually clever at rationalizing. However, the philosopher cannot pass up the point that our selection of some sense-data as significant and others as insignificant is always with relation to particular purposes—survival, the quest for certain pleasures, finding one's way to some destination, or whatever it may be." (27) I have suggested above that there are two modesof salience detection, the first merely automatic and based uponpreviously experienced situations, and a second which is based onthe genuine data of the primary holoprojections. Remember mylittle story of noticing the grey rock in the middle of thepathway. Automatic salience detection brought it to my awareness,and interpreted it relative to previous experience. Yet someunconsciously perceived anomalous data, a slight movement, acolor not quite in keeping with experience, caused me to suspectan error, and choose to examine the raw sensory dataitself and Decide that something was amiss. At this point theoriginal habit routine was overruled, and a new interpretationactively demanded by the Attention. This was accomplished by useof the working memory, thought to be a function of and residentin the prefrontal cortex, the same cortical area from whichthe locus coeruleus receives its sole input. Remember also mystated feeling that under the influence of psychedelics, it seemsthat the habit routines of interpretation in this case would beat least momentarily suspended, and after a moment multiple habitroutines might arrive at thinking2 processes. All theseobservations seem to indicate that psychedelics would beinterfering with the habit routine holoprojection, rather thanthe salience holoprojection. But according to my neurologicalmodel so far, it would appear that psychedelic agents interferewith the control exerted on the salience holoprojection by theraphe nuclei and the serotonergic neurons extending widely to allareas of the brain. I would now propose that the profoundalteration of the salience holoprojection by psychedelics,illustrated both by neurological data and by the practicalobservations of Huxley, Watts, and many others, causes theindividual, using the conscious mechanisms of thinking2, tohimself suspend the dependence on the habit routineholoprojection. It is the cumulative effect of not only addedsalience detected in the ENV both external and internal, but ofthe interpretation of this increased salience as itself extremelysignificant, that leads to a veritable avalanche of saliencedetection which simply overwhelms normal acceptance of anddependence on the habit routine system. The habit routines are still assembled and arethere in the background, but they are almost completely ignoredby Attention, Decision, and other thinking2 processes amidst theflood of salience perceived. Thus, the psychedelic experience is,in an important sense, voluntary, and this would explainthe ability to achieve such states through meditation and othervoluntary mechanisms. That the habit routines are still assembledand available to some extent is illustrated by the common abilityduring the lucid end-stages of psychedelic experience torecognize a duality in experience: a perception of the way thingsappear with "the doors of perception" cleansed, and asimultaneous recognition of how the same scene would appear in anormal state of mind governed by habit routine. Such realizationextends to the perception one's personality traits, one'sprejudices and automatisms of behavior, from a viewpoint that isessentially outside of the self and beyond the ego. Inthis state I believe, the habit routines have been completelysuspended in function, and salience detection is using theinformation of the primary holoprojections. At the request of thinking2, the primary sensoryholoprojections become the subject of meticulous examination,genuine reality floods through, the habit routines ignored. Theraphe nuclei must in some sense be acting as a control mechanismfor this switch-over, allowing the locus coeruleus system tocreate superimpositions of the genuine data rather than thememory data. This switch-over probably occurs in the cortexitself, by the control exerted by the serotonergic neurons fromthe raphe nuclei which contact both inhibitory interneurons andthe pyramidal neurons of the cortex. (28) Experimental evidence supporting the above modelrelating the neurological operations of brain systems and thehabit routine search and suspension hypothesis of normal andpsychedelic functioning has been easy to find in the literature.Of course, due to the current state of neuroscience, it is oftenfound that alternative interpretations of experimental results,leading to radically different models, is possible. Such is thecase here, and for any specific experiment which I might use asevidence for my model, others would find it just as easy to usethe same data for another view. For this reason, as well as inthe interest of brevity, I shall mention only a few examples. Athorough survey would require at least another volume, and themore important chapters of the present volume still awaitexposition. A vast body of literature concerning brainfunction and its perturbation by brain lesions goes back morethan a century. A great many studies have been done concerningpatients whose brains have sustained damage through accidents ornecessary brain surgery, and experimentally, countless numbers ofanimals of every description have undergone destruction,disconnection or removal of various brain areas in the attempt tolocalize various sensory, motor, and cognitive functions of thebrain. With such a wealth of evidence, it is not hard to findstudies that might support almost any model one would care todream up. I will mention just a few cases which have beenwell documented, and which deal with damage to the areas of theprefrontal cortex. This brain area, it will be remembered, hasbeen suggested both in the literature and in my own model as animportant center involved with the working memory and with themost complex levels of associative processing by the cortex. Suchassociation might be expected to facilitate complex cognitivephenomena such as the expression of personality traits, decisionmaking and attention, voluntary action and free will, theperception of and reaction to complex social situations, i.e.,the most complex and human of cognitive functions. (It is thefrontal lobe, and especially the prefrontal area that has seensuch a massive expansion and development in the recent evolutionof the hominids.) Remember also that it is from the prefrontalcortex that the sole cortical projection to the locus coeruleusoccurs. Projections from the prefrontal cortex also extend to theraphe nuclei and the amygdala. The model I have devised would therefore predictthat disruption of frontal lobe integrity should producealteration of salience detection and the evaluation andexpression of emotion, and radical changes in the assembly anduse of habit routines, especially as they apply to these mostadvanced cognitive and affective functions. Since the connectionsto the locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei, and amygdala hypothesizedto be important in my model project from the prefrontal cortex,interference with salience and valence functions should certainlybe observed in cases of prefrontal damage. And prefrontal damageresulting in an impaired function of working memory in supplyingparameters for the ongoing habit routine search process shouldproduce symptoms identifiable as resulting from impairedgeneration, access to, or use of habit routine in ongoingcognitive operations. A very famous case of brain injury in theprefrontal area, recently the subject of a book and variousnewspaper articles, is that of the construction foreman PhineasP. Gage. In 1848 Gage sustained a massive brain injury when anexplosives procedure went terribly wrong and sent an iron tampingbar vertically through the frontal region of his brain.Miraculously, Gage seemed at first practically unaffected, evenwalking some distance, and conversing with his men on the way tomedical attention. It was only later that the peculiar kind ofmental deficits that necessarily result from this type ofprefrontal injury came to light. The case has recently become thesubject of detailed attention thanks to the work of HannaDamasio, who was able to reconstruct the precise location ofGage's brain damage using state-of-the-art computer techniques toanalyze the features of Gage's skull, a museum exhibit at theHarvard Medical School Museum for over a hundred years. Anoverview of this work together with a detailed examination of thesymptomatic evidence in the case is presented in a recent book. (29) It was said of Gage that he became a differentman, his entire personality was radically changed. It seemed thathe had completely lost access to his previously acquired socialconventions and rules and had become childish, irresponsible, yetstrangely undiminished in terms of episodic and autobiographicalmemory, language ability, even, one might say, intelligence. Interms of the habit routine model: In the daily yet complex socialrelationships in which personality is expressed, it appeared thatGage's behavior was capricious, or even random, the habitroutines of personality which are among the most complex andhighly associative aspects of the habit routine complex, were nolonger accessible (reconstructible) from the memory of thefrontal cortex and by consequence, his automatic social behaviorwas based not upon previous experience but was instead arbitraryand random rather than merely childish. In theory, it seems,he could still reason out how one should act in a givensituation, but when forced into a decision by a life situation,he was essentially powerless to apply such reasoning. This mayillustrate how dependent we are on habit routine for makingdecisions and for the expression of personality. In the case ofpersonality traits, it would obviously be impossible to calculatelogically and consciously how to react to a situation in accordwith our established personality. The reaction must be automaticand instantaneous. If this is also the case with at least someaspects of decision making, a statement I previously made becomeseven more pertinent: "We see what we have alreadyseen..." and decide in ways that we have previously decidedto an overwhelming degree. The symptoms described by Antonio Damasio (30) could well beexplained in these terms, but in addition, Damasio describes thecase of a prefrontal patient which he had himself examined indetail. The patient, referred to as Elliot, had undergone surgeryfor the removal of a tumor at the base of the frontal cortex,just above the eye sockets. Surrounding brain tissue had alsobeen removed or damaged, and thus a large portion of theprefrontal cortices were dysfunctional. As with Gage, the largestpart of the damage was in the ventromedial (lower-central) area,and many of the symptoms were repeated, such as radicalpersonality change. But particularly striking were symptoms thatmight be interpreted as resulting from interference with thesalience and valence systems involving connections from thedamaged prefrontal region to the locus coeruleus, raphe nuclei,and to the amygdala. These symptoms might be categorized as alack of ability to plan ahead, to make decisions concerningstrategy and the immediate future, almost, one might say, adeficit of free will. The obvious intelligence which Elliotretained could not be mustered to organize even simple sequencesof activity as required for his job, for instance. In addition,he exhibited an emotional flatness or detachment in strikingcontrast to his pre-operative character. Interestingly, a lengthy series of psychologicaltests indicated that, like Gage, Elliot could theoretically makesuch decisions, such as those pertaining to moral judgments, endsand means problem solving, awareness of consequences concerningboth events and social situations, etc. But when a real lifesituation forced a decision based on habit routine, thetheoretical knowledge seemed impossible to apply. In thetheoretical situation, we could say that the records of socialinformation in memory were actively and intentionally used to reconstructthe required decision from scratch, whereas in the lifesituation what was required was an automatic referral to thehabit routines representing such decisions that had been madeover a lifetime: the records of previous decisions as representedin the highest levels of habit routine had been destroyed alongwith frontal cortex, (31)whereas the previous memories themselves upon which the previousdecisions had been based were still intact in other areas of thecortex. The combination of decision deficit withemotional flatness led Damasio to construct a model he calls theSomatic-Marker Hypothesis, and it has attracted much favorablecomment. (32) Iwill not describe it here, but will instead offer my owninterpretation of the concurrence of the two symptoms. We coulddescribe an inability to make rational decisions not only as dueto deficits in the assembly of the highest levels of the habitroutine complex, but also on the basis of faulty saliencedetection, since the relative significance of events and aspectsof reality, both present and in memory, must obviously play animportant role in constructing plans based upon contingencies andthe evaluation of probabilities and strategies. With both of theabove cases, Gage and Elliot, there was a theoretical ability tomake decisions, based upon reasoning processes utilizing episodicand autobiographical memory of events themselves. Likewise,reasoning processes and memory would be able to deducesignificance both in the internal and external environments, butthe automation of salience detection would be deficient. The keyto understanding the overall syndrome, however, is seeing thatthe generation of emotional content by a holoprojection driven bythe amygdala must be a process based on information in thesalience detection holoprojection. It is with the varioussignificances detected in the external and internal environmentthat emotional expression deals, all routine and superfluousinformation merely falls by the wayside and is ignored. The SDholoprojection feedback to all areas of the cortex accomplishesthis cancellation or ignorance of irrelevancy, to leave thedetected significances in stark contrast relative to thebackground. From this holoprojection of detected significancecomes the data from which the emotional value or valence isgenerated. It is easy to see, then, that if the saliencedetection system is perturbed or interrupted, a naturallyresulting symptom should be emotional flatness, or even randomlyexpressed emotion since the amygdala is not itself damaged butmerely has little or no accurate information to work with. Elliothimself realized perfectly well not only his inabilities inmaking decisions in the face of real-life situations, but alsohow subjects or situations that had once caused him strongemotion no longer evoked any reaction whatsoever. Here we can seethat, since he remembers subjects which formerly caused anemotional reaction, he can also theoretically evaluate emotionalcontent just as he can theoretically evaluate significance,reconstructing the information from long-term memory. But it isthe automated accomplishment of these functions which has beenperturbed, and in real-life, on-the-spot decision making,reconstruction does not and cannot substitute for the automatedprocesses. According to Damasio's hypothesis, the deficitfor decision is based on the deficit of emotional content, but Ibelieve the situation is quite the reverse, that emotion is basedon significance detection necessary in the process of automaticdecision-making, and that both of these functions are based uponintact operation and connections of the prefrontal cortices tothe locus coeruleus and the raphe nuclei. Now I cannot tell from Damasio's descriptionswhether the actual connections projecting from the frontal cortexto the locus coeruleus, amygdala and raphe nuclei were damaged orsevered during Elliot's operation. It would seem in Gage's casethat the trajectory of the iron bar might well indicate thatthese connections were destroyed: they are grouped together intothe medial forebrain bundle, an important nerve pathway passingdirectly through the ventromedial area. This pathway alsocontains the projections returning from the locus coeruleus andraphe nuclei which connect to all areas of the cortex. Whetherthe severing of the medial forebrain bundle alone produces asyndrome similar to the actual destruction of prefrontal cortexis not known, but if my hypothesis is correct, the severing ofthe medial forebrain bundle connections to the locus coeruleusand raphe nuclei should produce a very similar result as is seenin cases such as Gage and Elliot. Damage to the frontal corticesmay have to be quite widespread to bring about the same result asthe simple severing of these nervous pathways. There is another type of damage to the frontalcortex which produces rather different results. So far, in thetwo cases mentioned, the principal damage was to the ventromedialareas, just above the eyes and centrally located. When damage tothe dorsolateral areas also occurs, psychological tests indicatean important deficit in working memory accompanies the syndrome.These same tests, given to Elliot, showed no disabilitywhatsoever in his working memory function. Inasmuch as theworking memory has been proposed here as an important part of theprocess of habit routine search, its disruption should alter theprocess in certain ways. In the cases of ventromedial damagecited above, I proposed that the actual memory informationnecessary for construction of the highest associative levels ofthe habit routine complex had been destroyed. But withdorsolateral damage as well, an important part of the systemwhich carries out the habit routine search is destroyed: theability to supply parameters for the search is impeded. It was proposed that conscious and unconsciousparameters guiding the successive scans producing the habitroutine complex were introduced via the working memory. The ILNscan, incorporating WM parameters would, on the succeeding scanretrieve a modified selection of memory information according tothe parameters previously scanned. And it was proposed that this"small window on reality" was essentially the onlynormal way to guide the processes of thinking1 using free will orintentional creativity. In experimental situations we noticedeficits in precisely these domains. Fuster, in his book on theprefrontal cortex, states that "In general terms, ablationstudies indicate that the cortex of the dorsal and lateralprefrontal surface is primarily involved in cognitive aspects ofbehavior. The rest of the prefrontal cortex, medial and ventral,appears to be mostly involved in affective and motivationalfunctions..." (33)(such as salience detection and emotional evaluation.) In human prefrontal patients, a strikingexperimental demonstration of working memory disruption due todorsolateral damage is the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, heredescribed by Dudai: The subject is presented with a series of stimulus cards and a deck of response cards. The cards bear coloured geometric patterns (e.g. a single blue star, three red circles), and can be matched by categories (e.g. colour, form, number). The examiner selects a sorting category (e.g. colour), but does not inform the subject. The latter is instructed to place a response card in front of a stimulus card, wherever he or she thinks it should go. The examiner then informs the subject if the response was right or wrong, and the subject uses this information to obtain correct responses in the following matches. After ten consecutive responses, the examiner shifts the sorting category without warning, and the subject must unveil it again to obtain correct matches. The procedure is then repeated with other sorting categories. Patients with prefrontal lesions find this task abnormally difficult. The interpretation is that they have difficulties in using temporarily stored information to regulate their actions. (34) The function of working memory as a parameterstore for ongoing habit routine search is well illustrated by theexperiment. The original instructions for the experiment, whichthe subject has little difficulty in following, create a simplehabit routine for performing the sorting according to the firstlearned category. But when the category is changed, the habitroutine developed for the experiment remains fixed, itsalteration by new working memory parameters is difficult if notimpossible. Most prefrontal patients with dorsolateral damagehave great difficulty in this test, but Elliot, whose damage waslimited to ventromedial areas, passed it with flying colors. Now the evidence concerning prefrontal damageand its interpretation using my model takes on some additionalrelevance in consideration of the following experimentalfindings: In a series of experiments using PET brain scantechniques to observe subjects in altered states of consciousnessbrought about by psychedelics, the primary effect noted was asignificant increase in the activity of the frontal cortices. (35) This result, incombination with Aghajanian's findings of greatly increased locuscoeruleus activity caused by psychedelic drugs, lends myinterpretation some credibility. Under the influence ofpsychedelic drugs, the cognitive functions of working memory andhabit routine search, significance detection and emotional valuedetection are all working overtime, and they all are facilitatedby the prefrontal cortices. Whether this is all mere coincidence,or an indication that pieces of a very intricate puzzle arefalling into place only time and further research will tell. A vast quantity of experimental evidence awaitsthe organizing ability of some yet-to-be-discovered overall modelof brain function. In reading the many papers dealing with justthe prefrontal cortex in the recently published The CognitiveNeurosciences (36)for example, one is immediately impressed with both the wealth ofexperimental information available and the corresponding wealthof models, terminologies, and hypotheses which attempt toorganize this information. But such a cornucopia of viewpointsmust certainly be a sign that we modelers are very much like thecollection of blind men describing the elephant from the feel ofmerely local areas of the overall beast. Who will be thevisionary to discover the viewpoint from which all these modelsand observations become a united whole? I certainly cannotpretend that the cognitive and neurological models I havepresented here fulfill that function. I would be the first toadmit the highly speculative nature of the above neurologicalmodel that I have presented, and would not be surprised norindignant if it were said that the area that I was describing wasnot even part of the elephant! In my view, the only claim for consideration ofmy ideas stems from their origin in the attempt to explain thebody of evidence that has accumulated concerning the psychedelicexperience, evidence which has been almost entirely disregardedby the mainstream of science for nearly thirty years. Had it notbeen for such neglect, which in part was forced by an idioticinternational effort to fight an unwinnable, self-defeating andtherefore irrational "war on drugs", it seems to methat several fields of study of human psychology and neurosciencewould have by now achieved far greater insight than is the case. But we can blame not only the drug warriors, thepoliticians and intelligence organizations, the religiousmoralizers and puritanical oafs for this ignorance: scientiststoo are to blame, perhaps equally so. It was easy for me, fromthe outside of the scientific establishment, to see that one ofthe most important discoveries ever made by Western science wasbeing ignored, even vilified. But from the inside of thatscientific enterprise, it was apparently no easier to see whatwas happening than it was for those inside the traps of religiousfanaticism or the carefully cultivated paranoia which is theparadigm for institutions providing much of the raw material forthe politicians: the intelligence organizations. Scientists, at least outside the realm of theirown specialties, often seem as prone to narrow-mindedness as areother intelligent yet confused men. It seems to be almostinstinctual that men follow such narrow pathways through life,and the habit-routine model is certainly also an attempt to showhow such narrowness might actually be derived from an inherentneurological feature of the human organism, rather than somethingwhich we must label instinctual for want of a betterunderstanding. The functioning of our nervous systems utilizingthe habit routine system might be taken as a convenient excusefor the current deplorable state of civilization, this"century of holocaust," but now that I have laid barethe roots of the situation, it is a lame excuse at best. In thenext chapter I will explore the idea that this inherentneurological and cognitive feature has been an essential (yet nowfor man a skeuomorphic or vestigial) characteristic in the stagesof evolution not only of man, but of all animal life. (1) Rupert Sheldrake, The Presenceof the Past, 1988, William Collins, publisher. (back) (2) A brief but concise description of the Hopfield Networkmay be found in Crick, The Astonishing Hypothesis, ibid.,pp182-185. A more technical and thorough exposition is found inChurchland & Sejnowski, The Computational Brain 1993MIT Press, p82ff. (back) (3) Steven Rose, The Making of Memory, Bantam Press(Great Britain) 1992, see chapter 13. (back) (4) Ibid., p322. (back) (5) Karl H. Pribram, Languages of the Brain, 1971Brandon House, New York, recently reissued (1988). See also hisessay "What the Fuss is All About", in TheHolographic Paradigm, Ken Wilber (ed.), New Science Library,Shambala 1982. Other articles in this volume discuss thepossibilities and limitations of the model. (back) (6) "From Metaphors to Models: the Use of Analogy inNeuropsychology", Karl H. Pribram in Metaphors in theHistory of Psychology, David e. Leary, ed., 1990, CambridgeUniversity Press. (back) (7) Sometimes called the "grandmother cell" model,in which a unit of learning or recognition (of your grandmother,for instance) was supposedly associated with a single brain cellor strictly local set of interconnections between cells. (back) (8) Francis Crick (1994) ibid. p185. (back) (9) Introduced by George Leonard to refer to entities havingthe nature of a hologram, The Silent Pulse, Dutton, NewYork 1978. (back) (10) "Spectral Density Maps of Receptive Fields in theRat's Somatosensory Cortex" in Origins: Brain & SelfOrganization, Karl Pribram, ed., 1994, Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates. (back) (11) Brain and Perception: Holonomy and Structure inFigural Processing, Karl H. Pribram, 1991, Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates. (back) (12) Times Literary Supplement, London, August 25,1995. (back) (13) See "Quantum Coherence in Microtubules" byStuart R. Hameroff, Journal of Consciousness Studies 1,No.1, 1994 pp91-118. (back) (14) In the brain there are approximately 1011 neurons(100,000,000,000), 1015 synapses, but Hameroff estimates thatthere may be 1023 dynamic sites or states associated with themicrotubules. (back) (15) See "Perception as an Oneiric-like State Modulatedby the Senses", Llin�s and Ribary, in Large-ScaleNeuronal Theories of the Brain, 1994, MIT Press. On page 113is a summary of brain connectivity illustrative of the inadequacyof current "information-flow" models. (back) (16) In producing a holographic image by illuminating aholographic photographic plate (the hologram) with coherentlight, the same image is produced by directing the light throughonly a small part of the plate as is produced by illuminating theentire plate. But the image in the former case carries much lessdefinition, it is of lower resolution. (back) (17) A review of the experiments is in Human Memory,Theory and Practice, Alan Baddeley pp14-18. (back) (18) See "Perception as an Oneiric-like State Modulatedby the Senses", Llin�s and Ribary, in Large-ScaleNeuronal Theories of the Brain, 1994, MIT Press. (back) (19) I might go so far as to suggest that most, if not allcognitive functions of the brain are accomplished by a dialogamong two or more brain parts, and not by a single area actingalone to effect some cognitive result which is then passed on toanother area. The multiple holoprojection model is entirely inaccord with this suggestion. The model has conceptualsimilarities to another important "checks and balances"feedback system of the body, the hormonal system. (back) (20) A publication containing the most recent researchfindings of the important workers in this field is 50 Years ofLSD: Current Status and Perspectives of Hallucinogens, Pletscherand Ladewig, editors, Parthenon Publishing, 1994. The bookpresents papers submitted to a symposium of the Swiss Academy ofMedical Sciences in October 1993. (back) (21) Ibid., "LSD and phenethylaminehallucinogens: common sites of neuronal action", G.K.Aghajanian. (back) (22) Another way of thinking about the disparity between"input" and "output" signals againillustrates a basic conceptual fault with the computer model ofbrain function. In the case of the locus coeruleus for example,it has been stated that since its "output" extends tosuch diverse regions, its functions must also be multiple andwidespread. This view has the underlying assumption that thelocus coeruleus is sending information it has processed from itsmodest input, to many locations where this data is then used formany different functions. But the alternative view I haveproposed is that the locus coeruleus accomplishes only onefunction. The multiple and widely connected "output"pathways are not to be seen as sending information, but rather asrequesting or accessing information of a widely diversenature (relating to the detection of salience in many domains,situations, and complexities). The result of this request is thencycled back to the locus coeruleus via its modest input from thefrontal cortex, as a reverberating holoprojection. (back) (23) Ibid, p27. (back) (24) Chemoarchitecture of the Brain, RudolfNieuwenhuys, 1985 Springer-Verlag, p40. (back) (25) From references mentioned in Stairway to the Mind,Alwyn Scott, Springer-Verlag 1995, p94. (back) (26) A suggestion of Donald Hebb, recounted in Stairway tothe Mind, ibid., p94. (back) (27) "The New Alchemy" in This Is It, AlanWatts, Random House, 1958. (back) (28) Aghajanian in 50 Years of LSD, ibid., pp33-34 (back) (29) Descartes' Error, Antonio R. Damasio, G.P.Putnam's Sons, 1994, chapters 1 & 2.(back) (30) Ibid. (back) (31) One could view the situation also as an inability of theintralaminar nucleus of the thalamus to include in its habitroutine-generating scan the information from the destroyedfrontal region. This is probably the more useful if not accurateview, as opposed to the view that frontal lobe"information" has been destroyed.(back) (32) Ibid., p173-ff. (back) (33) The Prefrontal Cortex, Joaquin M. Fuster, 2ndedition 1989, New York: Raven Press, p74.(back) (34) The Neurobiology of Memory, Yadin Dudai, OxfordUniversity Press 1989, p263. (back) (35) F. X. Vollenweider and colleagues in recent paperssummarized in "Evidence for a cortical-subcortical imbalanceof sensory information processing during altered states ofconsciousness using positron emission tomography and[18F]fluorodeoxyglucose" in 50 Years of LSD, ibid., pp67-86. (back) (36) Michael S. Gazzaniga, editor, The CognitiveNeurosciences, 1995 The MIT Press. (back) Table of Contents Chapter 6 WT01-B36-13IA087-000632-B030-28http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065133 text/html 51446HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:51:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:57 GMTContent-length: 51227 The Center of the Universe - Chapter 6 6. Instinct The ideas expressed so far, particularly those inthe last two chapters, were not the starting point for thepresent theory of psychedelic experience. They were, on thecontrary, only recently developed along with my also recentinterest in cognitive neuroscience and the organization of thehuman brain. But rather than present the components of my theoryin the chronological order of their development, for the purposesof this book it was desirable to construct a theoreticalframework within which my principle hypothesis would, whenrevealed, already have a persuasive foundation. The actualstarting point of the theory began with an idea which occurred tome several years ago during my tenure at an institution of"enforced languishing". I had plenty of time toconsider at length my experiences, and to re-read the manyvolumes I had collected along the way (volumes which, somewhatunbelievably, due to their titles and subject matter, I wasnevertheless permitted to possess). A part-time libraryengagement (and a friendly library "director") alsoallowed me to order in on loan any book I might desire. Theentire situation, despite the shabby surroundings and lack ofintellectual companionship, was not unlike a very productivesabbatical from my former routines. Thus I began early on in my study to think againabout things that I had experienced in Mexico, to considermankind's early and ubiquitous use of psychedelic medicinesespecially with regard to the aboriginal practices of shamanism,early religion, the curing arts. And given the universalimportance of psychedelic plants and preparations for early manit was not a great extrapolation (but a surprising onenonetheless) to begin to suspect that the use of these sacreddrugs must go right back to the very origins of man; they musthave played a role in his evolution from proto-humans, fromwhatever species it was that was definitely advanced animal, butdefinitely not-yet-mankind. Whatever the characteristics of this proto-humanspecies were, (1) itis generally agreed that they were hunter-gatherers who exploredwidely for food from many diverse sources. Evidence alsoindicates that climatic changes and other factors had provided astrong impetus for proto-man to migrate from his African home tothe most distant regions of the earth, thus bringing him intocontact with the diverse psychedelic flora of many new habitats.The period of this migration, the middle to late Paleolithic,coincides precisely with evidence of the birth of human cultureillustrated by the recovery of artifacts such as complex tools,body adornments, artwork, evidence of music, etc. McKenna (2) has presentedseveral persuasive arguments indicating that such generallyagreed characteristics which typified the proto-human specieswould have ensured that its members frequently came into contactwith a range of psychedelic plants. But to hypothesize a role forpsychedelic plants in the evolution of man was easy, to discoverwhat kind of psychological and cognitive leap was entailed inthat miracle of evolution, and what function psychedelic plantsplayed therein, especially whether their influence was anecessary, merely facilitating, or just coincidental factor, thatwould require some diligent study and inventive thought. Although I had studied chemistry and physics in atop university, my knowledge of the biological sciences was quitelimited. In trying to get some ideas about what might have beenthe psychological condition of proto-man, and how psychedelicsmight have affected that condition to bring about major change, Inaturally started with only the most elementary of conceptualtools, the first of which being that somewhat discredited conceptcalled instinct. To the psychologists of the last century theexistence of instinct was self-evident. William James,introducing an extensive chapter on the subject in his famousopus The Principles of Psychology wrote, Instinct is usually defined as the faculty of acting in such a way as to produce certain ends, without foresight of the ends, and without previous education in the performance. That instincts, as thus defined, exist on an enormous scale in the animal kingdom needs no proof. (3) Yet soon the Behaviorists, in a half-centurycrusade to objectify the science of psychology, would firstdispense with the terms, and later with the very concepts of manysuch self-evident entities for lack of simple experimentaltechniques capable of isolating, measuring, and controlling them.The difficulty or inability to accurately measure the predictionsof a model is, of course, a serious flaw, for the purpose of amodel is precisely to suggest experiments that will yieldmeaningful measurement. The Behaviorist stratagem is thusunderstandable, and would probably have been better justified hadthe science of psychology already attained a level of perfectioncomparable to that of early 20th Century physics or chemistry. Inretrospect, and in consideration of the still very rudimentarystate of the discipline, the strategy must now be judged as oneof desperation, for despite the Behaviorists' long and powerfulonslaught, concepts such as instinct and consciousness remain fartoo vital to justify the elimination of the terms from thelexicon of psychology. As I have already pointed out, the studyof consciousness is now enjoying a major and fruitful revival,and I think that I can show how at least one aspect of what hasbeen called instinct is now describable, and perhaps evenmeasurable, in physiological terms. At the start of my quest therefore, before I hadworked out some of the cognitive and neurological mechanisms forthe Habit Routine Model, I necessarily found myself toying withthe concept of instinct. Believing that the influence ofpsychedelic drugs on proto-humans might have been a necessary catalystfor the rapid (4)transformation to culturally modern Homo sapiens, thereseemed two possibilities to explore. Either the psychedelicsmight have added something to the psychological abilitiesof proto-man (which turned out to be the conclusion of McKenna'sviews), or conversely, perhaps the repeated and cumulativeeffects of psychedelic drugs had eliminated an impediment tofurther psychological evolution, an impediment which, up untilthat point in evolution, had been not an impediment but acharacteristic favorable or essential for the reproduction andsurvival of the species. And that characteristic, it seemed,should be something very much like an instinct, an innatepsychological tendency governing the normal behavior of thespecies. I am assuming that, in the ultimate stages, the changefrom proto-man to humankind was preponderantly if not entirely a psychologicalchange, the facilitating physiological changes such asgreatly enlarged brain capacity having already been present. The latter hypothesis seemed the more powerful, forif it had been necessary to add to the abilities ofproto-man, the normal processes of evolution are always willingand able to provide such addition. This is the whole idea ofevolution. Additions to the abilities and design features of aspecies follow necessarily from the essentials of the process.Thus the hypothesis that psychedelic drugs might have added tothe abilities of proto-man would have carried with it theprobability that such addition would not, in the long run, havebeen necessary. The mere passage of time, and further selectionpressures, would have surely led to the same result. Under thishypothesis, the psychedelics would only have provided afacilitation to an ongoing process, or perhaps been merelyincidental to it. It didn't seem that the ubiquitous use ofpsychedelics by early man would have resulted from a merelycoincidental influence; the great importance of these sacredplants for early man in every corner of the earth indicated to methat they had been essential and necessary for the evolution ofhumankind. If this were the case, their prevalence of use andcentral importance for early man would naturally follow. But if evolution relentlessly provides any requirednew feature, we also see the strange result that occurs sometimeswhen a feature becomes obsolete, the case of the vestigialvermiform appendix on the large intestine being the example knownto all. Evolution is remarkably efficient at slowly bringingabout any design feature that is required for the production ofnew abilities and new species, but does not pay much attention tothe intentional removal of design features that have becomeobsolete, even if they become mildly unfavorable as in the caseof the appendix. Design features may persist through sheerconservatism or "force of habit", as for example thepersistence of a full range of digital bones in the fins ofwhales and other once-terrestrial species; and if the feature hasbeen an important one at some stage of development, it will bevery difficult to eliminate. One would suspect that such afeature would have to become a significant disadvantage beforeselection pressures and the normal course of evolution wouldbring about its gradual removal. Now if evolution could produce physiological"skeuomorphs" (design features which have persisteddespite becoming disused or non-functioning (5)), then it seemed that the same processmight have occurred in the realm of psychology. Perhapsinstincts, once valuable to a species or range of species(perhaps even the entire animal kingdom), might have become notonly skeuomorphic, but a factor which would impede furtherpsychological development in a given species. Although such askeuomorphic instinct would present no disadvantage to thespecies in its given form, it might well tend to prevent aradical evolutionary jump such as that between animal andhumankind. The existence of evolutionary dead-ends in thephysiological sense (6)might illustrate the parallel concept of the case of the advancedape who had every physiological capacity necessary to be aphilosopher, a mathematician, yet... My hypothesis began to take shape: an instinctualor innate psychological drive or tendency that had been anessential and defining feature of advanced animal life hadbecome the barrier which prevented proto-man from achieving themost important of all evolutionary quantum leaps. And it was thisbarrier, this very powerful and efficient psychological trait orinstinct which had been eroded and then (at least temporarily)suspended by proto-man's exposure to psychedelic drugs. It would be valuable at this point to provide adefinition and examples of the concept of instinct as it appliesto my theory. As I hinted above, I intend to show how theinstinct in question is actually something describable inphysiological terms, but a clearer understanding results, Ithink, from treading the same conceptual path from instinct tobrain systems that I myself took in constructing the theory. Afew general suggestions concerning the various possiblemechanisms of instinct, and what kind of information constitutesan instinct might help to alleviate some objections to theconcept by the more demanding adherents of hard science. Perhapswe might also find that what was once piled together under thelabel "instinct" is actually a range of quite differentand independently organized processes. It is quite true, for example, that we have not thefoggiest notion of how fledgling cuckoos, at the end of theirfall migration, find their way to the same trees in Africa wheretheir parents are nesting, despite the fact that the parentsleave Europe a week or more in advance of their progeny. Sayingthat the young cuckoos have an instinct to do so tells us verylittle, and it is far-fetched to suppose that the parent birds"teach" their progeny how to make the voyage beforetheir early depart. Equally improbable, despite"nothing-but" arguments of"what-else-could-it-be?", is the proposal that cuckoogenes or nervous systems come equipped with maps of Africa. Theuse of "instinct" as a mere label that only pretends toimpart an understanding of how such a phenomenon might arise hasjustifiably drawn criticism. Thus the distinguishedanthropologist Gregory Bateson has commented, (in a"Metalogue", between Father and Daughter), Daughter: Daddy, what is an instinct? Father: An instinct, my dear, is a explanatory principle. D: But what does it explain? F: Anything—almost anything at all. Anything you want it to explain. D: Don't be silly. It doesn't explain gravity. F: No. But that is because nobody wants "instinct" to explain gravity. If they did, it would explain it. We could simply say that the moon has an instinct whose strength varies inversely as the square of the distance… D: But that's nonsense, Daddy. F: Yes, surely. But it was you who mentioned "instinct," not I. D: All right-but then what does explain gravity? F: Nothing, my dear, because gravity is an explanatory principle. D: Oh... (7) Such an instinct as cuckoos have still evadesdescription in terms of brain systems or genetic codes, and thusto call it an instinct is about as far as we can go. In the lastcentury, due to a very primitive understanding of the nervoussystem, practically all habitual behavior of animals had to belabeled instinct. "Early psychologists sought to identify adrive for every aspect of behavior: a hunger drive responsiblefor feeding, a thirst drive, a sex drive, etc. It provedimpossible to classify animal behavior in this way withoutresorting to a reductio ad absurdum involving drives forthumb-sucking, nail-biting, and other minutiae of behavior."(8) The examples ofproposed instincts for thirst and hunger illustrate how aninability to explain a trait of behavior and the resultingretreat into mere labeling, can later be resolved with furtherknowledge. Science has today discovered a great deal about thephysiological systems which control and produce hunger, thirst,and more. With more advanced knowledge of the brain, somephenomena which were once called instincts, and which wereindistinguishable from other phenomena like the cuckoo'snavigational abilities, can be shown to result from elementarybrain-systems operation. Such will be the case with the"instinct" I have in mind as a candidate forproto-man's impediment. (9) The perceptive reader will certainly, rememberingmy cognitive and neurological models of earlier on, see wherethis argument is going. But the pathway that was followed, Ibelieve, is not only an interesting view of how one model leadsto the next in theory building, but also of how the pieces ofthis large puzzle were manipulated to form an overall andconvincing picture. At first, and very crudely, it seemed to me thatproto-man might have had some kind of instinct that could beviewed as a "narrow-mindedness", a strong repressionof, or inability to use the obvious and recently expandedtheoretical capacity of his brain. I soon coined a nice term forthe effect, the sophiolytic instinct, a behavioral drivethat prevented the ape from becoming wise, that actually"cured" him of any tendency to become wise, for an apewho suddenly decided to ape not an ape, but a Socrates, would notbe very popular with his mates! He would be excluded from thegroup, become solitary with no chance of reproducing either hisweird psychological abilities (through teaching perhaps) nor anyphysiological "adaptions" that had suddenly enabled himto use his tremendous brain capacity more fully than hiscontemporaries. The model began to improve as I realized that sucha sophiolytic instinct should be part of a pair ofcharacteristics which would be precisely what all advanced animallife would profit greatly from. An animal should have amuch greater mental and psychological capacity than it needs innormal everyday life, for that capacity would be of enormousvalue in crisis situations, or other infrequently encounteredsituations where the animal is called upon to be creative in somesense. Obtaining food from a new source, coping with unusualthreats to life or habitat, and many other imaginable situationswould demand a level of "creativity" in an animal. Ifextra brain capacity could provide for overcoming merely habitualand stereotyped behavior in times of need, this should obviouslybe a favorable evolutionary development in the animal kingdom. But likewise, it seemed that there would have to bea strong tendency for an animal not to use his creativeabilities on a daily basis. Any creative potentials of an animalwould have to be dormant or actively inhibited in the normalroutines of existence, and this would also favor survival andreproduction because it would lend great stability and coherenceof behavior between the members of a group, and within species aswell; individuality would be suppressed during routine existencein favor of group and species stability. Indeed many species havemechanisms for isolating and expelling members of a reproductivegroup who exhibit unusual or disruptive behaviors. Such behaviorwould often have indicated that a given individual might bediseased, or afflicted with some genetic defect, so a species'ability to isolate such individuals would be a favorablecharacteristic for maintaining species integrity. Thesemechanisms and the sophiolytic instinct would therefore ensurethat members of a group all "toe the line" and do notbecome too much the individual, in spite of the possession ofcognitive capacities going sometimes far beyond those requiredfor routine existence. The evolution of animal life is not at all a matterof one exceptional individual providing genetic material for thefuture, but of the slow selection of many slightly betteradapted individuals providing for future inheritance. Thehypothesis of excess cognitive capability coupled with amechanism for the normal suppression of this capability seemed tofit these requirements quite well. (10) And what was more, the dualcharacteristic should become more and more important with thecomplexity of the species considered: the most advanced animalsin terms of social situation, reproductive requirements,nourishment-obtaining abilities, protection strategies, etc.,should be the very animals which would profit most from excessand reserve cognitive abilities, and it would be in these veryspecies that the most efficient, powerful and precisely appliedsuppression of these abilities in everyday routine would berequired. The maximums here would have attained their summit inthe proto-human species, the recent and sudden increase incranial capacity indicating a vastly increased cognitive reserve,and my speculations indicating that the restraining mechanism,the proposed sophiolytic instinct, must also have attained acorresponding power and efficiency. This scenario seemed to provide a paradox forevolution. On the one hand, in order for evolution to producemodern man, it would have had to proceed through stages in whichanimals gained more and more neurological and cognitive ability,and especially a reserve of such ability, yet an essentialrequirement of this gain would be that it needed to beincreasingly suppressed for normal routines of daily existence.It would therefore become impossible for an advanced animal touse this cognitive power at will, to enter a mode oflife, by conscious choice, in which the creative abilitymight be used routinely rather than only in extremis. Tobreak through this evolutionary barrier between proto-human and Homosapiens would require an extraordinary and externalinfluence capable of dissolving this barrier. All theneurological equipment would be in place, thanks to the normalevolutionary processes, but the final breakthrough would have tobe something that the normal processes of evolution could notprovide. And the drugs which enabled that cognitive breakthroughwere conveniently scattered about the planet in plenitude... If these hypotheses are at all valuable, it shouldbe possible to see evidence in animal behavior of the processesthey describe. The idea that animals, even lowly insects, havequite amazing abilities available for use in case of novelchallenges has been experimentally demonstrated for manydifferent species. Greater cognitive abilities are likewisereflected by correspondingly larger nervous system capacitycompared with similar species exhibiting less versatile behavior.A lengthy review of recent work on "intelligence" inanimals is not necessary here, a few examples will suffice toshow convincingly that not only our recent evolutionaryneighbors, apes and chimpanzees, have significant cognitivereserves, but that the hypothesis of excess cognitive capacitydescribes a universal trait of animal life. Although recent presentations by Gould & Gould (11), Griffin (12), Byrne (13), and others showmany examples of rudimentary insight, context-switchingintelligence, and conceptual thinking in animals as diverse asbeavers, honeyguides, and even insects such as wasps and bees,certain hard-science advocates have done their best to raiseobjections against such evidence. Donald Griffin has reviewedsuch argument and presented an admirable rebuttal to what heconsiders to be a taboo against considering that non-humananimals might have subjective mental experiences or an ability to"think", albeit in very primitive ways. The taboo...has become a serious impediment to scientific investigation. Effective indoctrination—often accomplished by nonverbal signals of disapproval—inhibits students and young scientists from venturing into this forbidden territory, and those that do so encounter criticism and ridicule. One result is that students of animal behavior are inhibited from reporting versatile behavior that suggests conscious thinking; and scientific journals sometimes refuse to publish data or interpretations that support the inference of animal consciousness. (14) I will mention only examples of intelligence inapes and chimpanzees, because here the weight of evidence isexceptional. In suggesting some ideas about the importance ofyoung animals' play for cognitive development, Richard Byrne (15) mentions aseeming paradox: Gorillas in captivity regularly show extensiveskills in the use of tools, yet in the wild, tool use in gorillasis practically non-existent. He notes that only young chimpanzeesand humans "invest much time in play with detached objects.But under the artificial conditions of captivity, young gorillasalso play with objects". Byrne's proposal that infant playwith objects might be a causal explanation of the paradox mayhave some validity for gorillas, but apparently ignores that manyother tool-using species also do not exhibit play with detachedobjects in juveniles. But he also notes that "gorillasevidently have the latent potential to play with objectsin childhood, and to use tools to solve problems in adulthood,yet they do neither in the wild-why?" [my emphasis]. The question is answered with the hypothesis of asophiolytic instinct being the factor which all but guaranteesthat much advanced behavior capability in animals will remain as"latent potentials" under normal conditions, especiallyif we understand that the sophiolytic instinct must be a powerfuland primary one, surpassed only perhaps by instincts for sexualbehavior without which, of course, there would be no animalsaround to study. Without the sophiolytic instinct, the forceensuring group stability, survival, and reproduction, individualswould have constantly been far more subject to the vicissitudesof the environment, to dispersal and separation from potentialmates, to dangers resulting from their constant"inventiveness" and individuality in dealing witheveryday situations better handled with habit than innovation.The latent potential which Byrne concedes is evident for apes, isa simple and elegant illustration for the concept of the dualcharacteristic of excess cognitive capacity and the sophiolyticinstinct. Byrne asks practically the same question later on,(p158): Ape mentality: why not more? ...But we are still confronted with a paradox: if cognitive abilities are so useful in social and other spheres, as we like to imagine they are, why aren't these demonstrations much, much more common and obvious in these animals which apparently can show the cognitive skills occasionally? Nicholas Humphrey, in his paper "The SocialFunction of the Intellect" asks the same question: We are thus faced with a conundrum. It has been repeatedly demonstrated in the artificial situations of the psychological laboratory that anthropoid apes possess impressive powers of creative reasoning, yet these feats of intelligence seem simply to not have any parallels in the behaviour of the same animals in their natural environment. I have yet to hear of any example from the field of a chimpanzee (or for that matter a Bushman) using his full capacity for inferential reasoning in the solution of a biologically relevant practical problem. Someone may retort that if an ethologist had kept watch on Einstein through a pair of field glasses he might well have come to the conclusion that Einstein too had a hum-drum mind. However, that is just the point: Einstein, like the chimpanzees, displayed his genius at rare times in 'artificial' situations—he did not use it, for he did not need to use it, in the common world of practical affairs. (16) For apes especially, the answer is that thesophiolytic instinct, in these advanced animals, has attained theheight of its development and effectiveness, for it needs torestrain a nervous system with tremendous inherent capability.And in light of Humphrey's comments I might add somethingobvious, perhaps painfully so, to which I shall return later: thesophiolytic instinct is certainly not something that miraculouslydisappeared once humankind was on the scene, and its power (likethe power of other important instincts) is negligibly reduced byawareness of its effect, or of its skeuomorphic nature for man. Let us consider another example of excess cognitivecapacity, in the chimpanzee. No-one would disagree with theproposal that the use of language is one of the most advancedcognitive abilities that has developed. Thus, in the explorationof potential cognitive abilities of our closest evolutionaryneighbors, the attempt to teach some form of language tochimpanzees has been going on for a long time. As usual, anyapparent success in this project has been immediately met withobjections, mostly from the lingering remnants of the BehavioristSchool of Thought (at least they readily admit that theythemselves think!). A difficulty has been that chimpanzeessimply do not have the physiology for speech (as opposed to neurophysiology),hence spoken language of any complexity is physically, butnot necessarily cognitively impossible for them. Thus attemptshave been made to teach chimps various types of sign language asused by the deaf, and quite good results have been obtained. The work of B.T. and R.A. Gardner with a chimpnamed Washoe constituted a breakthrough, in which the animal wastaught to use correctly about 130 words of the American SignLanguage over a period of four years. Of particular note was: theachievement of this and other chimpanzees to invent novel wordcombinations for new objects and concepts; the fact that chimpsin some of these projects began to communicate betweenthemselves using the language; and evidence that there begana cultural transmission of the newly acquired ability. Forexample, Washoe's adopted son, even though the experimentersnever used the sign language in his presence, neverthelesslearned over fifty signs directly from Washoe. (17) Perhaps the most striking example of languageability in chimpanzees has come from the work of David Premackand of Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Duane Rumbaugh. These workerssucceeded in teaching chimpanzees a symbol-based language,using either colored plastic shapes to denote words("lexigrams"), or in another approach the use of akeyboard-based language in which keys are marked with arbitrary,not iconic or representational symbols: The most ambitious project to teach language to chimpanzees was initiated by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and Duane Rumbaugh. With their colleagues they developed a keyboard-based language. Each key is marked with an arbitrary symbol. When pressed, a key lights up and its symbol appears in sequence on a screen, so the chimpanzees can keep track of their lexigram sequences. The researchers used a word-order grammar with a generic interrogative symbol to initiate question sentences. The chimpanzees in these experiments are typically taught a vocabulary of 75 to 90 words. The computer-mediated keyboard approach allows unprecedented accuracy in recording the linguistic progress of chimpanzees. Analysis of the painful transition from the one-word stage of using a lexigram to identify an object to a two-word level that permits interrogation (by both humans and the chimps) shows that in these experiments the symbols initially are learned as operants for obtaining things (usually food). But once the two-word concept is mastered for, say, asking the name of a particular food, the chimp realizes how it applies to all other objects. This kind of mental breakthrough opens new horizons for the chimp and at the same time demonstrates that they understand concepts like "food" and "tool." In a further extension of language use, the keyboard-based approach has allowed two chimpanzees to communicate with each other. The chimps had to learn that the keyboard and screen could be used for two-way exchanges; just mastering the techniques for answering researchers' questions or making requests was not enough. But once the chimpanzees grasped the idea of exchanging information, they were able to cooperate to solve problems. To take a typical example, one chimp would figure out what sort of tool it needed to get at food left by a researcher, and then use the keyboard to ask the other animal (in an adjoining room) for that implement; the second chimp, who was unaware of the particular problem, would pass the requested tool through a small opening. Again, there was every evidence of a conceptual threshold having suddenly been reached: training accelerated and error rates plummeted. Moreover, the chimps began to engage in what seems to be interactive play via the keyboard link. (18) The idea of "a conceptual threshold havingbeen reached," is precisely what would be expected from myhypotheses: the excess inherent cognitive capacity of the chimpsis sufficient for significant language abilities, but chimps inthe wild have never achieved these abilities because there is apowerful, if not almost unbreachable barrier which needs to beovercome to allow a specific manifestation of excess cognitivecapacity to be used routinely. Thus it requires great and carefuleffort to teach chimps the rudiments of language in experimentslike these, but once a certain stage is reached, once thesignificance of the new situation and ability has temporarilynullified the sophiolytic instinct, the new abilities themselvesbecome part of the normal routine of the chimps, and are eventaught to youngsters independent from further human training. I should mention one further example in which evengreater abstract reasoning ability in chimpanzees has beendemonstrated. This is a particularly valuable body of evidencefor my hypotheses since it illustrates that a particularcognitive ability, once liberated from control by the sophiolyticinstinct, may then facilitate the liberation of further cognitiveabilities which would not have been possible for the animal tolearn or employ without having achieved the first ability. I willuse another extended quote from Gould & Gould to describe thework, the title of this section is "Chimpanzee Logic": Though the reasoning abilities of keyboard-trained chimpanzees have not yet been explored in any systematic way, Premack has tried teaching a variety of logical operations to both language-trained and untrained chimpanzees. In the simplest tests, the chimps were faced with the task of' labeling pairs of objects as either "same" or "different." This problem is unlike the same-different concept tests described earlier. In the usual form of the task the experimenter shows an example and then a pair of objects, one of which is the same as the example and the other different; the animal is rewarded for choosing the member of the pair that is different. In the Premack study, however, the two objects to be categorized were presented simultaneously. Language-trained chimps learned this discrimination, whereas untrained chimps did not. Premack also attempted to teach the concept of analogies: A is to B as C is to D-lock is to key as can is to can opener, to choose one of the most abstract examples he used. The usual format of the test was to present an incomplete analogy and offer a choice of three different objects to finish the verbal equation. Language-trained chimpanzees eventually handled these tasks with nearly an 80 percent accuracy rate; chimps without language training, on the other hand, never mastered even the simplest analogy: "apple is to apple as banana is to...." Another task familiar to students of child development is proportionality. Language- trained chimps could choose an object—a half circle rather than a full or three-quarter circle—that corresponded to the proportion visible in the test object (a half-filled glass of water, for instance). Chimps without language training could master this task only so long as the choice objects they had to select from were similar to the test object. Interestingly, Premack found that his language-trained chimp had no difficulty with a related concept that proves very difficult for children: conservation of volume. Young children judge the amount of liquid in a glass or the mass of clay in a lump by its height or length; thus they behave as though there is more water in a tall, thin glass than in a short, squat tumbler, even if they have seen each filled from identical containers of liquid. The language-trained chimp tested on this task required no instruction: from the outset she recognized the two amounts as being the same. To be fair, though, this chimp was nearly 20 years old at the time, and she had had plenty of opportunity to learn the basic facts of fluid physics before testing ever began. Finally, Premack has taught language-trained chimps to complete cause-and-effect sentences of the form "whole apple plus X produces cut apple," offering three objects (a bowl of water, a knife, and a pencil, for instance) as possibilities for X; in other tests, the goal was to supply the final item, as in "dry sponge plus bowl of water produces Y." The language-trained chimp mastered these tasks with a minimum of training; untrained chimps failed. (19) Clearly, advanced apes have extensive latentlanguage capabilities, and even what would have to be called acapability for logical reasoning, and one wonders what might bedeveloped by these animals by the training of a hundredgenerations of chimps, first by human instructors but later bycultural transmission. Unfortunately such experiments aredifficult to carry out without access to a time machine, andphysicists seem loathe to provide us with either a theory or thetechnique for constructing one. But extensive experimentationattempting to use psychedelic drugs as facilitators for thisprocess are called for, and might well reveal a facilitation,perhaps cumulative, for the animals' rapid overcoming ofsophiolysis and resultant achievement of quantum leaps in theircognitive development. Again unfortunately, governmentrestrictions on psychedelic research, and especially a strongreluctance for scientists to engage in research with such"discredited drugs of abuse" make it certain that suchwork will not soon be attempted. Perhaps the absurdity of mycomment on time machines will call attention to the even greaterabsurdity of the impossibility of undertaking, in the presentsocial, political, and scientific climate, even the mostelementary of psychedelic research projects. Gould and Gould continue with a few carefulcomments about what the chimpanzee research might indicate, andcertainly caution is necessary when research has barely begun ina field. But the evidence outlined above, if not yet sufficientfor other conclusions, clearly demonstrates the validity of theconcept of excess cognitive capacity and the sophiolyticinstinct. Yet leaving the model at the stage of postulation ofyet another mysterious instinct without physiological basis wouldnot have amounted to much more than another instance of New-Agetechnobabble if the facilitating neurocognitive mechanisms forits operation could not be found or hypothesized. The next stage of my model-building toward thepsychedelic theory therefore involved an attempt to see how thesophiolytic instinct might actually operate on a physiologicallevel. The fact that it seemed to be such an important instincthinted that a fundamental operation of the nervous system mightproduce what at first would be seen as an instinct, much as thediscovery of fundamental neurological operations had elaboratedthe nature of such former "instincts" as those forhunger, thirst, or breathing. The idea that instincts wereessentially habits, or exhibited themselves as such, and therealization that the implementation of a habit could only beusing the contents of long-term memory in an unconscious way, ledto the models described in chapters three and four. These modelswere then seen to have a wide explanatory power across a range ofphenomena, as my examples in these chapters showed. Thus thesophiolytic instinct became the primary cognitive operation ofthe nervous system of all advanced animal life, the habit routinesearch function. Now it was no longer necessary to posit askeuomorphic instinct, of mysterious origin and operation, to seehow the result that such an entity would produce was insteadbrought about by a normal brain operation utilizing brain areascommon to all mammals right back to the most primitive. The sophiolytic instinct thus turned out to bemerely a descriptive artifact resulting from the way animalnervous systems have evolved to operate, the HRS system as theprimary cognitive operation, and the requirement of activation ofthe SD (significance detection) system, dependent on unusual ENV(environmental) events, for overruling of the HRS patterns astemplates for thinking2 and behavior. As to the question of whyevolution produced a nervous system that detected, not realitydirectly, but a representation of current reality drawn frommemory data through the process of HRS, I think that it can beseen that at each stage of animal evolution, the former type ofnervous system would always lend a greater survival value thanthe latter. With the very first organisms that became capable of"taking a decision", it seems to me that such decisiontaking should be a far more efficient and dependable process ifit were based on habit rather than fresh analysis of the entireenvironmental input which, at a minimum, would require far moretime and "brain power". Thus we can see the normal andnecessary parameters of evolution as the factor which hasproduced the "sophiolytic instinct" which is the"suppresser of creativity", the characteristic that wehumans are still very much slaves to in lieu of active, strenuousand constant striving to free ourselves from our in-built"narrow-mindedness". Needless to say, it is my opinionthat the judicious use of psychedelic drugs to aid in this effortis precisely the Rx that is called for, just as it has been forthe ancient Greeks at Eleusis, for the Native Americans, for somany other tribes down through history. References (1) The term"proto-human" is intended to denote anatomically modernHomo sapiens, before any significant cultural attributeshad yet appeared. Anatomically modern hominids probably go back150,000 years or more, yet the initial stages of development ofculturally modern man occupied a very brief period, between ca.50,000 to 30,000 years ago, the Upper Paleolithic. (back) (2) At roughly the sametime of my own musings about early man, and unbeknown to me,Terence McKenna was writing about his own evolutionaryhypothesis. It was first outlined in a paper Mushrooms andEvolution (personal communication 1988), and later developedin his popular books including Food of the Gods (Bantam1992). (back) (3) William James, ThePrinciples of Psychology Vol. 2, authorized Dover edition of1950 p383. (back) (4) "Rapid" on anevolutionary scale, i.e., perhaps on the order of ten to fiftythousand years, whereas normal evolutionary changes, especiallyimportant ones, are in general thought to take far longer. (back) (5) Nicholas Humphrey, in AHistory of the Mind (p196) introduces the use of the term inthe present context, and adds that such features are "nolonger subject to selection on utilitarian grounds". (back) (6) Such as the case of theKoala Bear and other examples described by Arthur Koestler in TheGhost in the Machine, Chapter XII. (back) (7) Gregory Bateson, Stepsto an Ecology of Mind, Random House, 1972, Part I,"Metalogues". (back) (8) The Oxford Companionto the Mind, ibid., "Instinct" p374. (back) (9) From the foregoing,instinct thus seems a mere label for phenomena which have not yetbeen explained on a more reductionist level. But perhaps there isa more hopeful future for the term, and phenomena of behavior andvariations thereof which can profit from a new conception of theterm. Recent advances in the science of chaos and complexitymight suggest that at least some instincts, those not explainablein simple physiological terms for instance, might be somethinglike state attractors for behavior patterns, analogous to theattractors seen in other complex adaptive systems. See forexample Complexity, Life at the Edge of Chaos, RogerLewin, MacMillan 1992, especially the example on page 176, andalso The Origins of Order, Stuart Kauffman, OxfordUniversity Press 1993. An instinct seen as a biological stateattractor for behavior would be more like a mathematical functionthan some undefined "innate drive" supposedly hiddenaway in an organism's "genes", and this behavioralattractor would guide the formation of habit routines in anindividual animal. Under the influence of such a function, habitroutines in different animals of the same group or species wouldbe very similar, but yet show the small variations commonly seenin instinctual behavior. The idea of instinct as a probabilisticstate attractor for the formation of habit routine is perhapsonly a more modern description of William James' idea that"most instincts are implanted for the sake of giving rise tohabits, and that, this purpose accomplished, the instinctsthemselves...consequently fade away." (The Principles ofPsychology, ibid., vol. 2, p402). Since my conception of thesophiolytic instinct is reducible to the operation of brainsystems however, these speculations would not be of use to thepresent work, and I will leave their development for some futureproject. (back) (10) The "dualcharacteristic" might at first seem to be tautological: a"reserve" capacity would necessarily imply theselective or only occasional use of that capacity, otherwise itwould not be "in reserve". But if we concentrate firston the aspect of suppression, and then see that this is only anintroductory and oblique way of understanding what an importantcognitive system of the brain is naturally producing, andfurther, that other brain mechanisms allow the over-ruling of thefirst system, then we see that the tautology is merely the resultof a rudimentary description of the overall phenomena. Here againis illustrated how an introductory model, primitive and not veryuseful in itself, can lead nevertheless to more advanced modelsovercoming the original limitations. (back) (11) James L. & CarolGrant Gould, The Animal Mind, Scientific American Library1994. (back) (12) Donald R. Griffin, AnimalMinds, The University of Chicago Press 1992. (back) (13) Richard Byrne, TheThinking Ape, Evolutionary Origins of Intelligence, OxfordUniversity Press 1995. (back) (14) Griffin, ibid., p6-7(back) (15) Byrne, ibid.,p86-87 (back) (16) from: GrowingPoints in Ethology, (1976), P.P.G. Bateson and R.A. Hinde,eds., p307, Cambridge University Press. (back) (17) See the account inGould & Gould, ibid., pp183ff. (back) (18) Gould & Gould ibid.,pp186-187. (back) (19) Gould & Gould ibid.,pp189-190. (back) Table of Contents Chapter 7 WT01-B36-14IA087-000632-B030-64http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/univch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065204 text/html 98257HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:51:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:47 GMTContent-length: 98038 The Center of the Universe Chapter 7 7. Evolution Drugs will no be brought under control until societyitself changes, enabling men to use them as primitive man did; welcoming the visions they provided not as fantasies, but as intimations of a different, and important, level ofreality. —Brian Inglis (1) Early Man's relationship with the psychedelicplants he discovered was a symbiotic one. These plants, which hadlong before evolved biochemical mechanisms to produce substanceswhose ultimate, if incidental function was not to be realized formillions of years, suddenly provided the key whereby the veryprocess of evolution might overcome a most formidable barrier. Homosapiens, the (potentially) Wise Man was born, and dozens ofobscure species of fungi, flowering vines, roots, seeds, treesand cacti, became revered partners with him to produce anexperiment in evolution which would truly be a final experiment:Either it would eventually succeed in producing an enlightenedworld society in which the rule of the Perennial Philosophyoccurred not through force of authority but simple good sense,enabling humankind to undertake a conscious and deliberatelyecological stewardship of his small corner of the universe, or itwould end in the probable destruction of all advanced life on theplanet. There would be no turning back once the barrier of thesophiolytic instinct had been breached. The symbiotic partnership at first enabled arelatively small population of Early Man to prosper, to migraterapidly from his birthplace to all the corners of the earth, toinitiate a veritable explosion of culture wherever he went, andto displace all more primitive species and races of archaic man,the descendants of Homo erectus which had migrated out ofAfrica eons before. But as the experiment progressed and culture,technology, and thus power accumulated, repudiation of thebeneficial symbiosis sometimes occurred in the various regions ofearly civilization. Unfortunately it is a simple fact thataccumulated power and technology may, with the greatest of ease,be used with malign intent, and thus be used by the ignorant toenforce their folly on the wise. Wisdom is by definitionincapable of using force, technological force at least, toassuage ignorance. Advantageous Ends are simply not obtainable byDeplorable Means. As the first organized societies grew andaccumulated technology, some inevitably succumbed to thetemptations which occur all too easily to the ignorant, includingthe subjugation and eradication of neighbors whose continuingwisdom threatened their power structures. The catalytic factorwhich had made culture and technology possible in the first placewas, again and again, ignored, and one by one, such societiesdeclined and were extinguished, their achievements to beforgotten along with their perversions. And so the storycontinues. In the early years of my work, and with the spiritof the 1960's still fresh, it seemed that it was yet possible toameliorate by stages and eventually reverse the destructivemomentum that had been building for centuries in the most modernand recent, and world-encompassing of civilizations, WesternCivilization (for want of a better term). The Twentieth Centuryhad provided horrors which were the logical extrapolation andepitome of many centuries of psychedelic ignorance, and there wassomething new: the horrors of the Twentieth Century were inessence terminal ones for they could no longer be exceededwithout a resulting collapse of the civilization which hadbrought them about, and the novelty was that this time, thecollapse would preclude the possibility of picking up the piecesonce the ignorance and stupidity of the powerful had run itscourse. But having been born into, and grown up within the bestand the worst that civilization had ever offered, it was naturalto hope that the good could be preserved, the bad at least slowlycorrected, a small group of wise persons begin to re-establishthe ancient symbiosis at first stealthily and cautiously, theresulting new vision becoming eventually an irresistibleground-swell. Today I am not so sure. The scenes of my several attempts to be a modernshaman for the tribe of Western Man provided contradictory andparadoxical results. In one sense, I was attempting for the firsttime a "scientific" rather than ritual and intuitiveapproach to shamanism. The teaching and experience of thepsychedelic state was not to be interpreted, as in previoussocieties, in terms of myth and ritual, but in terms of a trulyscientific understanding of the eternal religious questionsconcerning origins, destinies, and meanings of the life-process.This understanding would extend even to the biological processesof the human nervous system which corresponded to the psychedelicstate of awareness. It seemed possible for the first time toanswer many of the questions for which Early Man could onlycompose tales and enact symbolic ritual, it seemed that we mightfinally grasp where the Essential Mystery of life lay. We wouldbe able to see how all the religions, all the ancientphilosophies, were describing a truth with means inadequate tothe task, so that their result was not wrong but merelyincomplete, each description like that of one of the blind menexploring some local region of that famous elephant. Now for thefirst time we seemed to have all the tools necessary to step backand view the beast all-at-once, and use the former limitedtechniques to confirm what we now could take in at a glance. Another important difference in what modern"scientific" shamanism was attempting was that thepsychedelic experience had in the past been a factor in human evolution,whereas now we were attempting to make it an essential part ofour technology, a guide enabling the wise use of that technology.It was obvious that we could not achieve an evolutionary effecton such a rapid timescale, we could not expect to recapitulatethe phylogeny of the effects of psychedelic experience on EarlyMan with the ontogeny of modern psychedelic research. The newfunction of psychedelic experience, although helping theindividual to overcome the disadvantages and limitations ofhabit-routine governed existence, just like it had done for EarlyMan, was not this time a causative factor in the establishmentof culture and civilization, but would instead have to correct apsychedelically long-ignorant civilization from the path ofself-destruction. Such an accomplishment had never before beenrealized, at least not on the global scale required today. The intent of this approach was therefore to bedirected not just to the benefit of a local tribe as in formerages, or even the now global tribe of psychedelic seekers, but ata corrective experience for the evolutionary life process itself.It seemed therefore that we were involved with an evolution ofthe function of psychedelic experience. If at first thesymbiosis had made possible the great experiment, its role wasnow to help confirm the inevitable showdown implicit in such anexperiment: given the awakening of mankind from the slumber ofanimal existence, an awakening in which man acquires the creativeability, the sense of right and wrong, and all the other God-likeattributes, it is inevitable that such a gift will be repudiated,and man assume for whatever reason that he is self-made, not bornof the primitive elements of the earth nor of his animalancestors, a pretense of omnipotence. The result of this greatexperiment would thus usher in an age in which humankind in itsentirety would finally live up to its potential, or perish. Ifpsychedelic ignorance had in the past contributed to the demiseof localized civilizations, this time the fate of the entireplanet, and all life thereupon, was at stake. Although the energies which I set in motion in thisproject I know have reached a great many people, and provided acatalyst to the more positive of these possibilities, thescenarios within which I have had to operate never seemed to takeon a continuing spirit of the cooperativeness and enlightenedaction that might be expected from a knowledge of the intent ofsuch a project. The chocolate-covered placebo fiasco was neitherthe first nor last of the scenes filled with trivial disputes,cross-purposes, deceptions and dishonesty, scenes certain todetract from the business of effective shamanism. Business was,of course, one of the problems. Ideally, the enlightening medicine should be free;to attach an earthly value to a sacrament can only devalue themeaning of the situation in which it is given. But weco-conspirators could neither afford to work "for free"in our society of institutionalized greed euphemistically calledcompetition, nor could we expect others to do so. And theprohibitionary restrictions of the late 1960's ensured thatpeople who wished to spread the knowledge of psychedelic wisdomwould often have to deal with unscrupulous intermediaries whowould as soon deal cocaine or other contraband. Cash flow was thesacred element for such as these. And paradoxically, theprospective psychedelic initiate also required that a price bepaid for the potion, so paradigmatic was the principle of allthings having their price in this "capitalistic"society. The power of shamanism in this mundane world had becomein one way like that of the psychiatrist, the effectiveness ofhis treatment having been shown by statistical analysis to beproportional to the size of his fee! In attempting a modern shamanism I was also at agreat disadvantage not having the direct contact with tribalmembers which had always been an essential feature of theshamanic art in former societies. Rather than direct guidance,the instructions that went with the potion had to traverse theseveral hand-to-hand transactions between myself and the finalrecipient. I also had to assume that public information such asthat in the published works of Huxley, Watts, and the many othergurus of our time would be studied and employed. In the modernsituation, it was also obvious that there could be no publicpronouncement of the intent of such a project in guidingsocieties to a new and ecological direction, although manyauthors had suggested as much, at least obliquely. Personally, itwould have been absurd to proclaim that this was myintention, not least for the danger of intervention by theenforcers of the unenforceable. Today, having years ago retiredfrom any active continuation of my former activities, it hasbecome possible to publish an analysis of the intentions andparticulars of that handful of persons, the modern-day shamanswho were instrumental to the early years of the psychedelicmovement. It is not hard to understand why, with theseretrospective views now available, that of the various scenes andcollaborations of partners involved in the project, the smallerand more improvisational efforts were the more successful. Thesame seemed to be true of other groups doing similar projects.Bigness was a certain harbinger of disaster. When big plans weremade, large quantities of psychedelics produced, and sizable sumschanged hands, scenes collapsed, friends became enemies, or atleast no longer friends, and those who, like myself, seemed tohave an inner vision of the overall purpose of the projectencountered the most unlikely coincidences which set in motionthe beginnings of a new collaboration to attempt again that whichhad just failed. Many times the coincidences which arrived, inthe course of my own shamanic journey, were so unusual andunbelievable that I just ignored them; it would have beenpointless to speculate as to the origin or cause of such unlikelyevents. The overall lesson that was illustrated by myexperiences with several groups of collaborators was that amodern technological and scientific approach to shamanism,although rewarding for individuals and small groups able to existon the periphery of modern "bigness", was not going torestore the equilibrium between man and nature within theconfines of the present social reality of Western Civilization.The modern and artificial distinction of man being apart fromnature seemed to be a direct result of psychedelic ignorance, andthe "bigness" of the modern system of life exaggeratedthe distinction so much so that the ecology of the life of earlypsychedelic man simply could not be re-created within our modernsystem. Hence every attempt to produce sizable quantities ofpsychedelics inevitably met a swift retribution; and each timethere occurred a new wave of popularity of psychedelic use whichattracted public attention, that use seemed to degenerate quicklyinto misuse, and the majority of those seekers lose sight of thespirit of their original awakening, just as had entirecivilizations before them. The tribal nature of the societies of early man hadprovided the ideal milieu for beneficial psychedelic use, and thenature of our own society now prevented its own conversion to amore ecological, satisfying, and psychedelically-educated way oflife. The only project that made sense therefore, was to attemptto influence only small groups of people, individuals who wouldthemselves integrate their psychedelic experience by blending indiscreetly with our modern insanity to influence again only asmall circle of friends, keeping a spark alive and teachingvaluable activities that would be necessary for a future in whichthe inevitable if slow collapse of modern civilization into chaoswould eventually restore regional and small, "tribal"societies to their former importance. Whether that future was tobe a time of great pain and destruction, or relatively benign,no-one could hope to predict. Certainly, psychedelic educationwould help to promote a beneficial transition and prepare thoseso educated for the inevitable changes that lay ahead. Thepsychedelically-educated would hopefully be able to provide thewisdom necessary to guide others through a transition that willcertainly be difficult, yet perhaps not cataclysmic if the goalof modern shamanism were to be adequately realized in time. It has long been the accepted wisdom among mostscientists, as well as the common mythology of public perception,that the rise of tool-making, i.e., technology, was animportant, if not defining characteristic of the evolutionaryprocess connecting advanced apes to Early Man. Specifically, ithas long been hypothesized that Darwinian selection forincreasingly intelligent hominids came about through selectionfor the best abilities to make and use tools. In the extreme, atleast before recent studies of tool use and especially tool-makingin some animal species, the technology of tools was thought to bea primary defining characteristic separating Homo sapiensfrom the animal kingdom. Also among extremities of interpretationhas been the idea that tool-making and early technology mighteven have been the force driving the extraordinarily rapidincrease in the size of the primate brain, from the firsthominids of two or three million years ago with a brain volume ofabout 400 cubic centimeters, to modern man with a brain volumemore than three times this figure. It is understandably important to science toexplain this evolution in brain size, for it has often been notedthat, on an evolutionary timescale, the rapidity of the changewas practically unprecedented. Since the middle Pleistocene,about a half-million years ago, the rate of increase wasparticularly rapid, so much so that it has even been suggestedthat the enlargement might actually have been somewhatpathological, leading to a being whose irrationality andcapability for wanton destructiveness equals or excels hiscreativity. Certainly, the history of the Twentieth Century hasbeen a pinnacle of both tendencies, and also requires anexplanation, and a resulting solution, if we wish to ensure ourfuture survival. But even though we may have vestigial organssuch as the appendix, and "skeuomorphic instincts" as Ihave discussed, blaming our present situation on purported faultsof evolution is neither productive nor scientifically logical.The mere proposal of a hypothesis that we have too much brainpower for our own good goes a long way to suggest that we musttherefore have the brain power to correct any such tendency tolet foolishness dominate our lives; scapegoating is seldom aproductive hypothesis. It now appears that the tool-making hypotheses alsohave resulted less from a careful analysis of the data than fromsuperficial concurrence of two tendencies. We have complextechnology, we have large brains, animals have neither. Seeingthat there are facilitations and parallels between technology andbrain power does not, however, provide more than circumstantialevidence for causation. And recent work now makes it extremelylikely that the ability to produce technology, it has been calledobject-intelligence for want of a better term, has been adevelopment that has "piggy-backed" upon a much moreimportant development in intelligence, that which is required forsocial transaction. A recent collection of the importantpapers providing the foundation for the theory of MachiavellianIntelligence has been published as a book (2), and I will not present an extensiveargument here for its well-founded conclusions. One quotationshould suffice to illustrate that even anthropologists such asThomas Wynn, who might be surmised to have a "vestedinterest" in the importance of tool-use and making in thedevelopment of early hominids, has whole-heartedly agreed withthe new view: Given the evidence of brain evolution and the archaeological evidence of technological evolution, I think it fair to eliminate from consideration the simple scenario in which ability to make better and better tools selected for human intelligence. At almost no point in hominid evolution was there even a provocative correlation. The earliest known hominids, Australopithecus afarensis, had a brain larger than an ape's of equivalent size, but as far as we know, no greater reliance on tools. Early Homo at 2 Ma [million years ago] had a much more 'encephalized' brain, but the tools and even the context of use were not beyond the capacity of modern apes. Homo erectus did possess technology that was outside the range of ape behaviour, but by this time, 1.5 Ma, much of the encephalization of the Homo line had already occurred. In sum, most of the evolution of the human brain, the presumed anatomy of intelligence, had occurred prior to any evidence for technological sophistication and, as a consequence, it appears unlikely that technology itself played a central role in the evolution of this impressive human ability. (3) As one of the contributors to the book remarked,Wynn's paper "is a bombshell to the older 'Tools makyth Man'view... Wynn throws the question of the cause of human brain sizeback into the realm of the invisible: either the socialrelationships or the lifestyle which produced technology, not thetechnology itself." (4) The conclusions of the MachiavellianIntelligence hypothesis fit well with my own theory, and leadto the most probable evolutionary scenario for the influence ofpsychedelic plants in the emergence of modern humans. Thearguments of the hypothesis show that the complexity of logicaloperations required for social interaction in large groups ofindividuals is far greater than that required for tool use ormaking, or for that matter any other activity of primate species.(5) Studies ofsocieties of monkeys and apes in both natural and controlledenvironments strongly support the theoretical arguments. Thebrain size of various species of modern primates, for example,has been closely correlated with the size and complexity of thesocial groups of the various species studied. The complexity ofsocial interaction would increase geometrically with the numberof possible interrelations between animals in a group consistingof three or more generations of relatively long-lived animals.Complex dominance relationships, alliances, group undertakingssuch as efficient foraging and hunting, lengthy childhood, andrelatively constant possibility of mating activity add to thecomplexity. The demands of increasing social complexity was adevelopment requiring far faster biological evolution of theequipment which facilitated it than any previous set of demandssuch as tool use and manufacture, climate change, interactionswith other species, or other hypothesized evolutionary pressures.Thus it is reasonable that the rapid increase in brain size amongprimates requires no other explanation, despite its unprecedentedspeed. The proposal of early influence of psychedelicplants on hominid evolution as a factor in brain enlargement(between one and five million years ago), as suggested by TerenceMcKenna, is therefore difficult to support. Criticism ofMcKenna's theory as presented in his Food of the Gods hasbeen sometimes dismissive, (6) and although I find much of value inthe book, I would have to agree that his proposals thatpsychedelics were "mutation-causing" agents that"directly influenced the rapid reorganization of the brain'sinformation-processing capacities" are unsupported byevidence, and unnecessary in light of the much more reasonable MachiavellianIntelligence hypothesis. The temptation to explain the rapidevolution of the primate brain has led more than one author toerror, however. What McKenna overlooked was a much more recentperiod of prehistory in which a proposed psychedelic influencefits a wide range of facts like a glove. In the precedingchapters I have outlined many of these facts, and it remains nowto show at what period an intervention of psychedelic influenceis most likely in consideration of several areas of knowledgeabout fossils, human genetics, climate changes and catastrophicevents, and other sources of information. The necessity forpsychedelic intervention has already been established in previouschapters, the question of when such intervention occurred is thepresent concern. Before presenting possible evolutionary scenarioshowever, let me explore further the idea of social complexity andits relation to the habit routine model of cognitive operation Ihave proposed earlier. I stated that the power of the habitroutine cognitive system would have increased with the increasingcomplexity of animal species, and would have reached its summitin proto-man. The Machiavellian Intelligence hypothesisand its proposed increasing social complexity fits perfectly withmy surmise. Increased social complexity and the evolution of alarge, expensive to support nervous system go hand in hand withextreme reliance on habit routine generation as the primarycognitive mechanism. One major consideration is that a largebrain requires an excellent and copious diet, a requirement thatwould be fulfilled best in a social group able to cooperate onthe highest levels to procure and share a wide variety ofnutritious foods. An ability to avoid toxic plants as well woulddepend on complex social relationships as I will show in amoment. It might be said that all these requirements wouldbe an argument against the use of psychedelic agents insuch social groups, an argument with which I entirely agree! Theincreasing social complexity and food requirements are argumentsfor the increasing power of sophiolytic tendencies and habitsthat would prevent any cognitive breakthrough to using the newbrain for purposes other than the maintenance of social order andsurvival, a significant strengthening of the habit routinesystem. Experimentation with new foods, such as psychedelicplants, would not in normal circumstances have been a common, oreven likely occurrence. Two quotations concerning the diet andfood sources for primates will illustrate the point, the firstquotation concerning the necessity for a rich and complex diet,the second on the ways this is fulfilled while yet preventingexposure to toxic (or presumably psychedelic) items: Monkeys and apes have to balance their diet, which they do by wide ranging and yet selective eating; this is nicely illustrated by a study of Sri Lankan monkeys, Macaca sinica, by Marcel Hladik. By careful observation and quantification of their feeding, and phytochemical analysis of their food plants, he was able to show that for these 'frugivorous' monkeys, fruit was always more abundant than they could ever need. However, the monkeys had large day ranges and occupied a home range too large for efficient defense as a territory. Why? Their ranging was apparently a consequence of a need to eat fungi, rotten wood, insects, bark, shoots-a whole range of items that allowed them to make up the protein, vitamin, and mineral deficiencies of the energy-rich ripe fruit (Hladik 1975). The need for a balanced diet forces many primates to eat items that are hard to find. In studying baboon ecology, I was continually amazed at the subtle cues that they must use to identify some of their plant foods; at the most harsh time of year, the main survival foods were all either underground, or tiny and inconspicuous. (7) Mother primates of several species pull their infants away from novel objects (two species of macaque), or remove foods from infants if the food is not part of the diet (chimpanzee). Caro and Hauser suggest that the latter might be 'accidental', but having seen it happen in gorillas, I doubt this (Anne Russon, who has noted the same in orang-utans, shares my scepticism). An infant gorilla was fiddling with and chewing at a leaf (of a species not normally eaten), facing away from the mother who was eating herself, when the mother broke off her feeding, reached over the infant's head and took the leaf, dropping it well out of the infant's reach. In the case of a chimpanzee watched by Mariko Hiraiwa-Hasegawa (1986), the mother not only did the same, but systematically picked every other leaf of the same species in the infant's reach and placed her foot firmly on the pile of leaves! But in any of these cases, the function is unclear: does the behaviour serve to teach, or simply to remove infants from danger? (8) It has been proposed (9) that the dietary requirements of animals withcomplex nervous systems was itself a factor in the evolution ofhominid intelligence, the increasing need for a high-quality dietselecting for advances in intelligence and larger brains, whichitself would demand further dietary improvements. This mustcertainly be the case, but I think that the methods used byadvancing species to procure better and better diets arethemselves aspects of social behavior, and thus fall under thehypotheses of Machiavellian Intelligence. It was onlythrough the advancing complexity of social life that the dietaryrequirements could be met, either for the actual procurement andsharing of foodstuffs or for the transmission of the knowledge ofhow to obtain them, and how to avoid serious errors such asingesting toxic items. As I have just suggested, if increased socialcomplexity and the need for a correspondingly complex diet tosatisfy the needs of a large brain indicate anything, they wouldseem to argue against much use of psychedelic plants inadvanced apes and proto-man. Indeed, an individual whoaccidentally ingested a plant which disrupted his function andplace in such a social system would most likely lose that place,and possibly be ostracized and excluded from the group. This isthe substance of Andrew Weil's comments on McKenna's hypothesis(footnote 6). Psychedelic influence on H. erectus and evenmore remote human predecessors is of course possible, asMcKenna's model suggests, but I believe it was unlikely, and ifso, unimportant to either social or neurological evolution.Certainly, evidence is very sparse indeed, and there areimportant counter-arguments to be considered: For example, H.erectus lived on 3 continents in various habitats and throughseveral periods of disruptive climatic change for a period of 1or 2 million years, yet remained in a relatively unchangingstate, with few signs of significant cultural or technologicalinnovation. This is certainly a sign of normal, slow evolution,not psychedelic evolution. By contrast, the culture of earlyGreece, with psychedelic influence, advanced dramatically from aquite primitive state to an advanced civilization in the space ofa thousand years or so. In addition, the progression from Australopithecusto erectus to sapiens involved many differentanatomical developments, not only brain size and reorganizations,but speech-enabling changes to the larynx, (10) even an enlargement of nerve canalsin the spine suggested as facilitating the precise diaphragmcontrol needed for speech, (11) and many other anatomical changes.This is certainly an argument for slow gradual evolution, notpsychedelically-enabled or "psychedelic-mutagenic"evolution as suggested by McKenna. From the preceding arguments concerning socialstability, we may thus surmise that the influence of psychedelicson our immediate ancestors must have also involved some othersimultaneous and important changes or events which helped tosuppress the described tendencies to greater and greaterdependence on habit routine and the sophiolytic mode. Someunusual change must have occurred to allow and ensure thatpsychedelic use would occur on a significant scale and wouldrapidly and irreversibly transform the habits of the hominidgroup that was the precursor of modern humans. It is necessary to point out, however, that thevery brain changes which facilitated social evolution and apowerful habit routine cognitive system would be the same changesthat would make an eventual psychedelic intervention mosteffective: A greatly expanded cortex to allow the storage oflong-lasting and complex memory data used for habit routinesearch, would also implement creativity that was far more thanrandom trial and error, creativity that could intentionallyproduce wide-ranging positive results: we would not expectattempts at creativity by a small-brained animal to result inmuch more than increased risk for that animal. A greatly expandedportion of the cortex involved with "associationprocessing" allowing the assembly of habit routines of amultisensory and intentional complexity, would also facilitatehighly effective creativity. And a greatly expanded frontalcortex, the seat of working memory and other advanced cognitiveabilities, facilitating habit routine based upon simultaneousnested levels of intentionality, would likewise be instrumentalto a being requiring the frequent use of improvisation insituations which involved simultaneous trains of logicaloperations. The same nervous system improvements that enableadvanced habit routine generation and use also provide forpsychedelically-enlightened operation that is productive andcreative, and not just hazardous to an animal. Here we have anadditional argument against the influence of psychedelic agentsat an early, small-brained stage of hominid evolution:psychedelics would not have "worked" on animals withlimited brain capabilities. We might say that psychedelicshaven't really "worked" on humans either, consideringour backsliding tendencies to ignore (and eradicate) psychedelictribal wisdom that has accumulated for millennia. The presentstate of Western Civilization in this "century ofholocaust" is a direct result of that ignorance, and if itshould lead to the scenarios of devastation and collapse whichhave all too often been predicted by some, we will have toconclude that the great experiment, the psychedelic intervention,will indeed have been a failure. One further argument will suffice to eliminate fromconsideration an early psychedelic influence on hominidevolution. The role of language in hominid development has beenanother hotly-debated topic of late. It is my contention that thepsychedelic state of consciousness would have been of little orno value for an individual, and would have provided noevolutionary breakthrough for a social group which did notalready have the benefit of complex language abilities.Psychedelic use and its effects are most valuable as a cumulativephenomenon. The psychedelic experience must not only beindividually integrated but socially integrated as well, if it isto provide a key to rapid cultural advance. There must arise a"psychedelic culture" which is transmitted anddeveloped from one generation to the next, and through which thebeginnings of shamanism can arise. Without symbolic language, itis difficult to see how such a process might happen. Once afairly complex language ability had evolved, however, we mayimagine that psychedelic experience would have provided animpetus for further important language development into abilitiesconcerned with the expression of the abstract, the mythical, theartistic, language capable of elaborating and transmitting tradition,the hallmark of culture. Whereas written language is a cultural phenomenonwhich must be taught, (a child who is not taught to read andwrite will certainly not pick up the ability spontaneously),spoken language is assimilated spontaneously. Spokenlanguage is a biologically-inherent feature of the humanbrain, a realization that became apparent to the linguist NoamChomsky several decades ago. Steven Pinker, a former student ofChomsky, has made several conclusions concerning language and itsevolution which are pertinent to a hypothesis of the time periodin which psychedelic influence might have played a role in humanevolution. (12) Onthe strength of much recent research, Pinker concludes that thefirst anatomically modern humans already spoke theequivalent of modern human language. Since language is intrinsicto the brain structures which produce and interpret it, languagemust have co-evolved with those structures, and have been fullyrealized with the advent of the brain with which it co-evolved.Spoken language was therefore not "invented" at a latestage of that evolution, (although reading and writing mostcertainly were). Since language is inherently a socialphenomenon, this proposed co-evolution of brain and language fitsnicely with the Machiavellian Intelligence hypothesis ofbrain advances being driven by social requirements, including theadvancement of language capability. Pinker notes therefore that "language did notfirst appear in the Upper Paleolithic beginning about 30,000years ago, contrary to claims frequently seen inarchaeological...and popular science treatments." (13) The idea thatpsychedelics would not have "worked" on oursmall-brained forbears such as Australopithecus issupported by the proposed necessity of the existence of complexlanguage as a precursor for the beneficial influence ofpsychedelics, and considerably narrows the time frame in whichsuch influence must have played its role. Using conclusions fromlinguistics and brain evolution, we see that such a time frameshould extend from about 150Ka to 50Ka (thousand years ago). Ishall further narrow this window of opportunity for psychedelicinfluence in my arguments to follow. The important conclusionwhich has just been developed is that psychedelic plants in theenvironment cannot have played any significant role in either theearly development of language, nor in the parallel developmentand tripling in size of the hominid brain during the period fromabout 3Ma to the appearance of anatomically modern humans about150Ka. Considering the importance of language inevolution, and the importance of language for various modernarguments as to how the process of man's evolution took place,some further comments are appropriate which will tie togethersome ideas expressed in previous chapters with the task at hand.It is widely hypothesized, quite correctly I believe, that majorenhancements to spoken language occurred during the UpperPaleolithic with the appearance of anatomically modern hominids.As Pinker has noted, certain observers thus wish to believe thatlanguage itself was practically non-existent before this period.The argument of language being inherent to the brain structureswhich produce it, and therefore of the necessity that languageco-evolved with those brain structures is a powerful rebuttal ofsuch ideas, but additional evidence also favors the co-evolutionclaim. As noted in the last chapter, rudimentary languageabilities have now been definitively shown to exist in ourclosest relative, the chimpanzee. It was also noted that languageabilities are not used by chimpanzees in the wild, but the factthat these primitive language capabilities exist at all mustindicate that rudimentary brain circuitry for producing languagenevertheless exists. If such circuitry was present, albeit invery primitive form, at the period of divergence between the Panidaeand early hominids, it is unreasonable to assume that suchcircuitry might continue to evolve for the next several millionyears, to be used suddenly at the Upper Paleolithic to producecomplex language which had no precedent whatsoever. The onlyargument here could be that these brain areas which laterpermitted spoken language were all along used for anotherfunction altogether. Although I feel that chimpanzee language ability,and certainly the arguments of Pinker and other linguists,strongly favor the continuous existence and development oflanguage throughout hominid development, the alternative useargument just cited brings us to another consideration which isimportant to my theory. Referring back to figure 1 in chapter 3and the associated text, it will be seen that according to mycognitive hypothesis, language is but one, if the most obviousand important, of the symbolizing functions of thethinking1-thinking2 conglomerate. In other words, language, theserial realization of thinking in abstract symbolic form, is notitself the material or medium of the thoughtprocess until a late stage, and is not necessarily a part of thethinking process at all. My model is, of course, in contentionwith the majority of recently proposed cognitive models of thefunction and construction of language, and I do not expect itseasy acceptance: only the evidence of the many-sided picture thatmy theory of psychedelic experience presents might have the powerto convince scientists today that the cognitive model ofthinking1-thinking2 processes might have some generalapplicability. The neurologist Harry Jerison, for example,proposes that language itself is the medium of reflective thoughtand imagery: "The role of language in communication first evolved as a side effect in the construction of reality," proposes Harry Jerison, a neurologist at the University of California, Los Angeles, who has made a special study of brain evolution. "We can think of language as being merely an expression of another neural contribution to the construction of mental imagery." Brains throughout evolutionary history have been shaped to construct an inner world appropriate to a species' daily life. In amphibians, vision provides the principal element of that world; for reptiles, an acute sense of smell. For the earliest mammals, hearing was additionally important; and in primates, a melange of sensory input creates a complete mental model of external reality. Humans, says Jerison, have added a further component: language, or more precisely, reflective thought and imagery. Thus equipped, the human mind creates an internal model of the world that is uniquely capable of representing and coping with complex practical and social challenges. Inner reflection, not outer communication, was the facility upon which natural selection worked, argues Jerison. Language was its medium-and, at the same time, an efficient tool for communication. This hypothesis now has wide support. (14) Too bad. I believe the hypothesis that language isthe medium of the construction of mental models ofreality, is misguided. But it wouldn't be the first instance inthe history of science where the experts were wrong. Firstly, asstated here, the model implies that without language, theconstruction of mental models of the world, by animals forinstance, is minimal. Yet the habit routine cognitive model showsthat the habit routine, constructed by thinking1 processes andanalyzed by thinking2 processes, is the mental model ofreality we are concerned with, and that the transformation intolanguage or other forms of symbolization is a subsidiary,secondary, and non-essential process occurring in thinking2. As Ihave argued previously, the habit routine system has been theconstant companion of animal life from the beginning, it is theprimary function of all animal nervous systems, not justadvanced ones such as our own. It is interesting how close theabove quotation comes to the idea of the habit routine model asthe mechanism of construction of the "mental model ofexternal reality," ("a melange of sensory input createsa complete mental model of external reality") but thenmisses the necessary conclusion. Jerison's model would have thesymbolization function as the primary cognitive operation, butthat would require that the "raw material" ofsymbolization be the primary sensory information rather than thegenerated habit routine, and a great deal of evidence, summarizedin previous chapters, argues against this model. Language is not at all the medium of thethinking processes which precedes symbolization, which is aresonance to the habit routine and its analysis. Language as itis realized, or other forms of symbolization such as theproduction of gesture or music, perhaps also the expression ofemotion via facial expression and general posture, are serialprocesses, yet the habit routine, the internal model of theworld, is iconic. It is a Gestalt, a constantly changingand updated holistic entity not requiring elaborationthrough a serial process of point for point representation withabstract symbols as does language. Our basic thinking process isin terms of icons or Gestalts, holoprojections, whichlater, and sometimes very laboriously, may find only incompleteand unsatisfactory expression through the symbolizationprocesses. Consider this statement by Albert Einstein, describingthe way he considered his creative thinking to occur: "The words of the language, as they are written or spoken, do not seem to play any role in my mechanism of thought. The psychical entities in my case are . . . visual and some of muscular type. Conventional words and other signs have to be sought for laboriously only in a secondary stage." Thus many recent views of language and thinkingmiss the essential fact that the great part of what constitutesthinking, both conscious and pre-conscious as with theconstruction of the habit routine, has nothing to do with theserial process of spoken language at all. The creation of themental model of reality is not "linguistic" except inthe sense that we might define a new type of "language"constituted not of words and the rules for serially connectingthem, but of the very iconic Gestalts that are created by habitroutine search. The evolution of the ability to produce the habitroutine Gestalt started probably with the very first animals, asI have discussed, but the evolution of spoken language only beganmuch later. The two evolutionary processes are very far apartindeed, as are the brain processes which produce them. The problem of the modern understanding of thesefacts probably arises from the nature of the methods of modernWestern science itself. It is, above all, a descriptiveundertaking, and therefore a serial process rather than anexperiential, iconic one. So in attempting to"scientifically explain" many of our cognitiveabilities using descriptive language, we must necessarilylet serial symbolization rule our paradigm to such an extent thatwe ignore certain aspects of the ongoing iconic thinking processwhich is the seed of our explanations. Thus the possible Gestaltswhich would themselves, if we became aware of them, allow us anexperience of the nature of the iconic thinking processes whichprecede symbolization, of how they provide the basis forsymbolization, are ignored by the requirements of our paradigm toprovide only serial explanation: these ignored Gestalts, theiconic habit routines which would give a view of the nearlyinvisible underlying thinking processes, do not activate thesignificance detection system piloted by the locus coeruleus,because we have ruled them out from consideration by theprogramming of working memory with the specifics of our paradigm,this is the conscious feedback process which is an input, alongwith sensory information, to the habit routine generation processin thinking1 (see again figure 1). Except in thereflection of those unusually perceptive and gifted individualssuch as Einstein who have developed life-long habits of lookingfor the significant in what everyone else deems the routine, theiconic nature of basic thinking processes is therefore renderedinvisible. As I have shown, of course, the psychedelic experiencecan produce this very same result reliably and safely, althoughit requires considerable experience with the drugs to understandthat this is what is happening, and to use the effect to itspotential. I might say, perhaps not too ponderously I hope, thatthis entire book is the symbolization in language of an iconicentity or Gestalt, a "mental model" of my theory that Ihave been slowly constructing over the years. I "know"full well its entire content and form, and yes, it seems to bevisual and even "muscular" in a certain sense, but itstranslation into serial language is another affair altogether,requiring entirely different types of effort than theconstruction of the informational entity which I am describing.Interestingly, the symbolization in language does have a feedbackto the characteristics of the iconic Gestalt: the fine points ofits significance, the small details of the interrelations of itsparts seem to be refined as the experimental process ofsymbolization attempts to capture its essence in words. Other parts of my theory, such as theneuromechanics of HRS, the cognitive operations mapped in figure1, and other "pieces of the puzzle," are models, usefulaids, heuristic devices useful until better models come along, adevelopment which must surely come to pass considering thespeculative methods which led to their proposal. But thesuggestion of an evolutionary scenario for human developmentattempts to establish an actual series of events in history, ifpre-history. Considering the very fragmentary evidence in thefossil record, and the indirect nature of other modern evidenceto be described below, the chance for error in proposing thestory of how Early Man made his way out of Eden is humbling. Aswe have seen above, the first theory of psychedelic evolution,that of McKenna, has suffered, perhaps terminally, from a dose ofcounterargument all too easily supplied by the critics. Much of McKenna's book remains admirable however,for instance his presentation of evidence indicating the probableimportance of psychedelic plants for the very early tribalsocieties which lived on the Tassili Plateau of southern Algeria,or �atal H�y�k in central Anatolia. These are examples, alongwith ancient Greece and the Eleusinian Mysteries, whichillustrate the rapid flowering of culture possible in societiesin which there is strong, if not incontrovertible evidence ofpsychedelic use. The importance of psychedelics for early mancertainly suggests an important evolutionary influence as well:the trick is to deduce, using a wide variety of ancient andmodern evidence, when and where, and why that evolutionaryinfluence might have taken place. Let me start by consideringsome modern reinterpretations of the fossil evidence which haverecently received overwhelming support from one of science's mostrecent and fascinating developments, molecular genetics. Chris Stringer, who is today the head of the HumanOrigins Group of the Natural History Museum in London, recounts amost interesting tale of scientific discovery in his recent book,African Exodus, co-authored by the science writer RobinMcKie. It is the kind of story which has epitomized the romanceand excitement of scientific discovery and revolution asperceived by the lay public, stories such as the Curies'discovery of radium or Galileo's road to revolutionary views ofthe heavens. The important periods of these scientists' workwere, of course, marked far more by hard work than by romance!But not only is the story of these recent discoveries concerninghuman origins of interest to the general public, it represents ascientific revolution of important scope, comparable to therecent revolution in geology with the advent of the discovery ofplate tectonics, or even the revolution in physics earlier in thecentury. The first chapters of African Exodus areconcerned with a close examination of the "bones andstones," in which Dr. Stringer shows how the MultiregionalHypothesis (15) ofhuman evolution, the predominant model for most of this century,has just recently been discredited in favor of an Out-of-Africa(actually an Out-of-Africa II) (16) model. A new mathematical technique,multivariate analysis, used by Dr. Stringer during his severalyears of work on the fossils, led him to doubt the validity ofthe multiregional theory early on in his career. But only a smallminority of paleoanthropologists were ready to listen to newanalyses of fossil characteristics which called into question thestatus quo of their profession, for many great scientists of thepast decades had analyzed these same fossils and there was wideconsensus that a multiregional scenario was the correct one. Theupheavals and conflicts typical of a newly-born scientificrevolution ensued. A revolutionary new idea proposed by a smallgroup of scientists, at first rejected as absurd by theestablishment, soon began to topple that establishment. ChrisStringer and Robin McKie introduce the book: For the past few years, a small group of scientists has been accumulating evidence that has revolutionised our awareness of ourselves, and our animal origins. They have shown that we belong to a young species, which rose like a phoenix from a crisis which threatened its very survival, and then conquered the world in a few millennia. The story is an intriguing and mysterious one, and it challenges many basic assumptions we have about ourselves... It is a remarkable, and highly controversial narrative that has generated headlines round the world and which has been the subject of a sustained programme of vilification by scientists who have spent their lives committed to the opposing view that we have an ancient, million-year-old ancestry. The debate, which reverberates in museums, universities and learned institutions across the world, is one of the most bitter in the history of science. (17) What finally broke the dam of resistance to the newideas was the entry upon the scene of revolutionary newtechniques from a field which had previously played no rolewhatever in paleoanthropology, molecular genetics. Until veryrecently, the possibility that we might learn something about theevolution of our distant ancestors by studying the genetic makeupof living humans was hardly even suspected, and of course thetechniques for doing so completely unknown. But all this changedrapidly as the science of molecular genetics grew from itsinfancy in the 1960's to the powerful tool it is today. The useof genetic analysis for understanding evolution, the science of molecularanthropology, also had its beginning the 1960's, with thepioneering work of Allan Wilson (later to be a key player in theconfirmation of the Out-of-Africa scenario) and Vincent Sarich.It was their early work that began to topple many sacred cows ofpaleoanthropology, the first to fall being the idea that apes andhumans had diverged very early, between fifteen and thirty Ma. Bycomparing protein structures of modern apes and man, Wilson andSarich concluded that the separation could have been no earlierthan 5Ma. "We were variously ignored, abused andscorned," recalls Sarich. But it was the first of manyvenerable precepts of paleoanthropology that was to fall to thenew techniques of genetic analysis. The research of Wilson andthe many others who followed came along at precisely the righttime to resoundingly confirm the early work of Stringer. Stringer and McKie mention in their introductionabove that our species "rose like a phoenix from a crisiswhich threatened its very survival," and propose later on inthe book the occurrence of a population bottleneck sometime about100 to 150Ka. The possibility of such a bottleneck has also drawncriticism from defenders of the orthodoxy, yet again the geneticevidence is what has come to the forefront to support theproposal. The genetic evidence in question was not at firstconcerned with the DNA of the cell nuclei, found in every cell ofthe body and which is responsible for control of the growingembryo and inheritance of physical traits, but DNA contained the mitochondriaof these same cells. These small structures within animal cellsact like metabolic power-packs, enabling the biochemicalreactions which provide the cell with energy. That thesestructures contain their own DNA, entirely different from nuclearDNA, is something of a curiosity, and has led to speculation thatvery early on in evolution, mitochondria might have been aseparate organism which developed a symbiotic relationship withprimitive single-celled life forms to enable the evolution of thefirst true single-celled animals. Whatever their evolutionarystory, the mitochondria and their independently organized DNAstrands have provided an important key for the understanding ofhominid evolution. Two specific characteristics of mtDNA(mitochondrial DNA) figure importantly: firstly, mtDNA istransmitted only through the female lineage, since themitochondria of sperm reside in the cell's extranuclearprotoplasm, and do not enter the egg at fertilization. Thus mtDNAprovides a powerful tool for tracing genealogies in animals, andreconstructing recent evolutionary trees. Secondly, mtDNA has arelatively high and constant rate of random mutation which isconveniently analyzed, thus constituting a "molecularclock" providing genetic markers for accurately tracingmigration and fissioning in human societies. A recent paper byRebecca L. Cann, an early associate of Allan C. Wilson, explainsmore fully the peculiarities of mtDNA which result in its beingsuch a powerful tool for the study of evolution. Concerning thebottleneck hypothesis resulting from mtDNA studies she recounts: When I began my study of mtDNA in the late 1970s with Dr. Allan C. Wilson, one of his postdoctoral fellows, Dr. Wesley Brown, was writing up his work on a study of 21 human mtDNAs. Dr. Brown had discovered that using restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs), humans as a species looked 'different' to other mammals. He found that in comparison to two chimpanzees, or two gorillas, or two orang-utans, or two gibbons, or even two pocket gophers, humans had only one-half to one-fifth of the intraspecific variability seen in our closest primate relatives and other genetically well-characterized mammals. In 1980, Brown proposed that the level of variability sampled in his study was consistent with the derivation of the human mitochondrial sequence from a single female about 200,000 years ago. This was the origin of the bottle-neck hypothesis and mitochondrial 'Eve'. (18) The mitochondrial "Eve" hypothesisnaturally made big headlines, was featured on the cover of suchmagazines as Time and Newsweek, and also quitenaturally was journalistically exaggerated out of all proportionto the original claims. A concerted attack by themultiregionalist "old guard" also helped to make thenew idea sound a bit absurd, both to the public, and toscientists in other fields not yet acquainted with the geneticevidence. All the criticisms have been adequately counteredhowever, and the findings confirmed by newer and more completestudies, including studies on the nuclear DNA. Rebecca Cann wascareful to explain, in the above quoted paper, the intendedinterpretation of the hypothesis concerning the possible numberof individuals existing at the time of the proposed bottleneck.Since mtDNA is passed on only through the female lineage, theexistence of a mitochondrial "Eve" does not imply thatour nuclear DNA is also descended from a singleindividual, nor that at one point the human lineage was reducedto a single, or mere handful of individuals (the "BiblicalEve" scenario!) Recent estimates of the number ofindividuals existing at the time of the bottleneck, includingthat of Chris Stringer, puts the number at perhaps ten thousand. (19) It may be arguedthat a population of ten thousand individuals is not what onecould call a genetic bottleneck, yet the sum of the geneticevidence indicates that "there were at least 100,000 adultarchaic forebears of our Africa ancestors about 200,000 yearsago." (20)Thus a decrease to 10,000 individuals is certainly a"population crash" indicative of important events inthe early evolution of modern man. As for the date of the lifetime of"mitochondrial Eve," there have been various estimatesbetween the extremes of about 60 to 400Ka based on severaldifferent methods of mtDNA analysis. Some best estimates put thelife of "mitochondrial Eve" at about 130 to 140Ka,"the date of origin of modern humans." (21) The uncertainties in these severalestimates may be narrowed by considering data from other fieldsof study, and from a view of the overall evolutionary scenariowhich emerges upon consideration of all the information at ourdisposal, including my own hypotheses of the influence ofpsychedelics on the overall process. Using all these sources, areasonably constrained sequence of events with fairly accuratedates becomes possible. In looking at the combined evidence from newinterpretations of the "stones and bones," (ChrisStringer's findings), the genetic evidence, (now far moreconvincing than just a few years ago), and other pieces of thepuzzle, Stringer and other workers have come to the conclusionthat there must have been some kind of unusual event, somecatalyst, some kind of "trigger" which set in motionthe very rapid rise of human culture and civilization which begana mere few moments ago on an evolutionary scale. The strongevidence for a population bottleneck, during which timeindividuals existed who were our sole ancestors, and the ensuingrapid migration and rapid rise of human culture in every cornerof the earth, has led these workers to ask a central andimportant question for which they have not yet formulated ananswer. Stringer and McKie write: It was one of the critical events in mankind's convoluted route to evolutionary success. The nature of the trigger of this great social upheaval is still hotly debated, but remains a mystery at the heart of our 'progress' as a species. Was it a biological, mental or social event that sent our species rushing pell-mell towards world domination? Was it the advent of symbolic language, the appearance of the nuclear family as the basic element of human social structure, or a fundamental change in the workings of the brain? Whatever the nature of the change, it has a lot to answer for. It transformed us from minor bit players in a zoological soap opera into evolutionary superstars, with all the attendant dangers of vanity, hubris and indifference to the fate of others that such an analogy carries with lt. (22) Reading this paragraph in African Exodus, Irealized I had been for several years working on ideas whichconstituted the very answer sought by this recent revolution inthinking about human evolution. It was, as I have said in chapter2, "Models and Theories," a falling into place ofpieces of a puzzle which justified so much earlier "wildspeculation," a realization that practically by accident Ihad found a key that many others were actively searching forwhich would enable the opening of a door to an important futurein understanding. Rebecca Cann asks, We often wonder if language played a part of the process, and that our ancestors all had some new mutations which allowed them to spread, at the expense of the other indigenous peoples. [Results of genetic research] suggest the spread of our ancestors was rapid, with little mixing. (23) Although language certainly played a part in theprocess, as I have already discussed, the identity of thetrigger, the origin of the population bottleneck, the reasonbehind man's migration to the ends of the earth, the factorenabling the rapid rise of culture independently in all theseregions, the factor behind the ability of the new hominids toout-compete all former races of archaic man, the secret of thebirth of the human race, may all be intimately related to one andthe same phenomenon: the advent of psychedelic use by aregionally isolated group of proto-humans somewhere in Africa.Such use might then have spread with the spread of thedescendants of this core group of individuals, mimicking apopulation bottleneck in that psychedelic use and the advantagesit provided were closely guarded secrets not evident or availableto competing "tribes." As I stated previously, if amember of a competing "tribe" were to use the newmedicine, it would only serve to isolate him from his own group.Psychedelic use could then have been at once the reason for anapparent but not necessarily absolute bottleneck, and also thetrigger, the key which enabled this original group to expand andprosper by virtue of the cognitive advantages provided by thecumulative effects of psychedelic use. These advantages, I remindthe reader, concern a new and powerful ability to suspend a modeof existence entirely governed by habit routine. The advanced apethat was our predecessor necessarily had, as I have shown, themost complete, one might say irrevocable dependence on habitroutine of any animal yet evolved, a dependence entirelyprecluding the use of the most advanced nervous system everevolved for creative purposes. But what of that other facilitating factor Imentioned before, the one that would allow psychedelic use tobecome important and not just an infrequent and disorientingevent for single individuals who might then expulsed from theirgroup? Some environmental or social situation must have resultedin the frequent use of psychedelics by a significant proportionof the core group, and psychedelic use must then have become partand parcel of the social structure of the group. There areseveral possibilities. Here another body of research informationon climate change becomes important, for during the proposedperiod between 100Ka and 200Ka, drastic climatic changes wereoccurring on a time scale certain to disrupt all life on theplanet, especially those advanced forms of life so dependent onsocial complexity and a diversified diet. In view of the best estimates for the time slot forthe population bottleneck and mitochondrial Eve (about 133Ka), (24) a particularperiod of climatic history stands out: the Eemian interglacialperiod. During the Eemain, warm, wet, and tropical conditionsextended much further north than at present. The fossil evidenceshows that hippopotamuses browsed along the banks of the Thamesand the Rhine, while lions and elephants roamed the forests ofsouthern England. Until recently, the Eemian interglacial periodwas thought to have been a stable climatic period lasting fromabout 130Ka to 114Ka, when the beginning of the last ice agecommenced. Climatic information has been obtained from suchmethods as analysis of ocean sediment cores, pollen cores fromterrestrial sources, and ice cores drilled in such locations asAntarctica and Greenland. A recent ice core analysis fromGreenland however, has given us a radically new view of theEemain climatic era, indicating that it was not a period ofstability but rather one of wild climatic oscillations: (25) The early part of the Eemian was dominated by several oscillations between warm and cool stages. The temperature dropped by as much as 10 degrees, sometimes within as short a time as ten to thirty years. Some cold spells lasted a few decades, while others lasted several hundred years. After 8000 years of fluctuating conditions, the climate settled into a period of stable warmth lasting some 2000 years. This warm period ended abruptly...when the temperature in Greenland dropped about 14 �C within ten years. (26) Such a period as the early Eemain seems to provideexactly the kind of opportunities for the disruption and crisisconditions for groups of human predecessors that would lead tothe discovery of psychedelic use. Several times there must havebeen abrupt changes in habitability of various regions, withchanges in flora and fauna and resulting dietary pressures, foodshortages, the encroachment of and conflict with neighboringtribes, the possible occurrence of new diseases and a resultingsearch for medicinal remedies promoting population movements, inessence, frequent turmoil. If modern chimpanzees have the need toroam far and wide to procure their necessary diet including"fungi, rotten wood, insects, bark, shoots," we maysafely assume that proto-man had similar if not even greaterexigencies. If uprooted from a home ground, or if rapid climatechange forced him to experiment with new foods, an opportunityfor the discovery of psychedelic plants becomes important. In the case of edible fungi today for example, itis well known that many, if not the majority of cases ofpoisoning result when individuals or groups, newly arrived in anarea, see and consume a mushroom which they had always safelyconsumed in their previous home region. Many mushrooms looknearly identical, and some fungi species are known to be safe inone region, yet toxic in another. A changing climate might wellalter a fungal species, changing its visible characteristics orproduction of metabolites. Some recent work has shown that fungitend to proliferate at far greater rates in a tropical, CO2 richclimate, as must have existed during the Eemian. (27) In these facts we see a possible, ifnot probable mechanism whereby a group of our ancestors mighthave discovered the use of a psychedelic mushroom or other plant,in which the discovery involved the use of that plant by theentire group, and for an extended period of time. The likelihoodof widespread existence of unfamiliar and unusual species ofalkaloid-containing plants is, of course, much higher in thetropical and humid, and fluctuating conditions of the Eemian,rather than during the dry, cold, and barren ice age conditionswhich preceded it. And the dates of the climatic disruptions ofthe early Eemian that might have led to such a discovery matchnicely the mtDNA evidence of a population bottleneck. The Eemian might well have been the period ofmankind's first important exposure to psychedelic drugs, for by90Ka we see the appearance of sophisticated bone harpoons andknives in what is now Zaire, a level of technology that was notseen in Europe until 50 thousand years later. (28) But we should not expect that theinitial psychedelic exposure would have led to rapid culturalchange as we would today define it. Evidence from studies of"primitive" yet ecologically stable and wise tribalsocieties indicates that psychedelic use and the associated riseof shamanism does not automatically propel a society towardsbuilding automobiles and atom bombs, but rather, preferentiallyenables another kind of creativity involving stability andequilibrium. Some of the oldest of tribal societies, those thathave been discovered in New Guinea, or in the backwaters of theAmazon basin, or the vast tundra of the Siberian wilderness, allhave a long tradition of psychedelically influenced shamanism,and have remained stable for many thousands of years. If weshould look at such a society and call it "primitive,"their practices being seen as "backward" and"ignorant," how much more so may such a stable andecological society view the all-too-obvious happenings andextrapolations of Twentieth Century "Civilization"? Ourview today of what constitutes "progress" and"civilized living" has practically nothing in commonwith the views of hundreds, even thousands of societies that havecome before, and lasted far longer than our recent experiment in"progress". With a little luck, the remnants of anisolated tribe or two may well survive us. A psychedelically-enlightened society does not atall produce rampant technological change, just for the sake ofchange. They do not fly to the moon just because it is there, orto impressand propagandize tribal members with their supposedsuperiority over a rival tribe in some cold war scenario. Apsychedelically-enabled society does, however, make rapidadvances of a creative nature in response to real challenges suchas climate change, the necessity to emigrate to new regions, theavoidance of disease and a search for new medicines (chimpanzeesand even elephants have been shown to intentionally search outand consume effective medicinals as required). But in periods ofclimatic and resource-stability the psychedelically-enabledsociety also exhibits an ecological stability: it has the powerand intelligence to make creative changes as it pleases, andchooses consciously to remain in equilibrium with nature. Whatcould be more illustrative of wisdom than this? In times ofstability, psychedelically-enabled tribes produce myth, art, theyuse their creative powers to elaborate tradition, the hallmark ofculture; they do not spend their time in petty schemes to conquernature, or exploit reality, or develop "backward"regions. Perhaps the long term lesson that is taught by thepsychedelic experience is that the human animal, having evolvedslowly over millions of years, is ill-equipped to handle suddenlarge advances in technology, which have historically resultedvery reliably in mass production of weapons, ecologicaldestruction, genocide, waste, and the collapse of civilizations.Surely there is a better use for creativity than this. The point here is to give a better view of what apsychedelically enabled tribe, at the advent of the human race,might do with its powers of creativity. If our original Africanancestors began the use of psychedelic agents as the first steptoward an organized shamanism, only our modern illusions of whatconstitutes "progress" would predict that such asociety, if truly a society of man, would rapidly inventand amass technology. A broader view would predict that whatwould be amassed by the true Homo sapiens would betechniques of living exhibiting a consciously designed harmonyand ecology, leading to long-lasting modes of tribal lifechanging only slowly with time. Psychedelically enlightenedtribes would optimally remain stable for millennia. To restate:Creativity in such a group would involve the creation andpreservation of myth and ritual, the gradual perfection of astyle of living, the elaboration of tradition, not a headlongrush into exploitation of "resources" and a supposeddomination of nature. Thus our originally psychedelically-enlightenedancestors, the first humans, would have spread slowly and surelyfrom their original home, perhaps in East Africa, and carriedwith them such traditions of stability and longevity. Only severechallenges to their survival and continuation would result intheir use of the creative power to make radical changes in theirtechnology and lifestyle. Before long even a slow migration wouldhave brought descendants of the original core group into theMiddle East, as evidenced by fossils of modern humans in Israeldated at 100Ka. (29)We must remember that climatic changes after the end of theEemian, although following a general tendency toward the next iceage, continued to include occasional but abrupt reversals as isshown by the recent Greenland ice core studies. Migration waslikely therefore to have been a sporadic happening, as certainhabitats and food sources changed. Considering these tribes'penchant for stability, intentional migration, just for the sakeof migration, was unlikely. The spread of our ancestors wouldtherefore have been slow and occasional, initiated by theoccasional climatic upheavals and other environmental challengessuch as volcanic eruption, changing food supplies, occurrence andavoidance of diseases, and perhaps the search for new medicinesand psychedelic plants. We know from anthropological studies howimportant are the recommendations of the shamans for decisionstaken by tribal elders, and it is thus possible that shamans alsogreatly influenced decisions of our early ancestors concerningtheir movements. The shamans' use and search for psychedelicplants may well have initiated some early migrations. It is necessary to understand the above describedtendencies that would naturally follow our original psychedelicenlightenment to see why modern culture as we know it did not getunderway for over 60 thousand years. Tradition and stabilityreigned for many thousands of years while a slow migrationbrought human ancestors to Europe, Asia, and finally theAmericas. But the flowering of modern culture did not really getunderway until 40 thousand years ago, when art and bodyornamentation, sophisticated bone tools, built hearths andstructured living spaces, open site "religious"burials, storage pits and social storage, quarries, the longdistance exchange of raw materials, long term occupation of harshenvironments, and signs of complex forward planning made a wideappearance as evidenced in the archaeological record. (30) This apparentlysudden appearance of the roots of the modern age, in which thebeginnings of modern technology can be seen, is the phenomenonthat has challenged anthropologists the most. If anatomically andcognitively modern humans began their specieshood in Africa130Ka, why did it take so long for the modern trend to getunderway? And importantly, what was the catalyst whichprecipitated this event so suddenly? Like all history, theanswers to such questions, even if they could be known, mustnecessarily be very complex, a story that can be told in amultitude of ways that might seem contradictory. Consider themyriad ways the story of the eradication of Native Americanpopulations can be told. But some scholars have proposed that the suddenflowering of the modern age beginning about 40Ka might actuallyhave been more gradual, and sporadic. Such ideas fit in with theabove observations on the likely characteristics ofpsychedelically-enlightened societies. The appearance of thepreviously-mentioned bone harpoons in Zaire, and other scatteredevidence may well indicate that local tribes made advances intechnology in fits and starts, in response to novel challenges,and then returned to long periods of stability. The appearance ofcave art seems today from modern discoveries to be rather abrupt,yet the quality of such art would indicate a long tradition ofartistic endeavor, certainly the artists of the Lascaux andCosquer caves were no amateurs, thousands of years of traditionno doubt led up to their remarkable artistic abilities. Newdiscoveries of even more ancient sites are bound to indicate thatthe first "artists" did not suddenly appear around 40thousand years ago, but that artistic expression was a slowlymaturing phenomenon of very long duration indeed, going back tothe Eemian perhaps. The psychedelic model of evolution of culturetherefore agrees that some recent interpretations of evidenceindicating a "sudden flowering" of culture beginningabout 40Ka is too drastic. Alison Brooks, an archeologist whowith John Yellen made the important finds in Zaire, states: A closer scrutiny of the archeological record leads one to inquire, Just how abrupt was the behavioral transition in Europe? I believe that the gulf between the Middle Paleolithic and the Upper Paleolithic has been artificially widened by de-emphasizing the very real evidence of cultural complexity in the former and overstressing the achievement of early modern humans, who, in Europe, did not achieve all of the behaviors usually cited as part of the Upper Paleolithic "revolution" until the very end of the Pleistocene [near 10,000 years ago]. (31) One final surmise about the trigger events that mayhave continued to push Early Man along the road to moderncivilization will bring this chapter to a close. If, according tomy theory, there was a gradual evolution of culture during the 70thousand years between the Eemian and the period in which thebeginnings of modern culture are deemed to have begun 40 thousandyears ago, then we might look for the rapid, yet sporadic andgeographically independent advances in culture and technology tocoincide with known instances of rapid climatic change, withinstances of severe volcanic activity or other known orto-be-discovered radical environmental influences during theperiod. It will certainly be interesting to compare furtherdetailed analyses of the new Greenland ice cores to known andfuture archeological discoveries in an attempt to correlatecultural change with environmental disruption. Perhaps there willnever be enough evidence to write history about such pre-historictimes, but intriguing clues and parallel developments may wellappear that will at least allow the writing of a probablescenario. The question of how geographically isolated groupsof modern men all developed astounding cultural and technologicaladvances, and how at least two dozen different regional societiesof men experienced along with such changes a dramatic increase inpopulation, has been a puzzle for many archaeologists, linguists,anthropologists, and other workers. In the words of ChrisStringer and Robin McKie, It is an extraordinary catalogue of achievements that seem to have come about virtually from nowhere - though obviously they did have a source. The question is: what was it? Did we bring the seeds of this mental revolution with us when we began our African Exodus, though its effects were so subtle they took another 50,000 years to accumulate before snowballing into a cultural and technological avalanche that now threatens to engulf Homo sapiens? Or did that final change occur later, and was it therefore more profound, and much speedier in its effects? (32) I believe the answer is neither of these, or rathera combination of the two: The seeds of the revolution were indeedcarried by Homo sapiens from his birthplace in Africa, butthey were seeds which needed periodic stimulation to growvigorously. As I have argued, psychedelic wisdom does not ofitself propel societies to produce a "technologicalavalanche" nor should we believe that "technologicalavalanches" are inherently good. Psychedelic wisdom ratherleads to ecology, stability, and longevity. But when novel andsevere challenges present themselves to psychedelically-enabledsocieties, they are able to react intelligently and withforesight and complex long-range planning. This is perhaps themost important difference between the true Homo sapienshis animal forebears. Thus the periodic and now well-established abruptclimatic upheavals of the post-Eemian world became the catalystwhich successively and cumulatively forced tribes of men livingin many isolated areas of the globe to use their God-like powersof creativity to advance technology in the interests of survival.An ice age was approaching, with fits and starts, and globalclimatic change was frequent and severe. If the cognitive seedsexisted, dormant in the sense of not automatically producingtechnological change at a rate which we moderns believe essentialto our species, and these seeds existed in all the societies ofmen around the globe, the fact of climatic change being a globalphenomenon would explain how these seeds flowered, or were forcedto grow independently in all these regions. During the post-Eemian period, changes in theearth's orbit were responsible for the climatic disruption andslow onset of a new ice age. But such orbital changes havesometimes been hypothesized as the catalyst for increasedvolcanic activity as well. Whatever the cause, at least oneextremely severe volcanic eruption occurred during the periodleading up to that famous starting date for the beginning ofmodern technology, and in line with my proposals, may have been amajor event pushing tribal societies around the world towardradical changes in the effort to survive. Stringer and McKie tellof the eruption: The Earth was gripped by continuing climatic mayhem as changes in its orbit began inexorably to push down the world's thermostat. Then to add to these woes, about 74,000 years ago, Mount Toba on the island of Sumatra exploded in the largest volcanic eruption of the past 450 million years. The blast was 4,000 times more powerful than that of Mount St Helens and would have sent more than 1,000 cubic kilometres of dust and ash into the atmosphere, plunging the earth into years-long volcanic winters. Summer temperatures could have dropped by as much as twelve degrees centigrade, while forests shrank, deserts spread, and in eastern Asia, a prolonged winter monsoon would have swept clouds of dust from inland deserts round the globe... Having evolved in warm Savannah sun we nearly perished, huddled in cold dismal misery as volcanic plumes straddled the earth. (33) Examination of some recent charts of sea-levels andestimated prevailing temperatures reveals that this event seemsto have brought on the most severe period of the last ice age.The post-Eemian climate between 115Ka to 75Ka is now known to bemore changeable, the Greenland ice core data showing severalabrupt reversals, yet the same data show that after a significantwarming period peaking about 75Ka to 80Ka, a severe decline thenled into the very coldest period of the ice age. The whole of thepost-Eemian climatic turmoil may well have been the partner tothose original African seeds of modern culture which requiredsuch periodic stimulation to grow. The volcanic eruption mighthave been one of the most important instances driving societiesto improvise and find technological solutions in order tosurvive, the aftermath of the Mount Toba event would havedisrupted flora and fauna world-wide, it would have caused foodshortages, driven intentional and planned migration in search ofresources, brought about wide experimentation with new foods andmedicinal plants, and perhaps even led to the appearance of newor altered species of psychedelic plants such as the fungi whichmight have proliferated in the wake of widespread forest deathand an abundance of decaying vegetation. Psilocybe cyanescensfor example, usually a fairly rare species, thrives in decayingwoody debris and in colder climes. It is also one of the morepowerful Psilocybe species. It is certainly a difficult task to sift and weighall these factors in the attempt to propose a concise scenariofor psychedelic influence on early man. Two or more seeminglycontradictory scenarios might well have happened simultaneouslyin different regions, or consecutively. The idea of psychedelicevolution is still too new, and much more work will have to takeplace with these new hypotheses in mind, trying to prove anddisprove the many resulting implications before we can decide ona likely scenario. As I have said, this task is more than justthe construction of a temporary model, it is an attempt todiscover actual history and subject to real error. References 1. The Forbidden Game, ASocial History of Drugs, 1975, Hodder and Stoughton Limited,U.K. p230. (back) 2. Machiavellian Intelligence, Richard W.Byrne and Andrew Whiten, editors, Clarendon Press, OxfordUniversity Press, 1988. (back) 3. ibid., chapter 20, "Tools and theevolution of human intelligence," Thomas Wynn, p 283. (back) 4. ibid., Alison Jolly, pp373-4. (back) 5. See for example the paper by Daniel C. Dennett,"The intentional stance in theory and practice" for anappreciation of the "levels of intentionality"necessary and implicit in social interaction, ibid.,chapter 14, pp180-202. (back) 6. See for example a question responded to byAndrew Weil at the first Tucson conference on consciousness: Towarda Science of Consciousness, Hameroff, Kaszniak, and Scott,editors, The M.I.T. Press, 1996, p687. (back) 7. The Thinking Ape, Richard Byrne, OxfordUniversity Press 1995, p178. (back) 8. ibid., p142. (back) 9. Katherine Milton, "Foraging behavior andthe evolution of primate intelligence", in MachiavellianIntelligence, ibid., pp285-305. (back) 10. See for example African Exodus, ChrisStringer & Robin McKie, Jonathan Cape, London 1996, p92-93 (back) 11. Self-Made Man, Jonathan Kingdon, JohnWiley & Sons 1993, p97. (back) 12. Steven Pinker, "Facts about human languagerelevant to its evolution" in Origins of the Human Brain,Jean-Pierre Changeux and Jean Chavaillon, editors, A FyssenFoundation Symposium, Clarendon Press, Oxford, ch17. (back) 13. ibid., p271. (back) 14. The Origin of Modern Humans, op. cit.,p173. (back) 15. The Multiregional Hypothesis posits that anearly migration by Homo erectus from the African heartlandto the Near East, Europe, Asia, Australia, was followed by a longperiod of regional and parallel development, with someintermixing between regions, to produce Homo sapiensquasi-independently in the various regions. Under this scenario,racial differences, long thought to be far more significant thanhas recently been shown to be the case by genetic analyisis, weresupposedly evolved during this at least million-year period. (back) 16. The first "Out-of-Africa" migrationbeing that of H. erectus 1.5 to 2 Ma. (back) 17. African Exodus, Chris Stringer and RobinMcKie, Jonathan Cape, London 1996, from the Preface. (back) 18. "Mitochondrial DNA and HumanEvolution" in Origins of the Human Brain, Jean-PierreChangeux and Jean Chavillon, editors, Fyssen FoundationSymposium, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1995, p 128. (back) 19. African Exodus, op. cit., p150 (back) 20. Ibid., p 150 (back) 21. The Origin of Modern Humans, RogerLewin, Scientific American Library 1993, p99. (back) 22. African Exodus, op. cit., pp 5-6 (back) 23. Ibid., p134. (back) 24. see The Origin of Modern Humans, op. cit.,p99. (back) 25. "Chill Warnings from Greenland," NewScientist, 28 August, 1993, pp29-33. (back) 26. Ibid., p31. (back) 27. "Sneezing while the Earth warms," NewScientist, 24 August, 1996, p5. (back) 28. African Exodus, op. cit, p5. (back) 29. see African Exodus, op. cit, variousindex entries under "Qafzeh, Israel." (back) 30. see the chart in In Search of theNeanderthals, Christopher Stringer and Clive Gamble, Thamesand Hudson, 1993, p198. (back) 31. Quoted in Lewin, The Origin of ModernHumans, op. cit., p128 (back) 32. African Exodus, op. cit., p186-187 (back) 33. African Exodus, op. cit., p153. Stringerand McKie give the reference for the eruption as M. Rampino andS. Self, 1993, "Climate-volcanism feedback and the Tobaeruption of ca. 74,000 years ago", Quatenary Research, 40:269-80. (back) Chapter 8 Table of Contents WT01-B36-15IA087-000632-B030-113http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065230 text/html 21961HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:32:17 GMTContent-length: 21742 The Private Sea - Chapter 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 1. The pearl of great price At a party in Chicago, a young man under theinfluence of LSD seized a live kitten and ate it. Later, in aneffort to explain his action, he said he had felt an urgent needto experience everything. The story is revolting, of course, and possiblyapocryphal; but the incident is by no means improbable, and itdoes make the point—that LSD is powerful medicine, and thatthe consequences of its use are often bizarre and terrifying.While it now appears that health authorities have exaggerated thethreat of self-destruction or mental breakdown, the fact remainsthat LSD is dangerous. The nature of the danger, however, may beother than is commonly supposed, and it is possible the alarmistsare not nearly as alarmed as they should be. Almost anything mayhappen when LSD produces the negative reaction that inner-spacevoyagers refer to as a "bad trip," and such a reactionis by no means uncommon; but LSD also can result in a good trip,which is more to the point, and the good trip may in the long runhave graver consequences than the bad. Indeed, there areimplications in the use of LSD which are far more disturbingperhaps than an occasional suicide or psychosis. Assume just for a moment that LSD's cultists areactually doing what they suppose they are doing. If you can taketheir own word for it, they have been tinkering with the gears ofthe universe. They have rushed in where Sigmund Freud feared totread, invading a region of the human psyche from which thefather of psychoanalysis recoiled in horror. They have penetrateda realm of Egyptian darkness—courageously, perhaps, orrecklessly it may be—and in doing so they have raisedfundamental questions about man and God. Whatever the answers, the questions are valid. Theyare not new questions but very old ones, and some have theirroots in a philosophical tradition which predates Westerncivilization. LSD has merely given them a renewed emphasis. Moreover, the LSD cults are not an isolatedphenomenon. There is some evidence that they represent only oneaspect of a psychic revolt whose manifestations can be detectedtoday in the areas of theology, psychology, and ethics. Forexample, the cults appear to have a relationship to the radicalNew Theology, and especially to the ultra-radical Death of Godtheology. In essence, the LSD cultists are saying the same thingthat some of the Death of God prophets have said. From one point of view, LSD presents the orthodoxchurch with a challenge more awesome than the Turk and thecomet— from which, good Lord, deliver us. It casts doubt onthe validity of religious experience as a whole, suggesting thatthe mystical awareness of God is nothing more thanchemistry—and therefore a delusion. From another point ofview, however, the drug raises just as many questions for theatheist as it does for the church. It challenges the scientist aswell as the priest. And some of its more extravagant enthusiastsbelieve it will lead the way to a rebirth of the spirit—to anew Age of Faith in which man's soul in the twentieth centurywill win an ultimate victory over materialism and a skepticalscience. Its members in fact have described the drugmovement as religious—if not a religion—and some groupsalready have incorporated as churches. But if there is to be anew age, there also will be a new faith, for the LSD cultists inmany cases are promulgating concepts which basically are alien topopular Western theology. Perhaps the most striking aspect of theNew Theology has been its re-emphasis of the concept of immanence,or the indwelling nature of God—as opposed to transcendence,or the "otherness" of God. While immanence as such isby no means heretical, in the drug movement and in Death of Godtheology immanence is carried all the way to its radicalconclusion, where it becomes pantheism. Pantheism of course is anEastern concept, and the West has regarded it as anathema,describing it invariably as "a vague pantheism"—asopposed presumably to such crystal-clear doctrines astransubstantiation and trinitarianism. But pantheism is notvague. Whatever the merits of the idea, it is perfectly clear-cutand straightforward in its assertion: God is Man. Or Godis the Universe. There is nothing very complicated about that,and that is pantheism. It is, by and large, the Eastern view ofdivinity. By and large, it represents the direction in which thedrug movement appears to be headed. And, in so many words, itsums up the position of the theological school represented by Dr.Thomas J. J. Altizer. When Altizer says God is Dead, he meanssimply that God is Man. Altizer is a pantheist, and he admits heis a pantheist. His pantheism is not quite the same as theEastern version, as we shall see further on; but it isnonetheless pantheism and basically therefore an Orientalconcept. In this respect, along with LSD, it hints at adevelopment that could have considerable significance for Westernsociety. East is still East, and West is still West, butthere is evidence now that the twain have started to meet, and ata point where one might least have expected it: the point ofreligious metaphysics. It appears that there is presentlyoccurring, especially in America, a wholesale introduction ofAsian theories regarding the nature of man and the cosmos. Thisdevelopment began long ago, in a small way, in the New England ofEmerson and Thoreau, but it seems to have acceleratedtremendously since the Second World War. Sages throughout historyhave prophesied the day when the Wise Men of the Orient wouldjoin hands—or lock horns—with the Wise Men of theOccident, and signs abound that the day has arrived as a naturalconsequence of the shrinking of the globe. In a sense, theimmanent God of the East has come knocking at the door of thetranscendent God of the West, and it is possible that we arewitnesses today to a kind of cosmic shoot-out at the O.K. Corral.It would be premature to assess the full impact of the encounteror its likely denouement, but there seems to be little doubt thatthe encounter is taking place and that certain fundamentals ofEastern thought are being integrated or assimilated into Westernculture. In its initial stages the development preceded bothradical theology and the drug movement; but it is obvious thatthese are related to the development, just as they are related toeach other, and it would be worthwhile perhaps to judge them atleast partially within this wider context. Within such a context, LSD and the Death of Godoppose orthodoxy in crucial areas of doctrine. Not only do theydispute the idea of Theism, or a personal and transcendent deity,but they also question such concepts as pluralism, resurrection,personal immortality, grace, evil, and redemption or atonementthrough the intercession of some supernatural agency. In short,they leave man pretty much on his own, with nobody to turn to buthimself and with no place to seek salvation except inwardly, inthe recesses of his own inner Being. Putting these doctrinalconcerns to one side, the drug movement challenges the church inits functional role as well. According to the LSD cultists, mentoday are thirsting for the direct, personal experience ofGod— regardless of his actual nature. In other words, itmatters not whether God lies within or without; in either case,men need and want a sense of direct communion with the ultimatesource of their faith. This divine-human encounter is not foundin church, where little or nothing is done to promote it. But itis found in LSD, the cultists believe. Thus LSD challenges thechurch to do as well and offer as much. The debate spills over into the province ofpsychology, where a related movement is under way to establishstandards of behavior and adaptation based on universal truthsrather than social norms. Mental health would be defined in termsof man's actual nature or Being, and LSD might prove a helpfultool in determining what that nature or Being really is. Such aprogram of course would introduce psychology to the field ofvalues and ethics, which many have argued is a field thatpsychology should have occupied long before now. And it mightopen the way to the development of a humanistic morality foundedon man's true nature, replacing those legalistic moralities whichare founded on cultural mores or instinctive but arbitrarynotions of right and wrong. Coincidentally, this movement comesat a time when psychoanalysts are doing their best to repress atheory that schizophrenia is a physical disease, best treated bymassive doses of Vitamin B-3. The theory reduces Freud more orless to the status of a witch doctor, and it raises thepossibility at least of a common origin for insanity, religiousmysticism, and LSD experience. It may be that all of these movements areinterrelated in still another fashion, reflecting a revivedinterest in the study of metaphysics—and especially thatbranch of metaphysics termed ontology, or the metaphysics ofBeing: the study of life's essential nature. Academic philosophyhad largely abandoned metaphysics in favor of an arcanelinguistic analysis, and churchmen for the most part had turnedtheir attention to such mundane considerations as ecumenicism,internal renewal, and civil rights. Now it appears thatmetaphysics has come into its own again—both inside thechurch and out of it, but mostly out of it, and not so much yetin the universities. And this is just a fancy way of saying thatpeople have started once more to ask ultimate questions. They areasking who they are, and who God is, and what is therelationship, if any, between them and him. Altizer is askingthese questions, and so is the hipster who seeks cosmic fireworksin an LSD sugar cube. They are asking the questions that Gauguinasked on his canvas: "Where Do We Come From? What Are We?Where Are We Going?" It might be said that men have foundthemselves confronted by two kinds of questions, problems andmysteries. In recent years, men have dealt primarily with theproblems; but the mysteries are now and always will be the sourceof the world's essential anxieties and aspirations, and itappears that men are probing afresh into the mysteries, includingthe mysterium tremendum. They are seeking again the pearlof great price. The asking of ultimate questions is significant initself. It implies an assumption that there are ultimate answers,and that these answers moreover are accessible to men. In recenttimes, it seems fair to say, this assumption has not been widelyheld or widely expressed. Even proud science has gone mute on thesubject, having painted itself into that corner known asHeisenberg's Principle of Uncertainty. As a result, it has beensaid, the very best we can hope for apparently is that scienceone day will be able to describe everything—and explainnothing. But the new search for answers is not predicated uponscientific principles, nor indeed is it predicated upon orthodoxreligious principles; it seems to reject both the Scribes and thePharisees, the scientists and the formal religionists. If it doesin fact constitute a religious revival, which is open toargument, it is one which is bypassing the church's magisterium.It is eclectic, and it rejects all outward authority. On theother hand, it does accept the basic religious premise, asWilliam James defined it: "the belief that there is anunseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniouslyadjusting ourselves thereto." Fundamentally, today's pearlseekers are following Plato's injunction. They are striving foran explanation of Being, which all true lovers of knowledge musthave as their final object, Plato said. They are inquiring intothe nature of their own Being and into the nature of Beingitself. And they are conducting the inquiry by turning inwardupon themselves, like flowers closing their petals in the nightof doubt. Like poppies, one might add, or possibly morningglories and lotuses. But that is another question. All in all, the challenge appears to be directedtoward the laboratory more than the pulpit. The implications ofthe drug movement are basically anti-science rather thananti-church, and they offer grounds for some far-reachingspeculation. We spoke earlier of a possible psychic revolt, andwe might ask whether this is not in fact suggested now by thewidespread interest in LSD and by related developments in radicaltheology and psychology. Are these perhaps omens of acounter-swing of the psychic pendulum? Over the centuries, as theclassical historian Edith Hamilton has observed, that pendulumhas swung back and forth: from the rational to the intuitive,from the seen to the unseen, from the conscious to theunconscious. Whenever one alternative has failed to answer man'squestions or to meet his needs, he has turned invariably to theother option; it follows, therefore, that the apparent challengenow is not merely to science but to rational thought as such. Andthis is necessarily so. It can be argued that the erosion ofreligious belief has not been caused so much by the specificrevelations of science; rather, it is a result of the empiricalmethod which science has utilized to obtain thoserevelations—of the introduction into the culture of ashow-me frame of reference which might be characterized as theMissouri Syndrome. If empiricism has proved a disappointment, asindeed it has, it is entirely possible that the instinctive andunconscious forces of the mind may be rising again now inopposition to the rational and the conscious; the spiritualelement may be reasserting itself in an era when scientificrationalism had appeared to be solidly entrenched. An outburst ofmysticism perhaps has been simmering on the rear burner for sometime, in fact, and, if you care to, you might trace thepossibility back to the anti-rational philosophy of HenriBergson. Now LSD has turned up the flame. Of course, a revolt is not a revolution. The flamecould die— from lack of oxygen—and empiricism may bejust as impregnable as it thought it was. But the movements ofthe time deserve serious attention even if they do not, for themoment, seem to be leading anywhere or offering much substance.What men search for, after all, is just as significant in a senseas that which they find, providing some measure at least of theirnature and their needs. But suppose the revolt did ripen into a revolution.Would that necessarily be a bad thing? What, if any, are thedangers involved? The main danger, already apparent, is thepossibility that these various movements could lead to a sort ofneo-Gnostic rejection of the world—a retreat from theconcrete, as it were, resulting in the kind of pipe-dreamlethargy which characterizes so much of India and the MiddleEast, and which is symbolized in turn by the Hindu contemplativeand the Arab hashish-eater: the one held spellbound by an idea,the other by a drug. And perhaps the gravest challenge is notafter all to science, or to rationalism, but to the world assuch. Not just the values of the world, not just social goals,but the world itself, as earth and substance. The danger in thiscase arises from Oriental concepts of the world as some kind ofillusion, trick, or snare for the senses. According to this pointof view, the world does not really exist. It's all done withmirrors, and the purpose of life is to realize this fact, suchrealization bringing with it an immediate release from the worldwhere man is held captive by his own ignorance. Upon such releasethe enlightened one attains the eternal bliss of nirvana, beyondappearances. What we have called a danger—and the Hinducalls a blessing—is not a problem in so far as radicaltheology is concerned. New Theology is utterly committed to theworld, having turned away from the heavens, and Death of Godtheology actually rejoices in the world, embraces it, cherishesit, and does all but make love to it. Contrary to their popularimage, the Death of God people are by and large a jolly andoptimistic lot. As the radical theologian William Hamiltonexpressed it, in so many words: Prufrock, no; Ringo, yes. As faras he is concerned, the Wasteland has been transformed into alatter-day Canaan. Man is no longer alienated from the world,according to Hamilton. Man is "quite at home in thisworld." And next to Altizer, Hamilton is a gloomy Gus. Allthis happy talk stems directly from the fact that God is nolonger around to spoil the fun, so to speak. The danger of world rejection exists within thedrug movement, where one hears cultists referring to the Net ofIllusion and the Quagmire of Phenomena. But even if you grant thebasic validity of the drug experience, it does not necessarilyfollow that the world is a hoax. After all, there are Orientalphilosophies and Oriental philosophies. The Hindu and the ZenBuddhist start from the same point of view; they share a commonexperience, and they argue from the same evidence. But theyarrive at antipodal conclusions. The Hindu appears at least todeny the world, while the Zen Buddhist affirms it. So it ispossible for the drug movement to go either way: toward a totalrejection of the world or a total commitment to the world. Tohelp clarify the alternatives, we shall explore the conclusionsof Zen and related concepts in some detail. To provide stillanother option, we shall look into the evolutionary-theologicaltheories of Teilhard de Chardin, applying them to the questionsraised by LSD and Asian metaphysics. In sum, it is the argument of this book that arelationship exists between LSD cultism and radical theology;that both offer a legitimate challenge to orthodox theology; thatboth reflect an introduction into the West of Eastern religiousideas; that LSD may provide the basis for a humanistic ethics;that contemporary currents indicate a renewed interest inmetaphysics in general, ontology in particular; that there issome evidence of a nascent revolt against science andrationalism; that all of these developments carry with them bothdangers and promises. If the church is challenged, it has beenchallenged before. If men have lost their God before, they havealways managed, somehow, to find him again. If legitimatequestions are raised, there also are legitimate answers to thosequestions, and we shall suggest what some of them might be. The drug movement has been characterized as aweak-kneed retreat from reality. In reply, the cultists assertthat the truth is just the other way around: it is we who fleereality and they who accept it. They alone have faced thedreadful knowledge that comes when one encounters the Clear Lightof the Void. Only they have dared to turn and see what makesthose flickering shadows on the wall of the cave. Possibly theonly way to settle the question is to follow these explorers allthe way and enter with them into the secret inner world they saythey have discovered. And if you do that . . . well, they are notcowards. They are very brave, perhaps, or very wise, or very dulland foolish. Craven they are not. Contents Page | Chapter 2 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-16IA087-000632-B030-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065241 text/html 23686HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:38 GMTContent-length: 23467 The Private Sea - Chapter 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 2. Through psychedelic eyes On a good trip the LSD voyager may feel he haspenetrated to the godhead itself. But is it really the godhead hesees? Or is it the Medusa? Before we describe what LSD does, let us first askwhat it is. That is a much easier question to handle, admittedly,and it is mildly ironic that this is so. Where the mysteries ofnature are concerned, the situation is usually reversed, asBertrand Russell has pointed out in the case of electricity.Science can describe very accurately what electricity does buthasn't the foggiest notion what it really is. As for LSD, it is asynthetic drug: d-lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate, compoundedfrom a constituent of a rye fungus known as ergot. Its generalhistory by now is a twice-told tale and then some, so we shall bebrief about it. LSD was first synthesized in 1938 by Dr. AlbertHofmann, a biochemist at the Sandoz pharmaceutical firm in Basel,Switzerland; but the scientist did not know what he had createduntil 1943, when he accidentally inhaled or otherwise absorbed asmall amount of LSD and thus discovered the drug's curiousproperties. It produced uncanny distortions of space and time andhallucinations that were weird beyond belief. It also produced astate of mind in which the objective world appeared to take on anew and different meaning. These effects, and the agents whichproduce them, are now referred to as psychedelic —a genericterm which means "mind manifesting," which in turnmeans nothing. The word has come into common usage simply becauseof its neutral connotation; due to the controversy involved, itis the only word so far that all sides have been willing toaccept. It is used as both noun and adjective. Unlike heroin, opium, and alcohol, LSD apparentlyis not addictive. This means simply that prolonged use of thedrug, so far as we can tell at this time, does not create a physiologicalcraving or dependency based on changes in a subject's bodychemistry—changes that are produced by liquor andjunk—and there are no physiological withdrawal symptoms whenuse of the drug is terminated. LSD on the other hand may be psychologicallyhabituating; but this, after all, can also be said of chewing gumand television. There are literally scores of psychedelicsubstances, natural and synthetic, and LSD is only one of manyagents capable of producing a full-fledged psychedelicexperience. Identical effects can be obtained from Indian hempand its derivatives, including hashish; from the peyote cactusand its extract, mescaline; from a Mexican mushroom and itslaboratory counterpart, psilocybin, which Dr. Hofmann synthesizedin 1958. Hemp and peyote have been used as psychedelics forcenturies, and mescaline was on the market before the turn of thecentury. LSD's uniqueness lies in the fact that it is very easyto make— and mega-potent. According to the Food and DrugAdministration, a single gram of LSD can provide up to tenthousand doses, each of them capable of producing an experiencelasting up to twelve hours or longer. Scientists seized upon the drug as a tool forresearch and therapy, and literally thousands of technical papershave been devoted to it. Since LSD appeared to mimic somesymptoms of psychosis, it offered possible insights into thesufferings of mental patients—although psychotherapistslater came to doubt that it produces what was first referred toas a model psychosis. Preliminary research indicated it might beuseful in the treatment of alcoholism and neurosis, and it alsoserved to ease the anguish of terminal patients. In small doses,in controlled situations, it appeared to enhance creativity andproductivity. But the public at large knew nothing of LSD until1963, when two professors, Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert, losttheir posts at Harvard University in the wake of charges thatthey had involved students in reckless experiments with the drug.Leary went on to become more or less the titular leader of thedrug movement, in which capacity he soon ran afoul of the law,and the movement spread to campuses and cities across thecountry. By and large, it seemed at first to develop as amiddle-class phenomenon, attracting to its ranks mainly studentsand intellectuals, liberal ministers, artists and professionalpeople, as well as bearded pariahs. Official panic provoked awave of legislation which ended or seriously hindered almost alllegitimate research programs; the legislation did little ornothing to discourage the drug movement, which received itssupplies from black market sources. Depending upon the point of view, Dr. Hofmannassumed the role of a Prometheus or Pandora. In correspondence Ionce asked him if he sometimes felt like the latter, to which hereplied: "In my opinion, every discovery in the field ofnatural science is to be positively viewed, and thus also thediscovery of LSD. If one wishes to deplore the discovery of LSD,then one must also view the discovery of morphine negatively, formorphine, one of the most valuable gifts of pharmacy, is just asdangerous and destructive as LSD when used improperly. There areno forces in the universe that are bad in themselves. It isalways up to man whether he will make good or bad use ofthem." And if Dr. Hofmann's words have a familiar ring,perhaps they are reminiscent of the statements nuclear physicistswere making in 1945. LSD is a colorless, odorless, tasteless drug. It istaken orally for the most part, and the precise nature of itsaction upon the brain and nervous system has not been determined.It is believed, however, that only a minute portion of the tinydose ever reaches the brain, and even this disappears in lessthan an hour. Possibly, then, LSD sets off a reaction whichcontinues long after the drug itself has been dissipated. As Dr.Sidney Cohen, a leading medical authority on LSD, expressed it,"The drug acts to trigger a chain of metabolic processeswhich then proceed to exert an effect for many hoursafterward." In hipsters' terminology, the subject is"turned on." And the experience begins. The nature of the experience will depend oncountless factors, which are commonly summed up as"set" and "setting": that is, the mood of thesubject and the environment in which the drug is administered.The subject becomes highly suggestible, and the slightest falsenote can result in the nightmare of a bad trip. Most experienceswill include a hallucinatory period, in which fantastic visionsoccur, and in some cases it is possible to see sounds and hearcolors—the result of sensory short-circuiting, referred toin the literature as synesthesia. One subject reported that hecould taste the categorical imperative (which he said wassomething like veal). These very weird effects have receivedconsiderable publicity; when they are pleasurable, they—andsometimes sexual stimulation—constitute what may be regardedas the "kicks" aspect of LSD. But the drug movementcultists are not concerned with kicks in this sense. Skilledtravelers say they can avoid the hallucinatory period altogetherand thus are able to achieve and prolong the "centralexperience." There does appear to be such an experience, andthis is what the cultists refer to when they speak of a goodtrip. It does not always occur, and some people may never achieveit; it must be sought after, perhaps, and expectation may be asignificant factor in its production. But it does exist, and itis the very basis of the cult. From various sources, then, let us see if we canconstruct a typology of this central or core experience. Whilethe problems of description are notorious, in most cases the mindwill appear to operate at a new level of consciousness in which: 1. The sense of self or personal ego is utterlylost. Awareness of individual identity evaporates. "I"and "me" are no more. Subject-object relationshipsdissolve, and the world no longer ends at one's fingertips: theworld is simply an extension of the body, or the mind. The worldshimmers, as if it were charged with a high-voltage current, andthe subject feels he could melt into walls, trees, other persons.It is not that the world lacks substance; it is real, but one issomehow conterminous with it. And it is fluid, shifting. One iskeenly aware of the atomic substructure of reality; he can feelthe spinning motion of the electrons in what he used to call hisbody, and he senses the incredible emptiness that lies within theatoms, where the electron planets circle their proton suns atdistances which are comparably as vast as those in the solarsystem itself. Thus it seems only natural that one could passthrough a wall, if only it were possible to get all the atomslined up properly for just one moment. In the vastness of outerspace, is it not a fact that billion-starred galaxies are able todrift through each other like clouds of smoke or astral ghosts,without the single collision of one star with another? As for identity, it is not really lost. On thecontrary, it is found; it is expanded to include all that is seenand all that is not seen. What occurs is simplydepersonalization. The subject looks back on his pre-drugexistence as some sort of game or make-believe in which, for somereason, he had felt called upon to assume the reduced identity orsmaller self called "I." Being had concentrated itsattention at a single point in order to create, and play, thegame of writer, banker, cat burglar. Or so it now seems. If thereis any analogy to this in normal existence, is it not perhaps themoment when one awakens from sleep? In that case, what is thefirst thing one asks oneself? "Where am I?" Or isn't itrather, "Who am I?" And then, in an effort of will,attention is concentrated to re-create the role that was lost insleep. Thus in the drug experience, as in sleep, the normal stateof tension is relaxed. Home at last, after that dreadful party,Being slips out of her stays, so to speak, and breathes anontological sigh of celestial relief. Consciousness is allowed toscatter, and the subject at last can be Himself again. The subject is somehow united with the Ground ofhis Being, with the life force that has created the visibleworld. He remembers. And what he remembers is the trueidentity that underlies all the individual egos of the world. Heis one again with the universe, the eternal, the Absolute. He has found himself again. He is made whole again.That which he once knew, he has remembered. (But when did he know it? And when did he forget?) 2. Time stops. Or, in any case, it ceases to beimportant. And perhaps it would be more accurate to say thatmemory and forethought stop. The subject is content to exist inthe moment— in the here and now. And time has no meaning inthe here and now. Bergson suggested that the sense of timeconsists simply of arrests of our attention. Seconds and minutesdo not really exist; they are artificially created"immobilities" dreamed up by science, which is unableto comprehend flux, mobility, or the dynamic character of lifeitself. Installed within true movement, said Bergson, the mindwould lose its normal sense of time, since the normal function ofthe intellect is to foresee, so as to act upon things. "Wemust strive to see in order to see," he said, "and nolonger to see in order to act." This is precisely whathappens in the psychedelic experience, where forethought isanesthetized. Without forethought there is no anticipation.Without anticipation there is no desire. And time stops. 3. Words lose all meaning. In the here and nowthere are no abstractions. An object represents only that whichit is. It is perceived as a Ding-an-Sich, athing-in-itself, and it matters not whether Kant said that sortof perception is impossible. Kant never took LSD. If he had, hewould have known that rose is a rose is a rose is a rose. The same feeling is captured in childhood perhaps.As Wordsworth wrote, recalling his boyish days when nature wasall in all: . . . I cannot paint What then I was. The sounding cataract Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock, The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, Their colours and their forms, were then to me An appetite; a feeling and a love, That had no need of a remoter charm, By thought supplied, nor any interest Unborrowed from the eye.—That time is past, And all its aching joys are now no more, And all its dizzy raptures. The psychedelic experience is similar butmultiplied at least a thousand times over. Coincidentally,Havelock Ellis wrote, after experimenting with mescaline in the1890's: "If it should ever chance that the consumption ofmescal becomes a habit, the favorite poet of the mescal drinkerwill certainly be Wordsworth." But thing-in-itself perception is beyond alllanguage. It is, in fact, the antithesis of language, which isthe real cause of our normal inability to see thething-in-itself. This is so because we think in words, and wordsare abstractions or symbols of things; as a result, we tend tothink and perceive in symbols. Thus the American flag flutteringon the Fourth of July is seen in terms of Concord and Lexington.The flag-in-itself is never seen; we must always associate itwith something else. And so on. And the English language isespecially crippling because of its painful stress on simile andmetaphor. Thus a rose isn't a rose; it's what my love is like.Ruskin quite properly attacked the pathetic fallacy as evidenceof a "morbid state of mind." But the psychedelicexperience suggests that all figures of speech reflect the sameunhealthy attitude—and that speech itself is a web ofdeceit. The Greek poets sensed this. For the Greeks, as EdithHamilton pointed out, a thing of beauty was never a symbol ofsomething else, but only itself. A star was just a star, aprimrose a primrose. "That a skylark was like a glow-wormgolden in a dell of dew, or like a poet hidden in the light ofthought, would have been straight nonsense to them. A skylark wasjust a skylark. Birds were birds and nothing else, but howbeautiful a thing was a bird, 'that flies over the foam of thewave with careless heart, sea-purple bird of spring."' Andif symbols as such are deceptive, how much worse are the symbolsof use. We look at a peach, and we see something to eat. We lookat a field, and we wonder how many bushels of wheat it willyield. We meet somebody for the first time, and we ask ourselveswhat this new person can do for us. Can we play bridge with him?Sell him some insurance? Worst of all, we look at our loved oneseven in terms of our own needs, emotional and otherwise. In theterminology of Martin Buber, we live in the world of I-It. Weassociate things, and we use things, and we never look at thething-in-itself in the here and now. Moreover, we cannot lookupon an object without thinking the word which symbolizes it.Tree. Lamp. Table. But the psychedelic world is the world of pureexperience and pure relation; it is the world of I-Thou. In thisworld, for example, a tree is not a source of timber or shade. Atree is to look at. And it is not a tree. It is that,there. Now. And that is a that is a that is a that. 4. There are no dualities. Sweet and sour, good andevil— these also are abstractions, inventions of the verbalmind, and they have no place in the ultimate reality of here andnow. As a result, the world is just as it should be. It isperfect, beautiful. It is the same world that is seen withoutLSD, but it is seen in a different way. It is transfigured, andit requires no meaning beyond the astonishing fact of its ownexistence. What does "meaning" mean anyhow? Meaning is just one more abstraction, implying somefuture use or purpose; it has no place in the here and now ofnaked existence. And is this perhaps the significance of the Edenstory? They ate of the tree in the midst of the garden, and theireyes were opened, and they became as gods, knowing good and evil.The first dualism, fundamental to all others. What does thisstory represent if not the introduction into the world of a newway of thinking and a new form of perception? What does it referto if not the evolutionary product we describe so proudly asintellect, or the rational mind? What does it signify if not thatmoment when man looked about him and said for the first time:"This is wrong." Not, "This hurts me," or"The tiger is chewing my leg, and I wish he wouldn't."No. "This is wrong." What an idea! What acurious concept. No doubt it was the greatest, or worst, ideathat man ever had. It marks that point in the process of becomingwhen life took charge of itself. Man had accepted the world; nowhe decided to judge it. Thus Adam became the firstexistentialist, taking upon himself the nauseating responsibilitythat turned Sartre's stomach. In doing so he laid the basis forthose existential anxieties which are nothing more or less thanontological anxieties. He estranged himself from his environment;worse yet, he alienated himself from the very Ground of hisBeing. In Eden he had lived in perfect I-Thou relation, neitherjudging things nor subsuming them with words. East of Eden laythe world of I-It, where the ground was cursed for his sake, andthe Lord told him what he could expect from it. Thorns andthistles he could expect from it. So Adam was cast out of thegarden, his own mind the flaming sword that would prevent hisreturn. He lived in the world of I-It, and he sought there formeaning. But he never found it, and none of those who came afterhim have found it. Men are frustrated in the search by their I-Itminds of use, which have made meaning synonymous with purpose.Nothing is meaningful unless it leads to something else, orproduces some future effect. Thus a man smokes to enjoyhimself— and that is a meaningless action. But he puts onhis shoes so he can go to the store—and that bydefinition is meaningful. But it is not meaningful enough, andman craves for an ultimate meaning. He wants his life to lead tosomething else, somewhere in the future. It doesn't, apparently,so he feels the anxiety of meaninglessness. Taking hope, however,he diagnoses his anxiety as a form of psychic pain. The sense ofmeaninglessness is meaningful in itself, he decides; it impliesthere is a meaning somewhere, and he is estranged from it. Whichis so. But the ultimate meaning he seeks is in fact the absenceof meaning—in the sense of purpose. Meaning is simpleexistence in the here and now. And of course man already lives inthe here and now. The trouble is, he doesn't know how to live init. And this is what LSD seems to tell him. It tells him that heis still in Eden, if only he knew it. It is only necessary tospit out the apple and look at the world through psychedeliceyes. The apple is his intellect, or way of looking at things,and under LSD his intellect no longer functions. Forethought isput to sleep, and he opens his eyes upon Paradise regained. A voice whispers in his ear. It tells him: "Essenceprecedes existence." 5. The subject feels he knows, essentially,everything there is to know. He knows ultimate truth. And what'smore, he knows that he knows it. Yet this sense of authoritycannot be verbalized (any more than the experience as a whole canbe verbalized) because the experience is a whole which cannot bedivided, and it transcends all partial abstractions. What isknown is pure Being, which cannot be compared with anything else.The subject is identical with that which he knows and thereforeis speechless. In any case, language can never describe thatwhich language itself is responsible for negating. Finally, thereis the problem raised by H. G. Wells in his tale of "TheRichest Man in Bogota." To a race of eyeless men, how do youexplain sight? What words do you use? This describes the psychedelic experience, producedby a chemical. But it also describes something else. It describes religious mysticism. It describes the experience of saints and prophetssince the first tick of history's clock. And it describes as wellthose flashes of insight that sometimes come to humbler folk inmoments of prayer, or of grace. Contents Page | Chapter 3 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-17IA087-000632-B030-156http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065251 text/html 14673HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:32 GMTContent-length: 14454 The Private Sea - Chapter 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 3. Chemistry and mysticism In its broadest sense, mysticism refers to directcommunion with the divine; to intuitive knowledge of ultimatetruth; to the soul's sense of union with the absolute realitythat is the Ground, or the source, of its Being. And apparentlyit is impossible to distinguish this experience from the centralexperience produced by LSD and other psychedelic agents. The classic accounts of mystical experience readlike psychedelic Baedekers. In recent years, moreover, a numberof studies have compared the two experiences, and the resultshave reinforced the idea that the experiences are in some wayconnected. The best known of these studies was undertaken bypsychiatrist Walter Pahnke at Harvard University, wherepsilocybin was administered in a religious setting to tentheology students. Nine of the ten felt they had genuinereligious experiences, and Pahnke concluded that the phenomenathey reported were "indistinguishable from, if not identicalwith," a typology based on W. T. Stace's widely knownsummary of mystical experience. At Princeton, students were shown accounts of areligious experience and a psychedelic experience, and two-thirdsof the students identified the drug-induced experience as thereligious one. In a book in which they summarize five separatestudies, including Pahnke's, R. E. L. Masters and Jean Houstonstated that "religious-type" experiences were reportedby 32 to 75 per cent of subjects who received psychedelics in"supportive" settings, and by 75 to 90 per cent ofthose who received them in settings that included religiousstimuli. And so on. The consensus of research seems to be thatthe two experiences are at least phenomenologically the same.This is a way of saying: "Well, they certainly lookthe same, and beyond that I'm not going to stick my neckout." What this neatly avoids, of course, is the problem ofcomparing the sources of the experiences. Significant parallels to psychedelic experience areto be found in William James's observations on religiousconversion, the faith-state, and mystical experience. Conversionoccurs, said James, when a formerly divided self becomes unified,and "a not infrequent consequence of the change operated inthe subject is a transfiguration of the face of nature in hiseyes. A new heaven seems to shine upon a new earth." Jamesmade the point that "self-surrender has been and always mustbe regarded as the vital turning-point of the religiouslife." And the total abnegation of self or ego is withoutquestion the hallmark of psychedelic experience. "Only whenI become as nothing," wrote James, "can God enter inand no difference between his life and mine remainoutstanding." Discussing the faith-state, James observedthat it too is characterized by an objective change in theappearance of the world, which takes on a sweet and beautifulnewness. "It was dead and is alive again. It is like thedifference between looking on a person without love, or upon thesame person with love." In addition, there is a loss of allworry: "the sense that all is ultimately well with one"and a "willingness to be." Finally, there is "thesense of perceiving truths not known before," and these"more or less unutterable in words." As for mysticism,James found that it also is marked by an ineffability requiringdirect experience, as well as a noetic quality which carries withit "a curious sense of authority for aftertime." Stillanother aspect is passivity, in which "the mystic feels asif he were grasped and held by a superior power." And afinal factor is transiency. "Mystical states cannot besustained for long. Except in rare instances, half an hour, or atmost an hour or two, seems to be the limit." One of those rare exceptions perhaps was EmanuelSwedenborg, the so-called Swedish Aristotle, who was said to havehad a mystical experience which lasted, more or lesscontinuously, for almost three decades. LSD cannot match thatrecord, but it does seem to improve somewhat on the normal timelimits indicated by James. Except for duration, however, there isobviously a remarkable similarity between James's typology andpsychedelic experience. And just incidentally, James noted thatmystical states are often accompanied by various photisms, orluminous phenomena, which also are an aspect of psychedelicexperience (for example, Paul's blinding vision and Constantine'scross in the sky). Finally, let us call attention to James'sobservation: "One may say truly, I think, that personalreligious experience has its roots and centre in mystical statesof consciousness." In other words, we are likeningpsychedelic experience not just to mysticism but to religiousexperience as a whole. From this background, then, emerges LSD's firstclear challenge to orthodox theology. Did the saints owe their visions to some biologicalshort-circuit which caused them to experience spontaneously whatLSD cultists achieve with a chemical? Can their mystic rapturesbe traced to a malfunction of the adrenal glands? Does thefaith-state have a neurological basis? Is the religiousexperience as such nothing more than a fluke of body chemistry? The materialists would like to think so, and do.Dr. Sidney Cohen (who is no materialist) has suggested thatreligious experience may one day be redefined as "adys-synchrony of the reticular formation of the brain." Some scholars have pushed even further. Not only dopsychedelics appear to duplicate religious experience, they say.It is possible that religion itself is psychedelic in origin. Oneof the major spokesmen for this viewpoint has been Gordon Wasson,an authority on the psychedelic mushrooms of Mexico, who hassuggested that primitive men may have stumbled many times uponinnocent-looking plants which produce the same effects as LSD.These theobotanicals, possibly mushrooms, might well have been a"mighty springboard" which first put the idea of Godinto men's heads. Wasson also has proposed a psychedelicexplanation of the ancient Greek cult that produced theEleusinian Mysteries, and he has advanced the idea that Plato'spure Ideas might be the product of a psychedelic insight. (Inother words, Plato was an acidhead.) Following this line ofreasoning, it might seem logical to conclude that the Eden storyis actually a psychedelic parable—and we would be happy topropose that theory ourselves had we not already proposed anothertheory with an antithetical conclusion. In any case, Wasson goeson to suggest that psychedelic sacraments in the course of timemay have been replaced by more innocuous hosts, and that theyrepresent perhaps "the original element in all the HolySuppers of the world." The whole idea, of course, is purespeculation, and necessarily so, but at the same time it is veryinteresting speculation and by no means implausible. It isparticularly tempting to apply Wasson's theory to the metaphysicsof India; according to Masters and Houston, an estimated 90 percent of the holy men in that country are currently on hemp andvarious other drugs. The point often is made that religious asceticstraditionally have promoted their mystical states ofconsciousness by employing techniques that rival LSD in theirprobable impact on biochemical balance. These include fasting,yogic breathing exercises, sleep deprivation, dervish dances,self-flagellation, and monastic isolation. Even in the pews ofthe pious, religious contemplation may be supported by suchtrance-inducing aids as organ music, stained glass windows,repetitive chants and prayers, incense, and flickering candles. The question of religious chemistry has beenunderscored recently by the wide attention given to the theories,already mentioned, of Dr. Abram Hoffer and Humphry Osmond. Theiradrenochrome-adrenolutin hypothesis suggests that schizophreniamay be caused at least in part by defective adrenal metabolism.Very briefly, the adrenal gland secretes the hormone adrenaline,which helps coordinate biological mechanisms in emergencysituations—for example, a fist fight or a threatened trafficaccident. Heart rate is increased, the blood is sugared up andpumped to the necessary muscles. Adrenaline also may affect theemotions, contributing to anxiety and depression. In the body itturns into a toxic hormone called adrenochrome, which in turn canbe converted into either of two other compounds: dihydroxyindoleor adrenolutin. It is possible that dihydroxyindole balances offadrenaline to reduce tension and irritability; in schizophrenics,however, adrenochrome is converted primarily into adrenolutin,which also is toxic, and the combination ofadrenochrome-adrenolutin results in a poisonous disruption of thebrain's chemical processes. That is the theory. And theprescribed antidotes are nicotinic acid (niacin) or nicotinamide(Vitamin B-3). Discussing one of the villains in the piece, thescientists write: "There are few who doubt that adrenochromeis active in animals or in man, and it is now included among thefamily of compounds known as hallucinogens—compounds likemescaline and LSD-2 5 capable of producing psychological changesin man." The Hoffer-Osmond studies are far from conclusive,and similar theories have been advanced in the past. But thestudies hold promise, and they are receiving seriousconsideration—due in part, no doubt, to the significancethey have in other areas of current debate, including religion.The line dividing insanity and mysticism has never been toosharply drawn, and the biochemical theory of schizophrenia makesit all the more tenuous. Vitamin B-3 actually has cured cases ofschizophrenia, according to Dr. Hoffer and Osmond. But VitaminB-3 also has proved effective in terminating LSD experiences, andthe implications of this must be obvious. As we asked earlier:Are insanity, mysticism, and the psychedelic experience in someway related? Aldous Huxley has suggested they are. Theexperience of absolute reality is awesome enough in small doses,and the schizophrenic, drugged by his own body chemistry, is likea man who is permanently under the influence of a psychedelic. Heis "unable to shut off the experience of a reality which heis not holy enough to live with." He cannot take refuge,even for a moment, in "the homemade universe of commonsense—the strictly human world of useful notions, sharedsymbols and socially acceptable conventions." The result isa bad trip which never ends. But the psychedelic subject knowsthat he can and will return to that limited but comforting world,and he is therefore in a position to accept his experience: toenjoy it and to learn from it. This in fact appears to be themain basis for denying that psychedelics produce a modelpsychosis. As Dr. Cohen and parapsychologist Gardner Murphyexpressed it: "When the dissolution of the reasoning selfoccurs in a chaotic manner, the result is called psychosis. Whenthe state is not accompanied by panic or anxiety, it is perceivedas mystical, and creative solutions of (or at least an armisticewith) life problems could result." Dr. Cohen has proposedthat the difference here makes logical a distinction betweeninsanity and unsanity, which he would place at polar ends of acontinuum; in the middle, somewhere, would lie sanity.Nevertheless, it is a bit jarring to consider the possibilitythat religious experience is an end-product of adrenochrome,described as a dark crystalline material which can easily be madein a laboratory. "In its pure form," write Dr. Hofferand Osmond, "it manifests itself as beautiful, sharp,needle-like crystals which have a brilliant sheen. When thecrystals are powdered, it appears as a bright red powder, whichdissolves quickly in water to form a blood-red solution." It would be interesting to see if a shot ofvitamins could terminate a spontaneous religious experience. Butwhat if it did? And what if LSD does in fact initiate such anexperience? Does this mean the experience is simply amanifestation of the drug? Contents Page | Chapter 4 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-18IA087-000632-B030-185http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065306 text/html 20371HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:27 GMTContent-length: 20152 The Private Sea - Chapter 4 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 4. The sound of one hand clapping A spark touches off an explosion. But the explosionis not simply a product or property of the spark. If one opens awindow and looks at the view, one does not equate the view withthe window; one does not suppose that the window causedthe view. In the same sense, LSD has been described as a chemicalkey which opens some window in the mind. Similarly, electric shock may awaken a mentalpatient to the "reality" of the common-sense world, butnobody will say that the common-sense world is a product of theshock. By the same token, it could be argued that LSD awakensnormal men to a still greater reality—and that it does so bymeans of a chemical shock which liberates the mind from ingrainedthought patterns based on verbal abstractions and thememory-forethought habit. Our normal mode of thinking can be described assurvival-thinking. We see a traffic signal, and we think"stop" rather than "pretty red light."Furthermore, since our mind is designed to act upon things, wenormally limit our perception to those things we wish to actupon. This is known as attention, a form of consciousness inwhich awareness is brought to a sharp but limited focus; we seewhat we have to see, and we see it the way we need to see it.Both abstraction ("stop") and attention are designedfor action, and so we view the world in terms of our action uponit. Along these same lines, Huxley described the brain andnervous system as a "reducing valve" which receives theflood of sensory input and filters out all that which is notnecessary for action, and therefore for survival; were it not forthis, we could not function in the world as we know it. Tofunction, we must deceive ourselves as to the actual nature ofreality—a form of adaptation which LSD researcher Willis W.Harman has termed cultural hypnosis. "We are all hypnotizedfrom infancy," wrote Harman, who went on to propose thatthis was just another way in which to describe enculturation. Weaccept suggestions from the environment—from our parents andsociety—and these suggestions shape the manner of ourperception; finally, we perceive things in a state of hypnosis:not as they are, but as we are told to see them. Thus the childfirst sees the traffic signal as a pretty red light, which it is;but soon he learns to see it another way—as anabstraction—or else is run down by a truck. And so it mustbe. Genius, however, has been defined as looking atthings in just a slightly different way. Perhaps the truth of thematter is that genius looks at things more as they actually are:the genius is not completely hypnotized but only partly so.Reality is still reality, after all, and it does no harm perhapsto steal an occasional glance at it, if only to satisfy ourselvesthat it still exists. LSD presumably allows us to do this bybreaking the trance; it enables us, in Huxley's term, to becomeMind at Large. The reducing valve is shut down, attention isscattered, and we are back again in the real world—happy andhelpless. Comparing survival awareness and psychedelic awareness,Orientalist Alan W. Watts has suggested the analogy of aspotlight and a floodlight, and the analogy may be an apt one; itis true that the psychedelic subject often will focus hisattention for long periods upon some object of delight—aflower, perhaps, or a crack in a wall—but as Watts put it,this is an unprogrammed mode of attention in which one looks atthings rather than for things: the world is not choppedinto pieces for purposes of action or cause-and-effect analysis.In any case, LSD from this point of view is simply atrance-breaking snap of the fingers—and the same applies toany chemical agent which might be involved in ordinary religiousexperience. The chemical does not determine the experience, itmerely permits it. In this connection, we may read a certainsignificance into one of the LSD cultist's familiar expressions,"turned on." We turn on a radio and hear an orchestraplaying Vienna Bonbons, and of course the music was therein the room all the time, and the music would be there even ifthe radio were not; the radio simply allows us to hear the music.The comparison is all the more valid if, as indicated earlier,LSD in fact does quit the brain after triggering its chain ofmetabolic processes, and it may be significant in this connectionthat some cultists say they have learned to turn on withoutdrugs. And finally there is an interesting piece of evidence thathas come to us all the way from Japan. To produce the sudden insight called satori,many Zen Buddhists in Japan contemplate a"mind-murdering" form of riddle called the koan.(What is the sound of one hand clapping? What was your originalface before you were born?) These riddles of course defy logic,and that is just what they are supposed to do; they are designedto break down the rational intellect, just as LSD does, and thusprovide the student with a new viewpoint. If asked to explainultimate reality, a Zen master might kick a ball—or slap hispupil in the face. And the idea is that ultimate reality hasnothing to do with words or logic: it is raw existence in thehere and now. Satori is in fact remarkably similar topsychedelic experience, if not indeed identical, and it isproduced by a form of shock which is neither chemical norelectrical but intellectual—or at least mental. Still, the non-physical explanations of psychedelicexperience raise many questions. If psychedelics simply awaken asubject to reality, why does the subject invariably return to histrance-state after a predictable interval? Why will anotherchemical terminate an experience? And what of psychosomaticmedicine? Doesn't it suggest the possibility at least that ZenBuddhists and self-starting cultists have developed a capacity toinfluence their metabolism: that they somehow initiate abiochemical reaction which in turn initiates their experience?The issue of chemistry cannot be avoided, it seems; psychedeliccultists and religionists alike should be prepared to facesquarely the possibility or even probability that theirmetaphysical systems are in fact inexorably linked tobiochemistry. This is not a new question; it is one of those veryold questions we referred to earlier. And it revolves around themusty dispute between the materialists, who say that the soul orpsyche is just an aspect or property of the material body,nothing more, and the dualistic idealists, who make a cleardistinction between spirit on the one hand and matter on theother. According to the idealists, the soul merely inhabits thebody, and it survives the body after death. William James met the problem head on more than sixdecades ago in The Varieties of Religious Experience. Hewrote sardonically: "Medical materialism finishes up SaintPaul by calling his vision on the road to Damascus a discharginglesion of the occipital cortex, he being an epileptic." James himself had participated in experiments withnitrous oxide (laughing gas). This turn-of-the-centurypsychedelic produced what James referred to as the anestheticrevelation, and far from convincing him that religion was merechemistry, it indicated to James that there were unfathomedrealms of consciousness which "forbid a premature closing ofour accounts with reality." James scoffed at"superficial medical talk" about hypnoid states, and heasserted that medical materialism was "altogether illogicaland inconsistent." Why? If all states of mind are caused by someorganic condition, then one "could as easily argue that theliver determines the dicta of the sturdy atheist as decisively asit does those of the Methodist." The sturdy atheist has yet to answer that, but whatabout the Methodist? With its obvious capacity to alter states ofconsciousness, LSD might appear to make hash of dualisticidealism. Even if it does, however, materialism is by no meansthe only option that remains. An alternative can be found withinorthodox tradition, and this is the alternative offered by ThomasAquinas. One hesitates to speak for a saint, but it does seementirely likely that Saint Thomas would have no troublereconciling religious conviction with LSD or theadrenochrome-adrenolutin hypothesis. Dualistic idealism derives from Plato and has beenpassed on to us by Saint Augustine and Descartes, among others.But Thomistic philosophy rejects it and proposes instead theunitary idealism of Aristotle. This affirms the reality of boththe spiritual and the material, but it does not insist that theybe viewed antagonistically—or indeed as separate entities.One might as easily distinguish the warmth of the sun from thesun. Mendelssohn's Violin Concerto in E Minor is no lessbeautiful because it issues from catgut and horsehair. One doesnot say, "It's merely catgut" or "It's simplyhorsehair." Nor does one listen to Fischer-Dieskau singingSchubert and say, "It's nothing more than epiglottis, afterall." In the same sense, the human personality implied forSaint Thomas a combination of mind and matter, body and soul. Heacknowledged a physiological factor in dreams, moods, insanity.He did believe that a certain spiritual element survives afterbodily death; but he considered this soul without its body aninsignificant phantom, and he held that human personality, asopposed to this phantom, is an indivisible union of spirit andmatter. This view has serious implications for personalimmortality, as we shall see later. But it also provides aframework for a religious interpretation of psychedelicphenomena. The supposed necessity for religion to insist upona soul-body dichotomy traces back to that original sin of theI-It mind, dualism. And it also reflects a primitive line ofreasoning which Sir James Frazer described in The Golden Bough:"As the savage commonly explains the processes of inanimatenature by supposing that they are produced by living beingsworking in or behind the phenomena, so he explains the phenomenaof life itself. If an animal lives and moves, it can only be, hethinks, because there is a little animal inside which moves it:if a man lives and moves, it can only be because he has a littleman or animal inside who moves him. The animal inside the animal,the man inside the man, is the soul." Thus the Huron Indians supposed the soul had a headand body, arms and legs; for the Nootka the soul was a littlefellow who stood erect inside the head, and whenever he fellover, you lost your senses; for many primitives the soul was amanikin exactly resembling its possessor, and it was proper tospeak of fat souls and thin souls, or long souls and short souls.The soul could escape through the natural openings of the body;the Marquesans therefore would hold the mouth and nose of a dyingperson, and the Wakelbura of Australia would stick hot coals inthe ears of a corpse to allow themselves a running start beforethe dead man's ghost took after them. The soul also could escapein sleep and wander about, so the children of Transylvania wereinstructed to sleep with their mouths shut, and it was bad formto awaken anybody suddenly—or worse yet, to move the body ofa sleeper. In Bombay it was tantamount to murder to alter theappearance of a sleeper, painting a man's face perhaps or addingmustaches to a slumbering woman. Such notions may well amuse us,but one might ask how they differ in essence from the basicassumption of dualistic idealism. That assumption has always beendifficult to defend, and there is perhaps no compelling reasonfor us to defend it. The proposition that spirit is aproperty of matter has assumed importance only because thedualists have been so outspoken in their insistence that spiritis not a property of matter. Once you grant the formerproposition, it loses all its force as an anti-religiousargument. That chorus of "merely" and"simply" and "nothing more than" becomesabout as meaningful as the "nevermore" which Poe'sraven was trained to repeat. We do not even know, really, whatmatter actually is, and as far as Thomism is concerned,for example, LSD apparently does nothing to destroy the religiouspremise—as James defined it. If anything, it strengthens thepremise. From this point of view, it matters not that mysticalexperience has a chemical aspect. To say that it is physical aswell as psychical is to say nothing at all. "Of course itis," Saint Thomas might well reply. "And what ofthat?" In fact, some theologians and scientists alikeregard LSD as a kind of telescope with which to scan thedeep-space regions of the spirit: a discovery which will enableman to gain a far greater understanding of his religiousinstinct. Now mysticism can be produced in the laboratory. It canbe analyzed under experimental conditions with proper controls.And some have predicted this could lead to an eventualreconciliation of science and religion: to a science of religionsif not a scientific religion or indeed a religious science. That could be a bit optimistic, and it might appearto patronize religion. Considering their contrary viewpoints, itmight be asked whether the rational is suited to study theinstinctive any more than the instinctive is suited to study therational. But perhaps there is some hope for an accommodation. Asreligions professor G. Ray Jordan, Jr., put it, there is a chanceat least that intensive research with LSD "might do much toprovide empirical proof of a primary beingness in some senseconscious which is the mystical or intuitive base and perhapsgoal of man's religious aspirations and behavior." That goesdirectly to the heart of the matter: the possibility that thereis such a thing as absolute Being (not to be confused, by theway, with a Being) and that this gives life its direction andpurpose. Absolute Being in this sense means an ultimate nature,either realized or potential—as an oak tree has the ultimatenature of an oak tree (realized), and an acorn has the ultimatenature of an oak tree (potential). If it could be demonstratedthat absolute Being exists in the universe, this would of courseknock the existentialist props from Sartre's basic proposition.(Incidentally, it is interesting to note that Sartre onceparticipated in a mescaline experiment under psychiatricsupervision, and he did not like it at all, as Masters andHouston report the incident in their excellent study, TheVarieties of Psychedelic Experience. When Simone de Beauvoirtelephoned the hospital to ask how he was doing, Sartre told herunhappily he was fighting a losing battle with a devilfish. ) As for the common future of science and religion,there is another possibility, and it was suggested long ago in TheGolden Bough. Sir James considered science a naturaloutgrowth of religion, and in fact he traced a line ofdevelopment from magic to religion to science. As Sir James sawit, magic was actually a primitive form of science; it was basedon the assumption that there were immutable laws to the universeand that man could control them. Thus magicians fearlesslyordered the gods about, threatening to kill them or bash theirheads if they did not obey. But there was a fatal flaw to magic,and this lay "not in its general assumption of a sequence ofevents, determined by law, but in its total misconception of thenature of the particular laws." In the course of time thewiser magicians realized their spells were not working, and theyconcluded the gods must be running the show after all. Thus theAge of Magic became the Age of Religion; the magicians becamepriests, and they prayed to the gods they had sought to command.The point is that magic preceded religion "and that manessayed to bend nature to his wishes by the sheer force of spellsand enchantments before he strove to coax and mollify a coy,capricious, or irascible deity by the soft insinuation of prayerand sacrifice." But then man discovered new laws, and thesetruly seemed to work; the priests became proud magicians again,and the Age of Religion became the Age of Science. Sir Jamesthought this was well and good, as it should be. But he added: "Yet the history of thought should warn usagainst concluding that because the scientific theory of theworld is the best that has yet been formulated, it is necessarilycomplete and final.... In the last analysis magic, religion, andscience are nothing but theories of thought; and as science hassupplanted its predecessors, so it may hereafter be itselfsuperseded by some more perfect hypothesis, perhaps by sometotally different way of looking at the phenomena . . . of whichwe in this generation can form no idea." Today's magicians have found perhaps that theirspells do not work quite as they had hoped. Members of the drugmovement in turn may find Sir James's words prophetic, suggestingthat psychedelic insight can supersede both science and religionas we presently understand them. Certainly the cultists imaginethat they have just the thing Sir James indicated might benecessary: a totally different way of looking at phenomena. Curiously perhaps, scientists have seemed somewhatmore receptive to the idea than have religionists. Among thelatter, there are those who deny that psychedelics offer anyinsight into the actual nature of deity or cosmos. Contents Page | Chapter 5 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-19IA087-000632-B030-212http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065316 text/html 26295HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:53:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:17 GMTContent-length: 26076 The Private Sea - Chapter 5 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 5. The god of the East Toward the middle of the last century the poetCharles Baudelaire became a member of the famed Club desHaschischins in Paris. He was initiated into the mysteries ofhashish, one of the derivatives of psychedelic hemp, and he laterwrote of the drug in something less than glowing terms.Baudelaire declared that the "accursed sweetmeat"resulted in "an appalling thing, the marriage of a man tohimself." It led to "the individual's belief in his owngod-head." In short, it made a man feel he was God. A similar objection to the psychedelic experiencewas lodged more than a hundred years later by Professor R. C.Zaehner of Oxford, an authority on Eastern religions and a RomanCatholic. Zaehner set himself the task of replying to Huxley'senthusiastic claims for mescaline, and to play fair the professortook mescaline himself. "I disliked the experience," hereported, and what especially displeased him, as he put it, wasthe fact of losing control of oneself. "My consciousresistance to the drug was, indeed, very strong." That wasnot a very propitious set, as the cultists say, and as aconsequence no doubt Zaehner's experience was limited to a sortof silly jag which often occurs in the early stages of a completeexperience. Everything seemed utterly ridiculous and totallyfunny, and Zaehner laughed himself to tears. He described TheGolden Bough as one of the great comic classics, and he saidthe trouble with Jung was "he doesn't realize how dull hiscollective unconscious is." Cultists believe this period ofcosmic laughter reflects a first dawning of the awareness thatwords and normal perception patterns are both artificial andinadequate. In any case, Zaehner never went beyond it, and evenin his most mirthful moments, he said, he managed to distinguishbetween funny and sacred objects. Shown a reproduction of apraying figure in a nativity scene by Piero della Francesca, heremarked that this was "a holy thing not to be looked atwhen you're drugged." Later he evaluated the experience asin a sense anti-religious—not conformable with religiousexperience or in the same category— and he reported withsome pride that his normal religious consciousness "wasnever completely swamped." Zaehner's book, Mysticism,Sacred and Profane, is so far the most authoritative attackupon psychedelics from the viewpoint of orthodox religion, and init the professor denies the idea that drugs might give rise to agenuine state of mystical consciousness. Zaehner concedes thatpsychedelics might promote what he terms natural mysticism andmonistic mysticism, in which the subject feels a sense of unioneither with nature or with some impersonal Absolute; but they donot promote Theistic mysticism, in which the subjectencounters the transcendent, personal God of Judaism andChristianity. That at least is Zaehner's opinion, to which headds: "In the case of Huxley, as in that of the maniac, thepersonality seems to be dissipated into the objective world,while in the case of theistic mystics the human personality iswholly absorbed into the Deity, who is felt and experienced asbeing something totally distinct and other than the objectiveworld." In Theistic mysticism, Zaehner explains, thesubject is conscious only of God and loses his awareness of allother things. In Huxley's brand of mysticism, one identifieshimself with the external world—to the apparent exclusion ofGod. From his own point of view, Zaehner may be right.But there is reason to dispute even his basic premise—thatpsychedelic drugs cannot promote Theistic mysticism—and hisstatements in any case are somewhat confusing if not confused.The Zaehner test for authenticity does not compare thepsychedelic experience to mysticism as such. It compares it toWestern mysticism. And that is just the point. There also isEastern mysticism, which is older even than Western mysticism,and in fact it is just here that the drug movement offers itssecond major challenge to orthodox theology. Zaehner to the contrary, Westerners under theinfluence of psychedelics very often have reported overwhelmingawareness of a transcendent God; on the other hand, they alsohave reported the experience of alien concepts which franklyastonished—or even terrified—them, and these by andlarge have been the concepts of Eastern mysticism. Within thedrug movement, moreover, it seems fair to say that the tendencyhas been toward the latter type of experience. There aresubjective factors which may help to account for this tendency,and we shall discuss them later. But for the moment we can saythat psychedelic experience on the whole frequently appears tovalidate Eastern ideas about God, man, and the universe. This of course is a very broad statement andpossibly a very hazardous one; it assumes that it is possible tospeak of Eastern ideas as such, as if these constituted amonolithic system of belief. The fact is otherwise, it scarcelyneeds to be said, and in one sense it is just as misleading tospeak of Eastern religion as it is to speak of Western religion,thus bedding down together the Unitarian, the Roman Catholic, andthe Seventh-day Adventist. It is not even proper to speak ingeneral terms of Hinduism as such, or Buddhism as such, or evenHinyana Buddhism and Mahayana Buddhism as such. Each is a majorsystem which contains various levels of sophistication and pathsto the truth; in India, for example, you will find one Hinduworshiping a whole pantheon of Gods (330 million, according toone count, including the elephant-headed Gunputty), while anotherHindu contemplates a metaphysical abstraction: you will find oneHindu who denies the world and another Hindu who is totallyinvolved in the world. As you delve into Eastern thought youreach a level of interpretation which seems to correspond with atleast some elements in Western thought; at a still deeper levelit becomes almost impossible to say anything positive at all. Butwe shall call attention to some of these finer points, andmeanwhile the fact remains that there is something theWesterner refers to mentally when he uses that term, Easternideas. Perhaps in what follows it might be more correct to saythat we are describing Eastern ideas as they are generally viewedin the West, from a more or less superficial point of view, andthat for the most part (in this chapter) we are describing theideas of India rather than those of China or Japan: that is tosay, we are talking more about Hinduism than Buddhism, and arather rudimentary Hinduism at that. Within such a context, then,riding roughshod over nuances, it might be said that psychedelicexperience is Eastern in so far as it appears to validateimmanence rather than transcendence, monism rather thanpluralism, reincarnation rather than resurrection, nirvana ratherthan heaven, maya rather than hell, ignorance rather than evil,liberation rather than salvation, and self-knowledge rather thangrace, redemption, or atonement. As applied to the concept of God, transcendencerefers to a form of deity whose nature is wholly different fromman's. Theistic transcendence implies a wholly-other God who issome sort of supreme Person, in the sense at least that he canand does enter into a personal relationship with man. In stricttranscendence, God and man are no more the same person than amaster and his servant are the same person. In immanence, on theother hand, men partake of God's nature; God dwells in men, andthey are in fact a part of God. The concept of immanence as suchis perfectly acceptable from the viewpoint of Western Theism, solong as it does not deny altogether the element of transcendence.Thus it is fine to say that in God we live and move and have ourbeing, in the orthodox interpretation of that phrase, just so wedo not develop some fancy notion that we are him. Therelationship in this case is crudely that of a father and sonperhaps, as opposed to that of a master and his servant. But inpure immanence, or pantheism, God's nature and man's nature areidentical. God is just another word for mankind as a whole, orthe universe as a whole, or reality as a whole, or the life forceas a whole. In pantheism it is neither insanity nor heresy toimagine you are God, because in fact you are God. Westerntheology on the whole has tended to emphasize the transcendentaspect of God—certainly so at least in comparison to Easterntheology, which has tended to emphasize the immanent aspect ofGod. In Asia, moreover, the emphasis has been given to pureimmanence or pantheism, and God in any case is not conceived froma Theistic viewpoint as in any sense a person or being who dwellsapart. Consider next the doctrines of monism andpluralism. Pluralism insists upon the integrity of the individualsoul, self, or ego. In monism, the individual personality has nolasting reality. It is a passing phenomenon, illusory in nature,and, in the end, all of the individual selves will be absorbedagain into the godhead: into the One, the Whole, the Absolute,like drops of water in a termless sea. The godhead perhaps hastemporarily divided itself for some practical purpose, as thehand is divided into five fingers; or more likely the godhead issimply amusing itself, making all the world a stage on which itacts out the various roles—a method of killing eternity, asit were. In Hinduism, this monistic Absolute is known variouslyas Atman or Brahman, and all individual selves are but aspects ofAtman or the supreme Self. A Hindu holy man contemplates thesacred syllable OM, emblematic of the Atman godhead, and he asks,"What is that?" He is told, "Thou art that."Thus the wise Hindu is never jealous, for of whom should he bejealous? He sees no other, hears no other, knows no other, forwhat other is there to see, hear, or know? He hates no livingcreature—not even the tiger—for he knows that allcreatures are simply food: are born from food, live upon food,and then become food. As the hissing Hamadryad in Mary Poppinsput it: "It may be that to eat and be eaten are the samething in the end.... Bird and beast and stone and star—weare all one, all one." As cream in butter, as salt in the sea, Atman is ineverything and is everything. Atman is like a flame which assumesthe shape of each object it consumes. As the air in a jar isnevertheless the same as the air outside the jar, although ittakes the shape of the jar, so the Self in every self isnevertheless Atman. And the wise Hindu knows this. He knows thathe himself is the youth, the maiden, the old man bent upon hisstaff, the dark butterfly, the green parrot with red eyes, thethundercloud, seasons, and seas. Buddhists, in reverence, refuseto limit reality even to a universal Self, and thus they neverspeak of Atman. They speak instead of the Void or of the ClearLight of the Void. But the Void is not a void in the Westernsense; the expression is a via negativa which seeks toavoid the trap of language, because there are no words—evenAtman—to describe that which is beyond all words and beyondall determinations. But call it Atman or call it the Void,enlightenment comes when the individual self realizes it has noseparate identity beyond this Absolute. Such liberating awarenessis referred to as moksha by Hindus and satori byZen Buddhists, and with it comes that perfect peace in which theindividual self achieves nirvana and is absorbed into theAbsolute. In the Theistic mysticism of the West, strictlyspeaking the soul is not absorbed by the Absolute, or by God.Rather, the soul and God retain their distinctive identities, andtheir relationship is one of love. Love is the key word thatdistinguishes Theistic mysticism from Eastern mysticism; itimplies a relationship between two separate entities, and ittherefore preserves both the transcendent nature of God and theeverlasting integrity of the individual human soul. The soul isnot sucked up by the Absolute as water is sucked up by a sponge;the soul relates to the godhead in an act of love, and the soulin fact may be referred to, in this relationship, as the Bride ofChrist. As Buber expressed it in terms of his I-Thourelationship, I-Thou necessarily implies both an I and a Thou; Iis not Thou and Thou is not I, but I and Thou are united in love:hence the significance of that hyphen. In the Asian doctrine of absorption, of course, theachievement of nirvana can mean different things, depending uponthe interpretation. It can mean an actual release from the world,physically and psychically, or simply a new state ofconsciousness in which one is no longer deceived by his intellectand therefore views the world as it actually is, beyond languageand appearances. But nirvana commonly has been associated withthe former interpretation, and this leads directly to the Asianconcept of reincarnation—as opposed to resurrection.Resurrection was an Egyptian idea; it supposes that man has butone life upon the earth and thus only one chance to win his justand lasting reward, whatever that might be. On the judgment dayof Western theology, the soul will be reunited with its body tofind eternal life in a pluralistic heaven. Saint Thomas amongothers found it necessary to insist upon resurrection; with hisrejection of dualistic idealism, it seemed the only way toprovide for the personal immortality of the individual soul, andthis point was the main basis for Thomas' famous quarrel withAverroism. Averroes had denied the possibility of personalimmortality and had proposed instead the theory of monopsychism:the idea that mankind as a whole has a single mind in which allindividuals participate. It is said that Thomas consideredpersonal immortality the most important issue of the thirteenthcentury; he defended it vigorously, and Averroism wasanathematized by the bishop of Paris in 1270. But resurrection and the permanence of theindividual soul also are denied by the East. In the alternativedoctrine of reincarnation, the separate self does not reallyexist, and it is only the realization of this fact which permitsthe achievement of nirvana. But realization is difficult—farmore difficult than good works or avoiding sin. So a man is givennot one life in which to achieve it, but many lives. The soulpasses from body to body in a cycle of death and rebirth, as aleech proceeds from one blade of grass to the next, and each lifeoffers a fresh opportunity to make the great discovery in whichone recognizes at last the nature of the Grand Illusion. With thediscovery comes the death of the individual personality, whichnever was, and absorption into the monistic Absolute or theeverlasting peace of nirvana. This doctrine also has beeninterpreted symbolically as a poetic expression of the manystages that one man passes through in one lifetime, just asnirvana has been interpreted to mean a state of awareness ratherthan literal absorption into nirvana which leaves the earthbehind. But the goal in any case bears no similarity to thephenomenal heaven of the West. State of mind or state of Being,it is not a place, and the individual personality is not anaspect of it. In the same sense, there is no Eastern equivalentto the Western hell. If there is a hell, it is the world itself,or at least the deceiving world of appearances—thephenomenal illusion which is known as maya or sangsara.A man lives in hell when he fails to recognize reality. He livesin hell when he denies his own true nature and is thereforetormented by lust and desire. It is his mistaken sense ofindividuality which causes all of his pleasure and all of hispain, and there is far more pain than pleasure. He is a victim ofdualism, hopelessly enmeshed in meum et thrum. Because heimagines that there is an other, he envies or desires the other.Because he imagines that his little self is his real Self, heweeps at the thought of his own mortality —for he knows fullwell that the little self is finite and that one day it mustperish forever. But with enlightenment comes peace, serenity, andrelease from this hell. The wise man knows that there is noother, so he does not envy or desire the other; he is free fromcraving. The wise man knows that there is no little self, so hedoes not weep for his own mortality; he knows that there is onlyAtman or the Void, there is only the One, and he is that One, andtherefore he is in fact immortal and can never perish. It also follows, from the Eastern viewpoint, thatevil deeds are a product of ignorance. Evil in the Western senseis just one more example of dualistic perception. It suggeststhere is a very real, if negative, force which causes man to sinagainst the light. But ask the Western moralist what would happenif a potential murderer were somehow spirited away to a tropicalisland and left there alone. This would-be killer would havenobody to kill, and so of course he would not kill anybody. Onjudgment day, shall he be judged a murderer or not? The problemis easily resolved in the East, where all men in a manner ofspeaking are stranded upon that island. It is impossible to killanybody else, because nowhere in the universe is there anybodyelse. There is no other, except as imagined. In doing harm towhat he supposes is another person, therefore, a man does harmonly to himself. Homicide is impossible; there can only bepartial suicides. And so it is, according to the doctrine of maya,that men do wrong through ignorance. They sin against others, andthereby against themselves, because they are deluded as to theirtrue nature—because they fail to understand that they andtheir fellows are but elements of a monistic whole. Thusknowledge is the path to righteousness, and he who has knowledgewill never sin. Thus the goal of wisdom is liberation from maya. It follows that Eastern liberation is not the sameas Western salvation. The Westerner must work for his ownsalvation, but ultimately it comes to him only through the loveand mercy of God. In an act of grace, the transcendent deity maybestow his gifts upon some erring soul. For Christians, man'sredemption was secured by the sacrifice on the cross, a directintervention of the supernatural power on behalf of mankind. Butin the East there is no supernatural power to intervene. There isno forgiveness, for there is no God who is able to forgive. Theburden of liberation falls entirely upon the individual, who mustlift that burden himself; he cannot pray that it be lifted fromhim. He must strive for liberation through self-knowledge, and indoing so he is helped or hindered by his karma—the sum totalof a man's thoughts and actions during his lifetime or hislifetimes. He will be helped if it is good karma, hindered if itis bad karma. Bad karma might seem at first to correspond withWestern guilt, but it does not really. Guilt implies that sinfulaction is provoked by the active powers of darkness—by theforce called evil—and that free-willed man has perverselychosen darkness over light. A clear-cut choice and the freedom tochoose are basic assumptions in the doctrine of guilt,-and thewhole idea is foreign to Eastern thinking. There may be a choice,but there is nothing clear-cut about it. It is obscured by maya,which prevents a man from seeing it. If he could see it, there isno question what his action would be; he would do the right thingwithout a moment's hesitation, because the right thing is simplythe logical thing: it is the selfish, or if you will the Selfish,course to follow. Bad karma arises from ignorance, notperversity. It has been equated with cause-and-effect and withheredity. One remains a prisoner in the Net of Illusion becauseone has not been thinking the right thoughts—has not gainedthe proper knowledge, in other words—and heredity is anotherway of saying that karma follows you from one generation to thenext, or from one reincarnation to the next. Evangelists such asBilly Graham have complained bitterly that people no longerbelieve in guilt, and Saint Augustine in his time felt calledupon to condemn a similar trend. In the latter case, the falseprophet was the astrologer, who suggested that a man's faults layin his stars, while the tempter's voice today belongs to Freud.And perhaps America at least is moving toward an Eastern view ofsin. It has been said that an American takes delight in hisanalysis, talks about it freely, and has a penchant even to boastabout it, while a European is still ashamed of his libido andwould not dream of discussing it in public. But the world as illusion does not sit very wellwith traditional American concepts, and some would view this ideaas a greater threat to our values than pantheism, monism, or anyof the other Eastern isms. It seems to assert that life itself isa curse, and indeed the Hindu speaks of life as a terrible wheelof death and rebirth; reincarnation in his eyes is a curse, and anew birth is something to be avoided at any cost. This might betaken as a direct challenge to the Christian doctrine that beingas being is good (esse qua esse bottom est), and, asmentioned, some elements within the drug movement seem to havefound it an attractive idea. Moreover, it could be argued thatmodern physics supports the basic proposition with its formulathat energy equals mass times the velocity of light squared(E=MC2)—suggesting that matter after all is not the solid,substantial stuff we had supposed it to be. Nor is this justanother idea of some woolly-headed philosopher; it is an ideathat blew up Hiroshima and Nagasaki. These various ideas represent the religioustradition of half the world. Insofar as it confirms them,therefore, the psychedelic experience cannot be dismissed asnon-religious on the grounds laid down by Zaehner and Baudelaire,who really meant that it is non-Western. It seems fair to say, moreover, that most drugcultists do interpret the LSD experience as a confirmationof Eastern metaphysics. Timothy Leary, the high priest of LSD, has oftenappeared a bit vague on this point in his public statements.While he expresses himself for the most part in Hindu andBuddhist terminology, he tends to speak of the experience simplyas "religious" in nature—suggesting that thereligions of the East and West are fundamentally the same.Shortly after he founded his League for Spiritual Discovery,however, I asked Leary if there are not in fact certain basicdifferences between the Eastern and Western views. He agreed thatthere certainly are. I then asked him whether he thought LSDexperience supports the pantheistic Eastern God or thetranscendent Western God. And he told me there is no questionabout it—the experience supports the Eastern God, not theWestern. Even so, is it necessary to regard Eastern thinkingmerely as threat and challenge? As we have already indicated,many of the Eastern concepts are subject to different levels ofinterpretation—and some of them at least, at certain levels,may be entirely compatible with Western trends of thought.Furthermore, we might demonstrate that these Eastern ideas arenot so foreign to the West as they may seem. Contents Page | Chapter 6 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-20IA087-000632-B031-30http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065344 text/html 39295HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:53:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:10 GMTContent-length: 39076 The Private Sea - Chapter 6 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 6. The dome of many-colored glass "The Malay has been a fearful enemy formonths," Thomas De Quincey wrote in May 1818. "Ihave been every night, through his means, transported intoAsiatic scenes." The entry is contained in the famous drug addict'sautobiographical account, Confessions of an English OpiumEater. The passage which follows describes the Easternnightmares produced by the Eastern drug, and it is worth quotingat length: I know not whether others share in my feelings on this point; but I have often thought that if I were compelled to forego England, and to live in China . . . I should go mad. The causes of my horror lie deep; and some of them must be common to others. Southern Asia, in general, is the seat of awful images and associations. As the cradle of the human race, it would alone have a dim and reverential feeling connected with it. But there are other reasons. No man can pretend that the wild, barbarous, and capricious superstitions of Africa, or of savage tribes elsewhere, affect him in the way that he is affected by the ancient, monumental, cruel and elaborate religions of Indostan, etc. The mere antiquity of Asiatic things, of their institutions, histories, modes of faith, etc., is so impressive, that to me the vast age of the race and name overpowers the sense of youth in the individual. A young Chinese seems to me an antediluvian man renewed . . . nor can any man fail to be awed by the names of the Ganges, or the Euphrates. It contributes much to these feelings, that southern Asia is, and has been for thousands of years, the part of the earth most swarming with human life; the great officina gentian Man is a weed in these regions. The vast empires also, into which the enormous population of Asia has always been cast, give a further sublimity to the feelings associated with all Oriental names or images. In China, over and above what it has in common with the rest of southern Asia, I am terrified by the modes of life, by the manners, and the barrier of utter abhorrence, and want of sympathy, placed between us by feelings deeper than I can analyze. I could sooner live with lunatics, or brute animals. All this, and much more than I can say, or have time to say, the reader must enter into, before he can comprehend the unimaginable horror which these dreams of Oriental imagery, and mythological tortures, impressed upon me. Under the connecting feeling of tropical heat and vertical sunlights, I brought together all creatures, birds, beasts, reptiles, all trees and plants, usages and appearances, that are found in all tropical regions and assembled them together in China or Indostan. From kindred feelings, I soon brought Egypt and all her gods under the same law. I was stared at, hooted at, grinned at, chattered at, by monkeys, by paroquets, by cockatoos. I ran into pagodas: and was fixed, for centuries, at the summit, or in secret rooms.... I fled from the wrath of Brahma through all the forests of Asia. Vishnu hated me: Seeva laid wait for me. I came suddenly upon Isis and Osiris: I had done a deed, they said, which the ibis and crocodile trembled at. I was buried, for a thousand years, in stone coffins, with mummies and sphinxes, in narrow chambers at the heart of eternal pyramids. I was kissed, with cancerous kisses, by crocodiles; and laid, confounded with all unutterable slimy things, amongst reeds and Nilotic mud. I thus give the reader some slight abstraction of my Oriental dreams, which always filled me with such amazement at the monstrous scenery, that horror seemed absorbed, for a while, in sheer astonishment. Sooner or later came a reflux of feeling that swallowed up the astonishment, and left me, not so much in terror, as in hatred and abomination of what I saw. Over every form, and threat, and punishment, and dim sightless incarceration, brooded a sense of eternity and infinity that drove me into an oppression as of madness. . . . [And] many times the very same dream was broken up in the very same way: I heard gentle voices speaking to me . . . and instantly I awoke: it was broad noon; and my children were standing, hand in hand, at my bedside; come to show me their colored shoes, or new frocks, or to let me see them dressed for going out. I protest that so awful was the transition from the damned crocodile, and the other unutterable monsters and abortions of my dreams, to the sight of innocent human natures and of infancy, that, in the mighty and sudden revulsion of mind, I wept, and could not forbear it, as I kissed their faces. De Quincey's attitude might well reflect Englishprovincialism at its best, or worst, but surely he was correct inassuming that some of the causes of his horror are shared byothers. Undoubtedly he has summed up very well the reaction ofthe average Westerner to that nebulous something we have referredto as Eastern ideas. A similar attitude was expressed, forexample, by Grecophile Edith Hamilton in her comparison of Greekand Eastern art. The Greeks, she wrote, were the firstWesterners, introducing into the ancient world somethingcompletely new: the rule of reason and the supremacy of therational intellect. The Greeks loved order, they loved life, andthey embraced with joy the beauty of the visible world. They werethe first people to play, and their games were conducted on agrand scale. But this point of view was unique; it did not belong"to the immense expanse and the multitudinous populations ofthe East." With its oppressed masses and its wretchedconditions of life, the East was preoccupied with theunseen—and with death. So insecure and unbearable was thevisible world that men could find hope only by rejecting outsidefact and turning inward to the invisible world of spirit andintuition. Thus a tomb in Egypt and a theater in Greece."The one comes to the mind as naturally as the other."Thus a grotesquely stylized Hindu bronze of Shiva, its many armsand hands curving outward—and the Olympic Hermes, "aperfectly beautiful human being, no more, no less." When Egypt ended, the East went on ever farther in the direction Egypt had pointed. The miseries of Asia are a fearful page in history. Her people found strength to endure by denying any meaning and any importance to what they could not escape. The Egyptian world where dead men walked and slept and feasted was transmuted into what had always been implicit in its symbolism, the world of the spirit. In India, for centuries the leader of thought to the East, ages long since, the world of the reason and the world of the spirit were divorced and the universe handed over to the latter.... The mystical artist always sees patterns. The symbol, never quite real, tends to be expressed less and less realistically, and as the reality becomes abstracted the pattern comes forward. The wings on Blake's angels do not look like real wings, nor are they there because wings belong to angels. They have been flattened, stylized, to provide a curving pointed frame, the setting required by the pattern of the composition. In Hindoo art and its branches, stylization reaches its height. Human figures are stylized far beyond the point of becoming a type; they too are made into patterns, schematic designs of the human body, an abstraction of humanity. In the case of an Eastern rug all desire to express any semblance of reality has gone. Such a work of art is pure decoration. It is the expression of the artist's final withdrawal from the visible world, essentially his denial of the intellect.... Again, the gigantic temples of Egypt, those massive immensities of granite which look as if only the power that moves in the earthquake were mighty enough to bring them into existence, are something other than the creation of geometry balanced by beauty. The science and the spirit are there, but what is there most of all is force, inhuman force, calm but tremendous, overwhelming. It reduces to nothingness all that belongs to man. He is annihilated.... The Greek temple [on the other hand] is the perfect expression of the pure intellect illumined by the spirit. No other great buildings anywhere approach its simplicity.... Majestic but human, truly Greek. No superhuman force as in Egypt; no strange supernatural shapes as in India; the Parthenon is the home of humanity at ease, calm, ordered, sure of itself and the world. The Greeks flung a challenge to nature in the fullness of their joyous strength. They set their temples on the summit of a hill overlooking the wide sea, outlined against the circle of the sky.... To the Greek architect man was the master of the world. In so far as it remains Greek, and thereforerational, the Western mind no doubt abhors Oriental images andthe metaphysical concepts they might seem to imply. Indeed, manyOccidentals have emerged from a psychedelic experience with thesame sense of horror and relief De Quincey felt when he awakenedfrom his opium-haunted dreams to find himself safe again inmerry, common-sense England. As we have already suggested,however, those images and concepts are not as remote as they mayappear. They are and always have been an aspect of Westerntradition, as counterpoint if nothing more, and it would probablybe possible to demonstrate their influence in almost every phaseof Western history. We have no intention of doing so. The task isbeyond us and would serve no useful purpose here; without anyattempt at comprehensiveness, however, we shall try to show howthis or that thread of Eastern thought has appeared from time totime in the Western fabric. The earliest of the threads can be picked up inGreece itself. It was Heraclitus who observed that no man canstep twice into the same stream. The phenomenal universe is notthe secure and dependable piece of real estate our sensessuggest; on the contrary, it is in a constant state of flux andchaos. Nothing stays the same. The only thing that never changes,said Heraclitus, is the fact that everything is changing. Thusthe visible world of the West was called into question from thevery beginning, and philosophical attempts to refute Heraclitusled in turn to the hypothesis of an invisible realm beyond thesenses. Parmenides, for example, proposed that reality consistedof pure Being: an eternal One, never changing, which had nodescribable qualities whatever, except for the fact that itexisted—and since existence in this sense did not change,what then of that phenomal world where everything changed?Obviously, it did not really exist. Then came Plato with his eternal Essences or Ideas,which Gordon Wasson has suggested were psychedelic in origin."The eye and the ear and the other senses are full ofdeception," said Plato. The soul is a helpless prisoner ofthe body. It is "simply fastened and glued to thebody." Or so it was until philosophy came to its rescue.Referring to the soul in the feminine gender, Plato said thatphilosophy advised her to abstain from all use of the senses"and be gathered up and collected into herself, bidding hertrust in herself and her own pure apprehension of pure existence,and to mistrust whatever comes to her through other channels andis subject to variation; for such things are visible andtangible, but what she sees in her own nature is intelligible andinvisible." The soul is "dragged by the body into theregion of the changeable, and wanders and is confused; the worldspins round her, and she is like a drunkard, when she toucheschange.... But when returning into herself she reflects, then shepasses into the other world, the region of purity, and eternity,and immortality, and unchangeableness, which are her kindred, andwith them she ever lives." Platonism evolved into the Neo-Platonism expoundedby Plotinus, who preached a doctrine of mystical union with theAbsolute. Both Platonism and Neo-Platonism in turn wereassimilated by Christianity, and in fact they provided themetaphysical roots of the early church. This was due largely tothe enormous influence of Saint Augustine, who was aNeo-Platonist before he became a Christian. Plato's pure Ideaswere interpreted to be the thoughts of God, and as such Platonicphilosophy continued as the mainstay of Roman Catholicism untilthe rediscovery of Aristotle in the thirteenth century. SaintThomas became the most articulate spokesman for this revivedschool of thought, arguing the case for intellect, reason, andthe interdependence of the spiritual and the material. And so itwas that Platonism gave way at last to Aristotelianism, mysticismto empiricism, and Augustinianism to Thomism. Thomism in essencewas officially adopted by the Roman Catholic Church. But thebreak really was not all that sharp, even within the church, andPlatonism has continued to be a major influence in Westerntheology and philosophy. Today's drug movement might even bedescribed as a sort of Neo-Platonist revival. The point is that Plato was talking Net of Illusiontalk and that this so-called Eastern idea is entirely within theWestern tradition—the idea that the phenomenal world doesnot really exist; or the idea that our truncated senses cannotperceive ultimate reality; or the idea that our intellectdeceives us. Take Berkeley, take Hume. Take almost any Westernphilosopher you would care to name. Take modern physics, for thatmatter. It seems clear that the West mistrusts the visible worldjust as much as the East does, and always has. The only realissue has been, in James's terminology: Does some unseen orderlie beyond that visible world, and should we seek to adjustthereto? Platonism also contains other Oriental threads.Plato, too, spoke of a morality based wholly on knowledge. Hespoke of reincarnation and of concepts equivalent to nirvana andkarma. For example, Socrates in the Phaedo is discussingthe fate of the soul after death: That soul, I say, herself invisible, departs to the invisible world—to the divine and immortal and rational: thither arriving, she is secure of bliss and is released from the error and folly of men, their fears and wild passions and all other human ills, and forever dwells, as they say of the initiated, in company with the gods.... But the soul which has been polluted, and is impure at the time of her departure, and is the companion and servant of the body always, and is in love with and fascinated by the body . . . do you suppose that such a soul will depart pure and unalloyed? Such souls are held fast by the corporeal. Theyhaunt sepulchres and tombs. They . . . wander about such places in payment of the penalty of their former evil way of life; and they continue to wander until through the craving after the corporeal which never leaves them they are imprisoned finally in another body. And they may be supposed to find their prisons in the same natures which they have had in their former lives.... men who have followed after gluttony, and wantonness, and drunkenness, and have had no thought of avoiding them, would pass into asses and animals of that sort.... And those who have chosen the portion of injustice, and tyranny, and violence, will pass into wolves, or into hawks and kites. If the Greeks worshipped Apollo, god of reason,they were devoted also to Dionysus, the wine-drunk god ofinstinct and mysticism. The cult of the Eleusinian Mysteries paidhomage to Dionysus, and it is believed the Mysteries included atheory of reincarnation. The possibility that the cult utilizedsome sort of psychedelic host would appear to gain considerablesupport from a Plutarch fragment, quoted by Edith Hamilton, whichis thought to describe the Eleusinian initiation rites:"When a man dies he is like those who are initiated into theMysteries. Our whole life is a journey by tortuous ways withoutoutlet. At the moment of quitting it come terrors, shudderingfear, amazement. Then a light that moves to meet you, puremeadows that receive you, songs and dances and holyapparitions." As we shall see later, this passage suggests aremarkable parallel between the Mysteries and the contemporarydrug movement's esoteric interpretation of the Tibetan Book ofthe Dead. Reincarnation also was entertained as a doctrine bysome of those Gnostic sects that flourished during the firstthree centuries of Christianity. The sects were Platonist in thatthey took a very negative view of existence in the world ofappearances, and they taught that release could be obtainedthrough a secret gnosis or knowledge of the divine order.They also assumed Plato's concept of the Demiurge—animperfect creator god who made the earth, as opposed to thesupreme and perfect god who exists as pure Being. They made ofthe Demiurge an evil, fallen deity who was responsible for thecreation of matter and hence for the curse of phenomenalexistence, for the fall from pure Being, for the Net of Illusion.The sects were a curious hodgepodge of Christian dogma, magic,and Eastern metaphysics. Christianity had to absorb Gnosticism, just as ithad to absorb Neo-Platonism, and the early church was plagued inaddition by a whole spectrum of Asian-flavored heresies: forexample, the Albigenses, the Bogomiles, the Paulicians. Thesesects adulterated their Christianity with strong doses of Easternidealism, including the concept of the Demiurge and a hatred ofmatter. Similarly, Judaism had come under the dualistic influenceof Zoroastrianism during the Babylonian Captivity. The preciseextent of the East's impact upon the development of Judaism andChristianity is impossible to measure at this point in history;indeed, there is an equally frustrated body of scholarship whichhas attempted to demonstrate a Western impact upon Easternreligions during some period in the misty past. But there clearlywas some East-to-West metaphysical commerce, and this has led tosome rather airy speculation that the Bible contains an esotericteaching along Eastern lines. Much is made of the fact that Jesusspoke in parables, and it is suggested that these perhaps wereOriental abstractions presented in parabolic style for thebenefit of his unsophisticated flock. The people were not readyfor meat, so he fed them milk. "And with many such parablesspoke he the word unto them [the multitudes], as they were ableto hear it. But without a parable spoke he not to them: and whenthey were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples." Hidden meaning is thus read into many preachments."The kingdom of God cometh not with observation." (Thesenses are trapped in the Net of Illusion.) "Neither shallthey say, Lo here! or, lo there? for, behold, the kingdom of Godis within you." (You are God.) "Inasmuch as ye havedone it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have doneit unto me." (We are a monistic One. ) "Love thyneighbor as thyself." (You and your neighbor are the sameperson.) "Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?"(We are all the same person.) "If any man will come afterme, let him deny himself.... For whosoever will save his lifeshall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shallfind it." (You must obliterate the ego to recognize yourtrue Self.) "God is able of these stones to raise upchildren unto Abraham." (God is immanent in matter. )"A good man out of the treasure of the heart bringeth forthgood things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringethforth evil things." (Karma.) And so on. Small wonder, then,that no man dared ask Jesus any question after he declared,"Thou art not far from the kingdom of God." And the"I AM THAT I AM" of the Old Testament is obviously aZen statement of pure experience. If nothing else, suchconjecture indicates that truly great thoughts are like thecommerce clause of the U.S. Constitution: they can be interpretedto meet any need in any period. The thread of pantheism can be picked up again inthe monopsychism of Averroes, the Great Commentator who waslargely responsible for reintroducing Aristotle to the Westernworld. His theories fell short of pure pantheism, perhaps, forthey included a remote First Cause; but they were both Easternand heretical in their monistic denial of personal immortality,and they had gained considerable popularity in thirteenth-centuryEurope before Saint Thomas managed to reclaim Aristotle for thefaith. Pantheistic tendencies appeared in the medieval Jewishmysticism of the Cabala, and the latter movement did much toshape the thought of Spinoza in the seventeenth century. Thephilosophy of the Jewish Dutchman was wholly pantheistic,equating God with creative Nature and creative Nature with God.Spinoza also denied the possibility of personal immortality. Hedid, however, speak of the immortality of the mind in languagewhich might well set psychedelic bells to ringing:"Nevertheless we feel and know by experience that we areeternal.... Although, therefore, we do not recollect that weexisted before the body, we feel that our mind, in so far as itinvolves the essence of the body under the form of eternity, iseternal, and that this existence of the mind cannot be limited bytime nor manifested through duration." (A hundred microgramsof LSD will make that statement perfectly intelligible.) For hisintellectual pains, Spinoza was excommunicated by his temple inAmsterdam. But he had considerable influence on laterphilosophers, including Hegel. Hegel's system of absoluteidealism proposed that the universe consists of a single absoluteMind or Spirit which is attempting to realize and comprehend itsown nature through an evolutionary process. Hegel in turninfluenced such disparate thinkers as Karl Marx, Teilhard deChardin, and Thomas J. J. Altizer. Some of the more fragile nuances of Easternphilosophy perhaps are best caught in poetry—and the poetryof the West abounds in Oriental themes or hints of them. We couldquote countless examples but will limit ourselves to only a few,offering them in the hope they may serve to sharpen some of theseideas, and to show that the ideas as such have a definite placein Western literature as well as philosophy. Shakespeare, to begin with, certainly lends himselfto an esoteric interpretation. The Delphic injunction, KnowThyself, is echoed in Polonius' fatherly advice to Laertes:"This above all: to thine own self be true, and it mustfollow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to anyman." That might easily be taken to reflect the Hindu ideathat men abuse one another only through ignorance of theirmonistic continuity, and that knowledge of the true Selftherefore will automatically result in a perfect morality. AndHamlet himself sums up that delusion of the rational intellectwhich gives rise to the dualistic concept of evil: "There isnothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so."Shakespeare plainly is a commerce-clause bard par excellence, andnobody has described the Net of Illusion so well as his Prospero: Our revels now are ended. These our actors, As I foretold you, were all spirits and Are melted into air, into thin air; And, like the baseless fabric of this vision, The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, The solemn temples, the great globe itself, Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve, And, like this insubstantial pageant faded, Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded with a sleep. We must of course include John Donne: "No manis an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of thecontinent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away by thesea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as wellas if a manor of thy friends or of thine own were; any man'sdeath diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind; andtherefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tollsfor thee." Blake's poetry can be taken as a whole. It rejectsthe rational intellect and its dualistic perceptions, and indeedit gives the Eden story an interpretation quite similar to thatsuggested in an earlier chapter: Serpent Reasonings us entice Of Good & Evil, Virtue & Vice.... Two Horn'd Reasoning, Cloven Fiction, In Doubt, which is Self contradiction, A dark Hermaphrodite We stood, Rational Truth, Root of Evil & Good. Blake had his own term for the Net of Illusion:"the mind-forg'd manacles." He rejected the intellect,the phenomenal world, the God of Theism. He rejected everythingbut man's eternal spirit, and he looked back with longing to theUniversal Brotherhood of Eden, to the Universal Man, to the"Immortal Man that cannot Die." Blake in fact was aGnostic, and his Prophetic Books revive the concept of theDemiurge. His Urizen ("your reason"?) is that sinisterdeity who was responsible for the fall from pure Being and theworld of appearances. Earth was not: nor globes of attraction; The will of the Immortal expanded Or contracted his all flexible senses; Death was not, but eternal life sprung. Then came Urizen with his ten thousands ofthunders, and a shadow of horror was risen in Eternity. The Eternal mind, bounded, began to roll Eddies of wrath ceaseless round & round, And the sulphureous foam, surgeing thick, Settled, a lake, bright & shining clear, White as the snow on the mountains cold. Forgetfulness, dumbness, necessity, In chains of the mind locked up, Like fetters of ice shrinking together, Disorganiz'd, rent from Eternity . . . That eternal life, the furnace of all creation, wasthe subject of Blake's best-known poem, which Alfred Kazin hasaptly termed "a hymn to pure being." Pure Being, from which sprang the Tyger. In what distant deeps or skies Burnt the fire of thine eyes? On what wings dare he aspire? What the hand dare seize the fire? After Blake, as might be expected, the Romanticpoets come to mind—and one of the best examples wouldnaturally be Shelley, who abandoned rationalism and atheism tobecome a full-blown Platonic idealist. As for the Passing Paradeof Phenomena, compare that fragile speech of Prospero's andShelley's stark: "My name is Ozymandias, king of kings: Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!" Nothing beside remains. Round the decay Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare The lone and level sands stretch far away. Just as our contemporary mystics are dismissed uponthe grounds of biochemical imbalance, so too has the Romanticmovement been supplied now with a medical interpretation. Thepoets did not know it, but the source of their inspiration was abacillus, the mood of that period resulting from the prevalenceof tuberculosis. Keats was a victim of the disease, althoughShelley insisted the critics had done his friend in, andShelley's Platonic philosophy finds full expression in his elegyto the dead poet: The One remains, the many change and pass; Heaven's light forever shines, Earth's shadows fly; Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass, Stains the white radiance of Eternity, Until Death tramples it to fragments.—Die, If thou wouldst be with that which thou dost seek! Follow where all is fled!—Rome's azure sky, Flowers, ruins, statues, music, words, are weak The glory they transfuse with fitting truth to speak. Then to Wordsworth, poet of the mescal drinkers.His ode, "Intimations of Immortality from Recollections ofEarly Childhood," includes the provocative stanza: Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home: Heaven lies about us in our infancy! Shades of the prison-house begin to close Upon the growing Boy, But He beholds the light, and whence it flows, He sees it in his joy; The Youth, who daily farther from the east Must travel, still is Nature's Priest, And by the vision splendid Is on his way attended; At length the Man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day. The poem as a whole might appear to support thedoctrine of pre-existence or reincarnation—an implicationwhich Wordsworth later admitted "has given pain to some goodand pious persons." He protested he had not intended"to inculcate such a belief." The poem was concernedwith "that dream-like vividness and splendour which investobjects of sight in childhood," and Wordsworth had castabout in his mind for some device to express that vision,deciding finally to picture it as "presumptive evidence of aprior state of existence." He explained further: "Itook hold of the notion of pre-existence as having sufficientfoundation in humanity for authorizing me to make for my purposethe best use of it I could as a poet." The argument about this stanza, and aboutWordsworth's intentions, is extremely significant. It offers us akey. And that key fits many locks. It may give us access to the real issues and deepermeanings that are still half-hidden below the surface of Easternphilosophy, the drug movement, and radical theology. Professor Arthur Beatty, a Wordsworth authority,suggested that the poet really meant to say: "It is as ifour birth were but a sleep and a forgetting." And that isthe key. Consider, for example, a comment that Coleridgemade about the poem: But the ode was intended for such readers only as had been accustomed to watch the flux and reflux of their inmost nature, to venture at times into the twilight realms of consciousness, and to feel a deep interest in modes of inmost being, to which they know that the attributes of time and space are inapplicable and alien, but which yet can not be conveyed save in symbols of time and space. For such readers the sense is sufficiently plain, and they will be as little disposed to charge Mr. Wordsworth with believing the Platonic pre-existence in the ordinary interpretation of the words, as I am to believe that Plato himself ever meant or taught it. The italics are ours. And the point is simply this:that poets are poets, and they express themselves in the languageof poetry —saying "is" when they mean "asif." Prophets are poets as well, and so are the greatphilosophers. And all poets, of whatever kind, have found itnecessary at times to express their ideas in terms of symbol; thetools of their trade are the simile, the metaphor, the poeticimage, the myth. The Greeks indeed may have held themselves alooffrom the formal figures of speech, but they could and did makeample use of myth. So, too, perhaps did Jesus, Buddha, and thosefaceless authors of the Hindu holy books and the Old Testament.They were poets all. And we can only guess how often their "is"really means "as if." One is tempted to ask, ofcourse, why they couldn't just come out with it—say whatthey meant and so have done with it—and the question is fairenough. In some cases, however, the people in fact may not havebeen ready for meat. In some cases it may be that the poethimself only half-knew what he meant—knew what he felt, allright, but could not quite put his finger upon it. In some caseshe may have said what he meant and meant what he said, failinghimself to apprehend the deeper meaning. And finally: he knewwhat he felt, and he knew what it meant; but what he felt andwhat he knew could not be expressed in conventional language.Such language simply did not apply in those twilight realms ofconsciousness where the poet explored the modes of inmost Being. This is not as fuzzy as it may sound. Many of thediscoveries of modern physics cannot be expressed in conventionallanguage either; the physicists have been forced to leavelanguage behind altogether, resorting instead to a complexmathematical symbolism—a form of myth, if youwill—which cannot be retranslated into words. Many popularbooks have been written for the general public on the theory ofrelativity, for example; the fact remains that you cannot reallyunderstand the theory unless you have the math. Or so at leastthe mathematicians tell us, and we are prepared to take theirword for it, while we are by no means ready to take the mysticsat their word for anything. But the relativity theory is no lessvalid because it is expressed symbolically, for in facteverything is expressed that way. Expression as such is bydefinition symbolic: only the thing-in-itself is something morethan a symbol of itself. Language and math, therefore, areequally symbolic; they are simply different kinds of symbolism.In any case, it follows that Plato did not necessarily mean thatpeople really return to life as wolves, hawks, and kites; Blakedid not necessarily mean that there really exists a deitycomparable to Urizen; and "is" does notnecessarily mean "is" every time it occurs inthe various Hindu, Buddhist, Christian, and Jewish scriptures. Itmay in many cases mean "as if," and, when sointerpreted, these various scriptures perhaps are closer inmeaning than they appear. Using the key provided us, a case could be madethat contemporary developments in theology and psychedelicexperience can be explained essentially in terms of two basicmyths and the conflict between them: the myth of the Demiurge andthe myth of Ulysses. Let us leave no doubt as to our own meaning. As weinterpret it, the Demiurge is a symbol of the rationalmind—of the cerebral cortex, which separates man from thebeasts and (it may be) from much else besides. As for the Ulyssesmyth, we take it to suggest the presence of an evolutionarypurpose in the cosmos: that is to say, an inherent state of Beingas yet unrealized. We shall return to these concepts later. Meanwhile,turning from Wordsworth, we skip ahead a few decades and lookacross the ocean from Europe to America. Contents Page | Chapter 7 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-21IA087-000632-B031-56http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065357 text/html 30777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:53:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:01 GMTContent-length: 30558 The Private Sea - Chapter 7 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 7. Yankee Hindoos The Orient's first substantial impact upon Americaoccurred in a rather indirect manner, in 1492. Or the actual datemight be placed two centuries earlier: it could well be arguedthat America owes its discovery to the Great Khan Kublai, lord ofthe Tartars, for the hospitality he showed Marco Polo in thethirteenth century. Columbus of course discovered the newcontinent while searching for the fabulous Cathay about whichMarco Polo had written—and there is some irony in the factthat Polo's book contains one of the earliest accounts of thepsychedelic experience. Passing through Persia, the Venetian merchantlearned the history of the Old Man of the Mountain, who lived ina castle which concealed a magnificent hidden valley. The Old Maninvited youths to the castle, drugged them with hashish, and hadthem carried into the Valley of Delights, where they were winedand dined and entertained by dainty damsels. After four or fivedays the youths were carried back into the castle and told theyhad been in the Moslem Paradise. The Old Man could send themthere any time he wanted, he said, if they would carry out hiswishes—which usually meant killing somebody. This band ofhappy cutthroats became known as "hashshashins," fromwhich we have derived the word assassin. The barbarian invasions and the fall of Rome hadcut the old Silk Road into Hither Asia, and later the Crusadesserved to divert Europe's attention still further from theOrient. There had been virtually no contact whatever between Eastand West when Marco Polo arrived in Tartary with his father anduncle, and indeed the Polos were the first Westerners Kublai Khanhad ever seen. The promise of a restored relationship wasshattered when the Chinese overthrew the Tartars and slammed thedoor on foreigners; then the Turks spread across Central Asia,effectively padlocking the door—and just incidentallyforcing Columbus to seek a sea route to Cathay. The Englishpenetrated India by the late seventeenth century, following thePortuguese; but China kept all foreign devils out until themiddle of the last century, and Japan was a terra incognitauntil Admiral Matthew Perry sailed into Tokyo Bay in 1853. It is understandable, then, that America was a longtime making its own discovery of the East. The young country'sfirst real introduction to Asian philosophy was provided by theNew England Transcendentalists, whose writings were often abewildering blend of Unitarianism and Orientalism, of Yankeeself-reliance and Hindu self-abnegation. The influence ofRomantic idealism and German philosophy also was evident. Thusreaders of The Dial in 1841 found themselves asking, withFrederic Henry Hedge: Hath this world, without me wrought, Other substance than my thought? Lives it by my sense alone, Or by essence of its own? Margaret Fuller wrote of Man as a whole: "Asthis whole has one soul and one body, any injury or obstructionto a part, or to the meanest member, affects the whole. Man cannever be perfectly happy or virtuous till all men are so."Thoreau wrote of his inspiration: I hear beyond the range of sound, I see beyond the range of sight, New earths and skies and seas around, And in my day the sun doth pale his light.... It speaks with such authority, With so serene and lofty tone, That idle Time runs gadding by, And leaves me with Eternity alone.... Such fragrance round my couch it makes, More rich than are Arabian drugs, That my soul scents its life and wakes The body up beneath its perfumed rugs. As the last stanza suggests, Thoreau undoubtedlywould have no part of LSD were he alive today. In Waldenhe observed, "I prefer the natural sky to an opium-eater'sheaven." The point is, however, that Thoreau could turnhimself on, needing only that natural sky for a psychedelic, andhe was wholly preoccupied with the modes of inmost being. Therewas no object in going around the world to count the cats inZanzibar, he said. "Be rather the Mungo Park, the Lewis andClark and Frobisher, of your own streams and oceans.... Nay, be aColumbus to whole new continents and worlds within you, openingnew channels, not of trade, but of thought. Every man is the lordof a realm beside which the earthly empire of the Czar is but apetty state, a hummock left by the ice.... it is easier to sailmany thousand miles through cold and storm and cannibals, in agovernment ship, with five hundred men and boys to assist one,than it is to explore the private sea, the Atlantic and PacificOcean of one's being alone." As for the dualism of good and evil: "I loveto see that Nature is so rife with life that myriads can beafforded to be sacrificed and suffered to prey on one another....The impression made on a wise man is that of universal innocence.Poison is not poisonous after all, nor are any woundsfatal." As for the verbal mind: "I know not the firstletter of the alphabet. I have always been regretting that I wasnot as wise as the day I was born." As for the rationalsense of time: "Time is but the stream I go a-fishing in. Idrink at it; but while I drink I see the sandy bottom and detecthow shallow it is. Its thin current slides away, but eternityremains. I would drink deeper; fish in the sky, whose bottom ispebbly with stars." And as for the comforts of formalreligion: "I believe that men are generally still a littleafraid of the dark, though the witches are all hung, andChristianity and candles have been introduced." One passage in Walden strikes a particularlyresponsive chord for psychedelic cultists. Indeed, William Jamessingled out the same passage as exemplifying those moments we allhave "when the universal life seems to wrap us round withfriendliness" and those hours "when the goodness andbeauty of existence enfold us like a dry warm climate, or chimethrough us as if our inner ears were subtly ringing with theworld's security." The oft-quoted passage: I have never felt lonesome, or in the least oppressed by a sense of solitude, but once, and that was a few weeks after I came to the woods, when, for an hour, I doubted if the near neighborhood of man was not essential to a serene and happy life. To be alone was something unpleasant. But I was at the same time conscious of a light insanity in my mood, and seemed to foresee my recovery. In the midst of a gentle rain while these thoughts prevailed, I was suddenly sensible of such sweet and beneficent society in Nature, in the very pattering of the drops, and in every sound and sight around my house, an infinite and unaccountable friendliness all at once like an atmosphere sustaining me, as made the fancied advantages of human neighborhood insignificant, and I have never thought of them since. Every little pine needle expanded and swelled with sympathy and befriended me. I was distinctly made aware of the presence of something kindred to me, even in scenes which we are accustomed to call wild and dreary, and also that the nearest of blood to me and humanest was not a person nor a villager, that I thought no place could ever be strange to me again.... "How vast and profound is the influence of the subtile powers of Heaven and of Earth! We seek to perceive them, and we do not see them; we seek to hear them, and we do not hear them; identified with the substance of things, they cannot be separated from them." . . . I only know myself as a human entity; the scene, so to speak, of thoughts and affections; and am sensible of a certain doubleness by which I can stand as remote from myself as from another. However intense my experience, I am conscious of the presence and criticism of a part of me, which, as it were, is not a part of me, but spectator, sharing no experience, but taking note of it, and that is no more I than it is you. When the play, it may be the tragedy, of life is over, the spectator goes his way. It was a kind of fiction, a work of the imagination only, so far as he was concerned. One wonders whether Huxley's antagonist R. C.Zaehner would dismiss that as natural mysticism or as monisticmysticism, or possibly as both. Theistic it is not. Emerson probably did more than anybody else in histime to translate Eastern ideas, as he understood them, into theAmerican idiom. He informed his readers about a school ofthought, across the sea, which held that "what we callNature, the external world, has no real existence—is onlyphenomenal. Youth, age, property, conditions, events,persons—self, even— are successive maias(deceptions) through which Vishnu mocks and instructs thesoul." He added his opinion: "I think Hindoo books thebest gymnastics for the mind, as showing treatment. All Europeanlibraries might almost be read without the swing of this giganticarm being suspected. But these Orientals deal with worlds andpebbles freely." Emerson's poetry is freighted with Easternimagery, and his "Brahma," for example, is almost aliteral rendering of a passage from the Katha Upanishad: If the red slayer think he slays, Or if the slain think he is slain, They know not well the subtle ways I keep, and pass, and turn again. For Yankee monists, Transcendentalism had this tooffer: I am the owner of the sphere, Of the seven stars and the solar year, Of Caesar's hand and Plato's brain, Of Lord Christ's heart and Shakespeare's strain. As with Blake, Walt Whitman's poetry as a wholeseems to reflect the viewpoint of Eastern mysticism. In his lateryears Whitman gives the impression of somehow being in apermanent state of satori, and James indeed suggested thatWhitman probably had "a chronic mystical perception."Rather tempting bait for speculation is offered by the fact thatWhitman for so many years was little more than a journalistichack. What was the source, then, of the inspiration which gave usLeaves of Grass? Following Wasson, it might be assertedthat the Good Gray Poet at some period in his life was introducedto hashish or peyote or some other psychedelic, perhaps on thattrip he made to New Orleans. The idea is farfetched, and we shallnot pursue it; the fact remains that, spontaneously or otherwise,Whitman suddenly began to write poetry which echoes and re-echoeswith Oriental and psychedelic intuitions: I celebrate myself, and sing myself, And what I assume you shall assume, For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you. Maybe it wasn't hashish; maybe it was Hegel.According to an 1882 entry in Specimen Days, the mostprofound theme to occupy the mind of man is the relation betweenthe Me and the Not Me of the universe. And while Kant andSchelling perhaps had supplied us with partial answers, "G.F. Hegel's fuller statement of the matter probably remains thelast best word that has been said upon it . . . illuminating thethought of the universe, and satisfying the mystery thereof tothe human mind, with a more consoling scientific assurance thanany yet." Long before that entry was made, however, Whitmanhad written in his journal of 1847: "I cannot understand themystery, but I am always conscious of myself as two—-as mysoul and I." He was not contained between his hat and boots,he later wrote. There also was "the unseen soul of me."There also was the square deific, the One. There also was: Santa Spirita, breather, life, Beyond the light, lighter than light . . . Ethereal, pervading all, (for without me what were all? what were God?) Essence of forms, life of the real identities, permanent, positive, (namely the unseen.) Life of the great round world, the sun and stars, and of man, I, the general soul . . . And just in case anybody should have missed hismeaning: What do you suppose creation is? What do you suppose will satisfy the soul, except to walk free and own no superior? What do you suppose I would intimate to you in a hundred ways, but that man or woman is as good as God? And that there is no God any more divine than Yourself? And that that is what the oldest and newest myths finally mean? For the general soul, read Brahman or pure Being;for Yourself, read Atman. Clearly, if Wordsworth speaks for themescal drinkers, Whitman deserves consideration as the poetlaureate of LSD. He also hinted at an esoteric doctrine ofreincarnation, especially in "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry,"and, like Thoreau and the three monkeys, he heard, saw, and spokeno evil. As we shall see, the innocent denial of evil in theuniverse is the basis for one of the principal charges that wouldlater be lodged against Whitman, just as it is lodged now againstthe psychedelic drug movement. America was given another injection of Easternmetaphysics in 1875, when the Theosophical Society was founded inNew York City by Helena Petrovna Blavatsky and Henry SteeleOlcott. Madame Blavatsky, a Russian, said that she had studiedunder an Eastern master in Tibet, and the Theosophists wereeffective in promoting many Hindu and Buddhist concepts includingreincarnation, the monistic brotherhood of man, and the direct,mystical knowledge of a Universal Self. At the turn of thecentury, James's classic study of religious experience had aprofound and lasting influence on theology and psychology; itopened the eyes of scholars and laymen to whole new realms ofconsciousness, probing deeply into the mystical awareness of Eastand West alike. On a lesser scale, R. M. Bucke helped to lay thegroundwork for future developments by popularizing the concept of"cosmic consciousness." Bucke, a Canadian psychiatristand a contemporary of James, wrote in 1901: The prime characteristic of cosmic consciousness is a consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of the universe. Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an intellectual enlightenment which alone would place the individual on a new plane of existence— would make him almost a member of a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an indescribable feeling of elevation, elation, and joyousness, and a quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking, and more important than is the enhanced intellectual power. With these come what may be called a sense of immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already. Bucke might easily have been describing thedeep-seated conviction of a psychedelic cultist—and in factsome of the cultists have begun now to speak of themselves as anew species: as the forerunners of an emerging race of psychicmutants who will transcend the world to attain the nirvana ofpure Being. Even at the time Bucke wrote, experimentation wasbeginning with various psychedelic agents then available. Asmentioned, James himself was exploring the implications ofnitrous oxide intoxication. Havelock Ellis had been dabbling withmescaline. And during the latter part of the nineteenth century,American Indian tribes had begun to use peyote as a sacrament intheir religious ceremonies, leading finally to the establishmentof the psychedelic Native American Church, which now has anestimated quarter-million members. The new century saw a proliferation of cults,sects, and societies whose teachings often were a combination ofmumbo jumbo and Eastern philosophy (for example, the I AMmovement). Some of the issues at stake were translated to thesecular and political level; the conflict between monism andpluralism reappeared in the antagonism between democraticindividualism and the anthill conformity of fascism andcommunism: even the Rotary Club orator fulminating againstcreeping socialism and the Washington octopus was in a very realsense addressing himself to one of the most basic problems ofmetaphysics and East-West theology: the Many versus the One. Asfar as the laying of a groundwork is concerned, significance mustalso be attached to the new respectability which parapsychologygained as a result of the studies inaugurated at Duke Universityin 1930 by J. B. Rhine. The painstaking research devoted to suchphenomena as extra-sensory perception and psychokinesis wouldlend its scientific aura to the astonishing statements whichwould later be made by the prophets of the drug movement, makingthose statements sound not quite so astonishing to an empiricallyminded generation. Indeed, it is possible that the Duke researchhas a direct bearing on the validity of psychedelic experience.As the ultra-cautious Rhine explained in 1947: The research in parapsychology even now touches other great issues of religion. If the mind of man is nonphysical, it is possible to formulate a hypothetical picture of a nonphysical system or world made up of all such minds existing in some sort of relationship to each other. This leads to speculative views of a kind of psychical oversoul, or reservoir, or continuum, or universe, having its own system of laws and properties and potentialities. One can conceive of this great total pattern as having a transcendent uniqueness over and above the nature of its parts that some might call its divinity. Eastern themes were everywhere. Even the schoolgirlwas not immune as she turned the treasured pages of KahlilGibran's The Prophet. "Fare you well, people ofOrphalese," said that chosen and beloved one, Almustafa."A little while, and my longing shall gather dust and foamfor another body. A little while, a moment of rest upon the wind,and another woman shall bear me." The floodgates were opened by the outcome of theSecond World War, of course, and one does well to remember thatZen was "camp" long before LSD. Buddhist study groupssprang up. American pupils and housewives could be found writinghaiku poetry in grade-school classrooms and on the backs ofgrocery shopping lists. Bookstore racks gave prominent display topaperback editions of the Upanishads, the Bhagavad-Gita,the Tao Te Ching. These developments perhaps were inevitable;nevertheless, it seems fair to say that the Eastern influx couldnot have attained its present magnitude had it not been for theconscious and dedicated efforts of five men: Carl Jung, DaisetzT. Suzuki, Alan W. Watts, W. Y. Evans-Wentz, and Aldous Huxley.Jung's concept of the collective unconscious has Orientalconnotations, and Jung in addition had an abiding interest inEastern metaphysics: he lent the authority of his name to workson Zen and related subjects, writing forewords and commentarieswhich expressed his enthusiasm, and he once affirmed that the TibetanBook of the Dead had been a "constant companion" towhich he owed "not only many stimulating ideas anddiscoveries, but also many fundamental insights." Suzuki, aJapanese scholar who died only recently in Tokyo, wrote literallyscores of books in which he sought to interpret Zen for Westernreaders, and he also lectured widely in American universities.Watts complemented Suzuki by examining Zen through Western eyes;a gifted interpreter and popularizer of complex ideas, he hasmade Eastern wisdom comprehensible to a vast audience throughbooks, lectures, and television classes. Evans-Wentz introducedthe West to the Tibetan Book of the Dead, a remarkablebook which deserves our attention if only for the fact that ithas since been adopted as the bible of the drug movement. "It is a book which is sealed with theseven seals of silence," we are told in a foreword byLama Anagarika Govinda. "But the time has come to breakthe seals of silence . . ." And why? Because "thehuman race has come to the juncture where it must decide whetherto be content with the subjugation of the material world, or tostrive after the conquest of the spiritual world." Theorigins of the book go back at least a thousand years. In theoriginal Tibetan the work is known as the Bardo Th�dol,which means "Liberation by Hearing on the After-DeathPlane," and the exoteric purpose of the book wasemancipation from the reincarnational wheel of death and rebirth.The book was read over the bodies of the recently deceased bythose Sages of the Snowy Ranges, the Buddhist lamas of Tibet, andthe idea was to talk a dead person out of seeking reincarnationin a new body. A dead man was believed to wander in the Bardo orAfter-Death Plane for forty-nine days (a symbolic number based onseven times seven), and during this period—in fact at themoment of death—he would encounter the Clear Light of theVoid. If he had the understanding which comes with good karma, hewould surrender his sense of individuality and would merge withthat Void, thus ending the matter then and there. But the Void isterrible to behold if you lack understanding, and manyreincarnations are normally required before one earns one'skarmic passport to nirvana. And so it was that most dead menwould turn in terror from the Clear Light. They would wander inthe Bardo, their senses assaulted by visions both frightful andbeatific—by the Wrathful Deities and the PeacefulDeities—and finally they would enter the womb to be bornagain. In hopes of preventing this, the lamas would thereforeread aloud from the sacred book, a sort of Fielding's guide tothe Bardo region, and the dead men would thus receive detailedinstructions for every stage of their journey. They would be toldthat their fear of the Clear Light resulted from their falsesense of self, whose existence the Clear Light quite correctlyappeared to threaten. They would be told that the visions theysaw, apart from the Void, were nothing more thansangsara—projections of their own minds, which were stillcaught in the Net of Illusion. And finally they would be toldthat the womb was simply a doorway back to the world ofappearances. That was the exoteric teaching; but whenEvans-Wentz first presented the book to the West, in 1927, thesuggestion was made that it included or concealed an esotericinterpretation. Jung, for example, contributed a psychologicalcommentary in which he asserted that "it is an undeniablefact that the whole book is created out of the archetypalcontents of the unconscious." More to the point, LamaGovinda stated in his foreword that the book "was originallyconceived to serve as a guide not only for the dying and thedead, but for the living as well." And that in any case iswhat it has since become, whatever the original intention mighthave been. More than a quarter-century after its initialpublication, the Evans-Wentz edition came to prominence again in1954, when Huxley made much of it in his very influential book, TheDoors of Perception. In that book Huxley wrote of his firstexperience with mescaline, which he took in his home inCalifornia in the spring of 1953. Huxley reported that at onepoint he felt himself on the verge of panic, terrified by theprospect of ego disintegration, and he compared his dread withthat of the Tibetan dead man who could not face the Clear Light,preferring rebirth and "the comforting darkness ofselfhood." Thus the Tibetan Book of the Dead wasinexorably linked to the psychedelic experience, and ten yearslater, in 1964, there appeared a volume titled The PsychedelicExperience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead.The authors were LSD enthusiasts Timothy Leary, Ralph Metzner,and Richard Alpert, and they boldly offered their owninterpretation of the ancient book: it had to do not with thedeath and rebirth of the body but rather with the deathand rebirth of the ego in mystical states of mind. It wasindeed a book for the living. More than that, it provided, insymbolic imagery, a precise account of the psychedelicexperience. Absorption in the Clear Light is nothing more than agood trip, in which the psychedelic subject feels himself unitedagain with the Ground of his Being. It is the apprehension ofpure Being, beyond the sangsaric deceptions of language andrational perception. And those Peaceful and Wrathful Deitiesrepresent the hallucinatory period which occurs when one fails toachieve the central experience. A bad trip results inevitablywhen the subject refuses to face the Clear Light—violentlyresists the disintegration of his ego—and rather than seekrebirth in another body, he pleads for a shot of Thorazine whichwill return him to his own body in the phenomenal world of egoand rational symbolism. Huxley's book has a certain historicalsignificance; what we refer to today as the drug movement may besaid to date from that book, although, as we have attempted toshow, a substantial base for the movement had been in preparationlong before 1954. In any case, the drug movement appeared todovetail very neatly with what might be called the Easternmovement, and it might well be asked if this occurred naturallyor under duress; that is, did the two really fit together, orwere they made to fit? The latter possibility has been suggestedby R. E. L. Masters and Jean Houston, who cite as evidence thephenomenon they refer to as "galloping agape." Theyassert that the supposed capacity of the psychedelics to promotefeelings of brotherly love was rarely detected during earlyresearch in the 1950's: it became manifest only with theappearance of love-oriented drug literature. By the same token,Huxley and other drug enthusiasts are accused of leading theirreaders down the lotus path. Masters and Houston criticize theemergence of a "quasi-Eastern mystique," of a"wholesale leap to the East" and a "nebulous chaosseen as Eastern 'truth.' " These developments are all themore regrettable since the psychedelic drugs "may genuinelygive some inkling of the complexity of Easternconsciousness." Masters and Houston conclude: "To at leastsome extent the responsibility for this seduction of the innocentmust lie with such authors as Huxley, Alan Watts, and others whoin their various writings imposed upon the psychedelic experienceessentially Eastern ideas and terminology which a great manypersons then assumed to be the sole and accurate way ofapproaching and interpreting such experience." The charge is serious, if it holds up in court.Does it? Contents Page | Chapter 8 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-22IA087-000632-B031-93http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065425 text/html 37431HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:54:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:30:53 GMTContent-length: 37212 The Private Sea - Chapter 8 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 8. The evidence of things not seen Baudelaire complained in his time that ignorantpersons thought of the hashish dream as a kind of magic theaterwhere all sorts of miraculous things occur: wonders and marvels,all unexpected. But in fact, said the poet, hashish has nomiracles to offer; all it does is exaggerate the natural, raisingthe same number to a higher power, and the hashish dreamtherefore will always be "the son of its father,"reflecting the thoughts and impressions of the dreamer. Hashishis a mirror—"a magnifying mirror, it is true, but onlya mirror"—and a man will see revealed in it"nothing except himself." Evans-Wentz suggested that a wanderer on the Bardoplane would see the gods of his own pantheon: a Christian wouldsee the Christian Heaven, a Moslem would see the Moslem Paradise,an American Indian would see the Happy Hunting Ground, and amaterialist would experience after-death visions "asnegative and as empty and as deityless as any he ever dreamtwhile in the human body." The Tibetans taught, saidEvans-Wentz, that the after-death state is indeed very much likethe ordinary dream state, and whatever visions a man might see onthe Bardo are "due entirely to his own mental-content." There is no question that a subject underpsychedelic influence is extremely vulnerable to suggestion,including autosuggestion, and this might support the contentionthat the drug movement's Eastern orientation has been imposedupon it by an Eastern drug literature. One might also considerthe fact that the drug experience historically has had Orientalconnotations, for what could be a very prosaic reason. Thehashish and opium of the nineteenth century came from the Orient,and the Eastern imagery which so haunted the European drug fiendmight easily be explained as mental association. Even today themere word "drug" may often serve to summon up visionsof Fu Manchu and other sinister-looking Celestials. The power-of-suggestion argument should not andcannot be lightly dismissed. What can be dismissed, however, isthe contention that the psychedelic mystique is"quasi-Eastern" or "nebulous." Of course itis nebulous, as we suggested earlier, but that is neither herenor there; it is no more nebulous than any other metaphysicalassertion which cannot be submitted to empirical demonstration.And it is not quasi-Eastern. It is Eastern. If the problem was only one of imagery,suggestibility would no doubt be sufficient to account for it.There is no objective reason why LSD should evoke an image of aChinese pagoda rather than a Western church, or Ishwara ratherthan Jehovah. As Evans-Wentz indicated, even the Easternliterature acknowledges the subjective factor as far as visualcontent is concerned—and it can afford to do so preciselybecause it regards the Bardo visions as delusional: thephenomenal gods and paradises and hells do not really existexcept in the mind of the dreamer, and that is just the point theEastern philosopher is trying to make. It is only the Clear Lightwhich matters and is real. Similarly, no particular importance isattached to the hallucinatory period in psychedelic sessions; allthat matters is the central experience, which corresponds withthe apprehension of the Clear Light. Nor is the terminology usedof any significance. You can refer to the central experience asthe Clear Light, or as God, or as anything you wish. The questionwhich remains, then, is whether or not the central experience canbe imposed by suggestion. As for Baudelaire's statement, a drug cultist couldeasily turn it around to suit his own purposes. The psychedelicsdo indeed offer us a mirror, and a very accurate one at that.When a man looks into it, he sees nothing except himself—andthis is just as it should be. That is the whole idea, rightthere. There is nothing else to be revealed. We should keep in mind that the Eastern movementdid not grow out of the drug movement; if anything, it was theother way around. The Eastern movement was well established whenDr. Hofmann made his serendipitous discovery, and the factorsbehind that leap to the East had little or nothing to do withsuggestion. The Eastern movement absorbed the drug movement, andit did so because the central experience seemed to lend itselfvery well to an Eastern interpretation. But why weren't theEastern implications obvious to begin with? Why did they have tobe interpreted? Why didn't psychedelic subjects know they werehaving Eastern experiences? Why did they have to be told? A possible answer, of course, isthat they did know—but did not know that they knew. Theyknew they were having some sort of an experience, but how werethey to know it was an Eastern experience unless they had someknowledge of Eastern philosophy? If they did have the properbackground, they might have recognized their experience asEastern in nature—and certainly somebody must have done thisat some point, or how else was the connection made in the firstplace? Huxley had a mescaline experience, and he decided it wasEastern; nobody had to tell him so: he told other people. ButHuxley of course was Eastern-oriented; maybe it wasautosuggestion. And so the circle turns vicious. Let us turn, then, to the people Huxley told,assuming they were not Eastern-oriented themselves, and let usask why they believed him. They had an experience perhaps, andthey did not know what to make of it; there was nothing they knewwith which to compare it; they did not have the vocabulary toverbalize their intuitions or even to think them through; theconcepts involved were new and startling, completely bewildering.Then Huxley and other Eastern enthusiasts provided a vocabularyand suggested various alternatives and possible conclusions whichmight be drawn from the experience. Somehow it seemed to fit, andpeople said, "Yes. That's it. That's exactly what itwas." An analogy might be a robbery victim who flips throughthe photographs in a police rogues' gallery and then declares,"There, that's the man." Such victims unfortunatelyhave been notoriously poor witnesses, and even their certaintyleaves a reasonable doubt that a reliable identification has beenmade. Still, could a full-scale movement be generated bysuggestion alone, with nothing substantial to support thesuggestion? Surely there is something in the drug experiencewhich makes the Eastern interpretation at least appear tenable.Furthermore, supporting evidence is provided by relateddevelopments in radical theology, where a leap to the East alsois occurring, and without benefit of LSD. Watts and Huxley cannotbe blamed for that. Nor can they be blamed for the results of thoseturn-of-the-century experiments with nitrous oxide.Significantly, James found that the anesthetic (psychedelic)revelation tended to suggest "a monistic insight, in whichthe other in its various forms appears absorbed into theOne." Even so, from either point of view, we still areleft with a Scotch verdict: not proven. And there the mattermight rest, were it not for a final factor which has to do withmysticism as such. The fact is that Western church authorities havegenerally regarded spontaneous mysticism with a measure ofdistrust and sometimes with open hostility. There is first of allthe obvious objection that the mystic in a sense eliminates themiddleman: he deals directly with God and thereby undermines thechurch's assumed right to act as religious arbiter. The secondobjection is less obvious but more important. It seems mysticismhas shown a distressing tendency toward pantheism and monism, andthe saintly mystic has often been a source of acute embarrassmentto his church. We are talking now about Western mysticism. We aresaying that Western mysticism has tended to be very much likeEastern mysticism; or, more accurately, all mysticism, Easternand Western, has tended to be the same. James noted as a generaltrait of the mystic range of consciousness that it "is onthe whole pantheistic and optimistic." He said further: This overcoming of all the usual barriers between the individual and the Absolute is the great mystic achievement. In mystic states we become one with the Absolute and we become aware of our oneness. This is the everlasting and triumphant mystical tradition, hardly altered by differences of clime and creed. In Hinduism, in Neoplatonism, in Sufism, in Christian mysticism, in Whitmanism, we find the same recurring note, so that there is about mystical utterances an eternal unanimity which ought to make a critic stop and think . . . Churchmen had stopped to think about it long beforeJames made the suggestion, and they did not like what they werethinking. Mysticism too often had quite a lot to say about God'simmanence and not very much to say about his transcendence; ithad a lot to say about the divine encounter, but in many casesthat seemed to imply a monistic absorption, not union throughlove. Traditionally, the concern of the church has beenin three areas: (1) the institutional, (2) the rational, and (3)the mystical. In the first, the church has sought to create acommunity of faithful with a heritage of common belief; in thesecond, it has sought to adduce logical proofs for the existenceof God; in the third, it has sought to put church members indirect contact with the source of their faith. And every age hasgiven these elements different emphasis. Roman Catholicism has had its great mysticsaints—Saint Theresa, Saint John of the Cross—but italso has had such thorns in the side as Master Eckhart, aDominican, whose mystical utterances in fourteenth-centuryGermany sounded very much like pantheism. The rational SaintThomas largely ignored mysticism, and Roman Catholicism took theposition that God's existence could be proved intellectually. Asevere reaction against mysticism occurred in the seventeenth andeighteenth centuries, led by the Jesuits and provoked in part bythe excesses of the Quietists (Molinos, Madame Guyon, Fenelon).Quietism was accused of perverting the contemplative aspect ofmystical experience; it recommended total annihilation of themind, of the self, of all desire, including even the desire forsalvation; it blurred or erased altogether the distinctionbetween evil and good, man and God; wholly passive, it eschewedall thoughts and acts of service or devotion; it sought divineinspiration in the "soft and savory sleep ofnothingness"; in its extreme form it produced a state of"mystic death" which bordered on catatonia. Thepractical and beloved Saint Theresa, reformer of the CarmeliteOrder, had combined the active and the contemplative life, asindeed had Jesus before her. By comparison, the Quietistsappeared apathetic and amoral, if not immoral; they were chargedwith "idle basking in the divine presence," and theirdoctrines were condemned by Popes Innocent XI and Innocent XII.Mysticism in all its manifestations came under suspicion, andCatholics were advised that the mystical experience was a giftfrom God, not to be sought after. While this attitude was latersoftened, the Catholic reaction to Quietism quite likely has yetto run its course; nor can there be much doubt that the Vaticanwould tend to make a mental equation between the demand for adirect person-to-God relationship and the sort of thinking thatresulted in the Reformation. Antagonism toward a mysticalemphasis also was evident in Rome's dispute with the CatholicModernists during the early years of the twentieth century. TheModernists could scarcely be accused of Quietism—they werein fact activists who believed in living their faith, and theystrove for a liberal synthesis of the new science and orthodoxbelief. But they also were at odds with their church's stress onthe rational knowledge of God, and especially so with the revivalof the Scholastic tradition which was implicit in the emergenceof Neo-Thomism. Rejecting religious intellectualism, they calledinstead for a religion of the inner way: of the heart, not themind. Pope Pius X described their synthesis as a "synthesisof all heresies." Their doctrines were condemned in 1907,and the Modernist movement was crushed by excommunication. We have already mentioned the mysticism of theJewish Cabala, and in the following chapter we shall discuss atsome length the flowering of Hasidism in the philosophicalthought of Martin Buber. Turning to Protestantism, we find, asmight be expected, that the mystic at first met with a friendlyreception: the desire for a personal intimacy with God was one ofthe root causes of the Christian schism. Luther himself was amystic. But even within Protestantism, restrictions were placedupon the complete freedom of intuitive experience—which ledin turn to such developments as creedless Quakerism and theQuaker-meeting concept of personal communion with the indwellingChrist: the Inner Light. In the present century, Protestantmysticism came under fire from the heavy guns of Karl Barth andEmil Brunner. The barrage was devastating (or seemed to be), and,outside the revivalist's tent, spontaneous inner experience gaveway to a general emphasis upon creeds and community of worship.Maybe it was not so much Barth as it was the overall decline inreligious conviction—and therefore also in religious awe.Maybe it was just an end-product of secularization. But in anycase it occurred. Or such at least was the opinion of Carl Jungand others who warned that the churches to their peril wereignoring their fundamental mission and their basic source ofstrength. As the church critics saw it, that fundamentalmission was to put men in personal touch with their God—toencourage, in other words, the divine-human encounter. And thatbasic source of strength was the mystical perception of thenonrational mind. Such an argument makes mystical perception theprimary source of religious faith. To follow the argument,however, it is necessary first to define faith. A skeptic has defined faith as believing insomething you know is not true. And many devout persons mightactually agree with that. As Kierkegaard expressed the same idea,faith would not be faith if there were any rational basis for it.Faith and reason are mutually exclusive, the one beginning wherethe other ends, and a faith based on reason would be acontradiction in terms; it would in fact be reason, not faith:just one more example of ratiocination and logical analysis.Absolute faith recognizes the utter impossibility of its claim;to make the movement of absolute faith, you must first make themovement of absolute resignation—and then you believeanyway, "by virtue of the absurd." And this is faith.The knight of faith knows that "the only thing that can savehim is the absurd, and this he grasps by faith." Heacknowledges the impossibility, "and that very instant hebelieves the absurd; for, if without recognizing theimpossibility with all the passion of his soul and with all hisheart, he should wish to imagine that he has faith, he deceiveshimself." Paul Tillich expressed a similar view, insistingthat absolute faith must be preceded by absolute doubt anddespair. You confess that existence is meaningless, and then youaccept your existence in spite of this—and this"courage to be" in the face of meaninglessness is initself meaningful. Where does it come from, if not from Beingitself? What does it represent, if not the power and the purposeof the godhead? "The act of accepting meaninglessness is initself a meaningful act. It is an act of faith." And so on.But it is possible to define faith in an entirely different wayas well, and perhaps an inkling of this can be found in Hebrews: "Nowfaith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence ofthings not seen." John in his Epistle does not say that faith isbased on the absurd; he says it is based on evidence.Science is based on the evidence of things seen. Faith is basedon the evidence of things not seen. Both, then, are forms ofdeduction, and they differ only in the methods which they employto gather their evidence: science relies upon the rational mindor the conscious; faith relies upon the intuitive mind or theunconscious. This is precisely what Jung was talking about: hesaid the churches were ignoring the vital role of theunconscious. The churches perhaps were having enough troublewith science and so were in no mood to encourage a free-wheelingmysticism which might lead to a further erosion of orthodoxdogma. But Jung and other critics believed that religion wasmaking its stand on the weakest ground available. The logicalproofs for God's existence were not very convincing. Even if theywere, the intellect would reject them if instinct said no. Nordid it do any good to urge more faith, because faith is not aneffort of will but, rather, a conviction based upon the evidenceof things not seen. And the ultimate and only source of thisevidence is the unconscious. "The unconscious," saidZen scholar Suzuki, "is the matrix of all metaphysicalassertions, of all mythology, of all philosophy." Yearsbefore, James had suggested that the unconscious was man'sliaison to that unseen or mystical world for which the word Godis "the natural appellation." He proposed that theunconscious sends us whispers of that other world "even asthe waters of the infinite ocean send their waves to break amongthe pebbles that lie upon our shores." He said that all ofman's ideal impulses appear to originate in that other world; ifthere are spiritual agencies out there, he argued, itseems only logical that they should communicate with us through"the subconscious continuation of our conscious life.""If there be higher powers able to impress us," hesaid, "they may get access to us only through the subliminaldoor." And Jung agreed. But he charged that the churcheswere concerned only with creeds—with "traditional andcollective convictions which in the case of many of theiradherents are no longer based on their own innerexperience." Unreflecting belief, he said, "isnotoriously apt to disappear as soon as one begins to think aboutit," and in any case it is "no adequate substitute forinner experience." The unconscious is "the onlyaccessible source of religious experience." This does notmean the unconscious is God. It is, however, "the mediumfrom which the religious experience seems to flow." It isnot the role of the church, said Jung, to rope men into a socialorganization and reduce them to a condition of diminishedresponsibility. The care of the church should be the individualsoul; the task of the church is "helping the individual toachieve a metanoia, or rebirth of the spirit." From this point of view, the unconscious perhaps iscomparable to a shortwave radio receiver. And the church has onlyone function: it should help men tune in on God's wavelength, soto speak, and after that it should drop out of the picturealtogether, making no effort to interpret the transmissions—much less to jam them. The challenge to church authority becomesincreasingly obvious, and indeed it has always been implicit notonly in outright mysticism but in any form of devotion whichemphasizes inner experience. The challenge was there long beforethe word "unconscious" was introduced to thevocabulary—the Tibetans meant the unconscious when theyspoke of the Knower—and the German theologian FriedrichSchleiermacher as far back as 1799 was calling for a religionbased exclusively on Ansokauung und Gef�hl, or intuitionand emotion. A rejection of all creeds and dogma also wasfundamental to the "spiritual Christianity" proposedfour decades ago by the Russian philosopher Nicolas Berdyaev, andmany other examples could be given. Huxley saw the urge forself-transcendence as "a principal appetite of thesoul," and that appetite in our time has not been satisfiedin church; today, "the sole religious experience is thatstate of uninhibited and belligerent euphoria which follows theingestion of the third cocktail." Tillich pointed to thedecline of religious awe: the question of our century perhaps waswhether or not man could regain that sense of wonder he had onceknown in personal communion with the Ground of his Being. Then came LSD. With it has come a rebirth of awe. While somepeople might debate the assertion that this is religious awe,many members of the drug movement regard it as such—and thedrug movement, as mentioned, has already produced a number ofpsychedelic churches, of which the Church of the Awakening mayserve as an example. The church was incorporated in 1963 underthe laws of New Mexico by John and Louisa Aiken, retiredosteopaths. In a statement of purpose the church defines religionin its internal aspect as "the search within one's ownconsciousness for the Self, which is Being, which is Life."And to help the search along the church administers "thepsychedelic sacrament." In a 1964 decision based on theFirst Amendment, the California Supreme Court ruled that Indianmembers of the Native American Church could not legally bedeprived of the peyote used in their religious ceremonies. As aconsequence of the widespread legislation against LSD, the Churchof the Awakening and similar organizations such as theNeo-American Church and Timothy Leary's League for SpiritualDiscovery have indicated they might seek a First Amendment courttest to determine whether freedom of psychedelic religion appliesalso to the paleface, and the law's ultimate decision shouldprove to be of considerable interest, to say the least. The drug cults make impressive claims. In the past,they say, religion probably had real depth for only a minority ofchurchgoers. Under the best of circumstances, a direct encounterwith God was reserved for the special few; and even for them theexperience was usually fleeting in nature. There are of course nostatistics available on mystic percentiles, but it is justpossible that psychologist Abraham H. Maslow offers us a roughclue with his concept of the "self-actualizing" personwho is capable of achieving from time to time what Maslow hasdescribed as a "peak experience." We shall have muchmore to say about Maslow's psychology in a later chapter; for themoment, we are concerned only with his conclusion thatself-actualization is possible for less than 1 per cent of theadult population. If peak experience and mystical experience aresimilar, and if Maslow's figure is reasonably accurate, it israther interesting to find at the other end of the mentalspectrum that schizophrenia is also said to affect about 1 percent of the population. By comparison, the studies citedpreviously suggest that psychedelics can provide a mysticalreligious experience for up to 90 per cent of the population,which is certainly a considerable improvement. Now, say thecultists, with LSD it is possible for almost anybody to communewith God, any time he wants to, and for hours at a stretch. Nowthe common man can share the mystical visions of the saintsthemselves, and it is no longer necessary to spend ten or twentyyears in a Zen monastery to achieve true satori. The drug movement says to the churches: "Here,at last, this is what we were looking for, and neverfinding. This is what people really want. What do you have tooffer in its place?" And so orthodoxy and the psychedelicexperience arrive at their collision point. The institutional challenge is serious, if youaccept the premise that psychedelic experience is actuallymystical experience. Obviously the churches cannot compete withthe drugs in promoting that experience, even if they wished to.It remains to be asked whether the experience should bepromoted— whether in fact it threatens a jet-ageQuietism—and there are arguments on both sides, to bediscussed later. But what about the doctrinal challenge? Is itreally true that the central drug experience confirms the Easternideas we have mentioned? And why do these ideas have so muchappeal for Westerners in this day and age? To begin with, psychedelic experience is closer toZen than it is to anything else the East has to offer. And Zen isa unique religion, even in the East. It appears to be monisticand pantheistic, but actually it is not. Unlike Hinduism, it doesnot indulge in elaborate metaphysics; as far as possible itavoids words altogether, and the student is advised to let themildew grow on his lips. Basically anti-intellectual, Zenstresses intuition and the direct personal experience of reality.As Suzuki put it, Zen seeks only to grasp "the central factof life," which is found only in the here and now. It isaimed at those "who die of hunger while sitting beside therice bag." Unlike other schools of Buddhism, it does notregard the world as illusory, an epiphenomenon of the mind; likeSaint Thomas, it rejects any dichotomy between body and spirit(as it rejects all other dualistic concepts): in essence it is ayes-saying to life and to the world. Suzuki was at pains torefute the idea that Zen is pantheistic. Zen neither confirms nordenies a transcendent God—another dualism—and if Zenseems strangely silent about God, that is only because allstatements are limiting. If asked what God is, however, a Zenmaster might say, "Three pounds of flax." And thissounds pantheistic. If a Hindu said it, it would be pantheistic.But the Zen master's statement has nothing to do with such ideas;in calling attention to something quite prosaic, the Zen masteris simply affirming the holiness of the commonplace in the momentbeing lived. He might just as easily have eaten a peach, gone fora walk—or slapped his pupil in the face again. Since satorican hardly be distinguished from the psychedelic experience, itis significant that Zen scholarship has not found in this insightany necessary implication of pantheism or monism; since Zenscholarship represents centuries of study devoted to the verysubject which concerns them, immanence-minded drug cultists mightfind cause to re-examine their experience in the light of Zen. Still, the sense of immanence under psychedelicinfluence is very pronounced. It is overwhelming. And after all,as we have already said, it is not necessary for an orthodoxWesterner to reject the concept altogether: it is possible toconceive of God as both transcendent and immanent. Toborrow an example which has been used before, Shakespeare isimmanent in the characters of The Tempest. In him theylive and move and have their Being. But Shakespeare alsotranscends his characters, in the sense that they do not exhausthis Being; the characters are Shakespeare, but Shakespeare issomething more than Prospero and Trinculo. In the same sense, the indwelling God acts fromwithin, "through the path of immanence." He stilltranscends the world. But the world might fail to recognize this.The very fact of immanence could well blind men to God'stranscendent character: in the psychedelic state especially, thepart could easily mistake itself for the whole. As Baudelaire sawit, the hashish eater imagines himself to be God—and neverthinks to ask himself the haunting question, "Might therenot be another God?" Or to put it another way, "Mightthere not be more God?" Thus the psychedelicexperience neither absolutely confirms nor absolutely deniesGod's transcendence. If it confirms anything, it confirms hisimmanence. And there is nothing in the experience whichnecessarily rules out an immanent God who is also transcendent. Just as different ages have emphasized either themystical or the rational aspect of religion, so too haveimmanence and transcendence been in and out of fashion. SaintThomas, as might be expected, had attempted in his time to avoideither one extreme or the other, offering instead a synthesis ofimmanence and transcendence. Calvinism, on the other hand,insisted upon a majestic and omnipotent God who utterlytranscended the pitiful race of man, and transcendence also wascentral to the Deism of Voltaire and others for whom God was theGreat Watchmaker: having created the world and its laws, he hadgone off to exist in complete isolation from his creation. Themystics for their part preached the immanence of God; throughouthistory, in fact, whenever orthodoxy has made God too remote andaustere, the mystic prophets have appeared from the wilderness toreassert his immanence, and respect for immanence has gone handin hand with an emphasis upon inner experience in religiousdevotion. Immanentist concepts were given powerful expression inthe eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, both in literature andphilosophy. But the first part of the twentieth century saw theemergence of a kind of neo-Calvinism, and Karl Barth again was inlarge part responsible for the development: his objection tomysticism necessarily included a concomitant objection tomysticism's accent on immanence, and the result was a renewedappreciation of divine transcendence. It is possible, however, that the neglect ofimmanence has been at least partly to blame for the decline ofreligious enthusiasm in this era of technology andsecularization. A wholly transcendent God is probably leastcompatible with modern science and modern experience—he isthe kind of God modern man finds hardest to accept—and itdoes the churches no good to argue that this kind of God is acaricature. It does no good to insist that the churches have notpreached this kind of God, and it does no good to argue thattheology perhaps has proposed an entirely different kind of God.Doubtless we give theology and philosophy much more credit thanthey deserve. A great philosopher decides something, and weimagine that he has decided for his entire generation, if not forthe century in which he lived; this school of opinion gives wayto that school of opinion, and we suppose that mankind has beenfollowing the contest like a football match, with criticalinterest, and that everybody knows whether this side or that sidehas the ball at the moment. If the players would look around,however, they would find that the crowd is not paying muchattention to the game, or does not understand it, or finds ithard to keep an eye on the ball. Of course the whollytranscendent God is a caricature—but a caricature bydefinition is a distortion or exaggeration of an actualcharacteristic, and an emphasis on transcendence has been acharacteristic of Western theology. Indeed, this characteristichas mainly served to distinguish Western from Eastern religion,and it should hardly surprise us to find that a desire topreserve that distinction has led to an undue emphasis upon it inthe public mind. "Do you believe in God?" Ask thecommon man that question, and he will assume you are referring toa transcendent figure of some sort. Ask the uncommon man the samequestion; he still will assume that you are referring tosomething along those lines. Of course he knows better, but hetakes it for granted that you do not, when you ask the question.He may say, "Well, that depends what you mean by God."The question itself has come to imply that caricature ofcaricatures, the bearded monarch on the marble throne—andthat image is inferred even in those cases when it is notactually implied. Especially is it inferred when the word God isspoken from the pulpit of a church. The idea is ridiculous, ofcourse, and that is precisely the reason modern man no longerbelieves in it. Unfortunately, he still thinks he is being askedto believe in it, and that is the root of the problem. Easternphilosophy, on the other hand, does not ask him to believe in it,nor does the psychedelic experience ask him to believe in it, andthe credit both give to immanence is without question responsiblefor much of the current interest in Eastern ideas and in LSD. The churches had been complacent. Perhaps theyimagined that the caricature no longer existed, and so they madeno effort to correct it or to offer their parishioners a moreplausible alternative. But the caricature did exist, although fewpeople believed in it—or in anything else for that matter,as a direct consequence. The continued existence of thecaricature resulted inevitably in a reaction against it, andnecessarily in a drastic reaction. The idea was so deeplyembedded in popular theology, and churchmen were so ignorant ofthis fact, that Altizer had to kill off the transcendent Godaltogether before the churchmen displayed any visible signs ofalarm. Then LSD came along. If they now hope to preserve anyvestige of transcendence, the churches might be well advised totake a fresh look at the weight of their teaching—and starttalking immanence. With the decline of Barthianism, this has alreadyhappened in radical theology. Basic to contemporary developmentsin this area have been the concept of immanence and the directinner experience of that immanence. In Protestantism the reactionagainst stark transcendence can be traced progressively fromTillich to the New Theologians to the Death of God theologians.In Judaism the voice of Martin Buber has been heard. In RomanCatholicism immanence is the very heart of Teilhard de Chardin'stheology. But immanence has always been a dangerous idea, aswe have indicated. Open the door to immanence and pantheism triesto slip in with it. This too has been happening. Contents Page | Chapter 9 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-23IA087-000632-B031-127http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065441 text/html 59950HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:54:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:30:45 GMTContent-length: 59731 The Private Sea - Chapter 9 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 9. The New Theology A coffee shop in Indiana did not seem a very likelyplace in which to encounter the Anglican bishop of Woolwich,England, probably the best-known advocate of the radical NewTheology. But that in fact is where I met him one dreary morningin 1966, on the Crawfordsville campus of Wabash College. BishopJohn A. T. Robinson had come to Wabash from England toparticipate in the annual Lilly Lecture Series, and he looked abit weary as he sat there in a corner booth discussing Dr. ThomasJ. J. Altizer's announcement of God's demise. He shook his headover the idea, wondering aloud how Altizer could justify hiscurious position on Judaism. Later we left the shop together,heading for Robinson's temporary digs at the Caleb Mills House,and the balding, pink-cheeked bishop seemed a lonely figure as hewalked across the campus through a misty rainfall, his macintoshflapping in the wind. Some three years before, with thepublication of a little book titled Honest to God, he hadbeen attacked as a heretic, a traitor to the faith and a falseprophet; now—bitter pill—there were some who regardedhim as a theological square: in fact a real cube. For the momentat least, the Ground of Being was Out. The Death of God was In. Honest to God had created a sensation whenit first appeared in 1963. To the astonishment of the author andhis publishers, no doubt, the book became an international bestseller, and total sales had exceeded a million when I met thebishop. There are as many New Theologies as there are NewTheologians, but Robinson's book has had a tremendous impact bothin Europe and America, and it offers an excellent vantage pointfrom which to explore the main trends in radical theology justprior to the emergence of the Death of God school. It is in asense a compendium of the ideas that shaped those trends, andwhat it did basically was bring together a number of conceptsdeveloped by four contemporary giants of philosophy and theology:Rudolf Bultmann, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Paul Tillich, and MartinBuber. But it brought them together in a new synthesis, the mostimportant aspect of which was a new interpretation of divinetranscendence, and it popularized them for a vast lay readership.In doing so, it gave expression to the spiritual unrest anddissatisfaction of laymen who had been theologicallyinarticulate, and it helped also to lay a popular groundwork forthe still more radical ideas which were soon to follow inAmerica. From Rudolf Bultmann, to begin with, thebishop took the concept of "demythologizing" the Bible. To demythologize does not mean to debunk. On thecontrary. A myth may represent an eternal truth—intuitivelygrasped perhaps—but the mode of expression will be dictatedalways by the world-view of the men who lived in the age when themyth was promulgated, and it will reflect also that age's levelof knowledge and sophistication. Its language is metaphorical andanthropomorphic. The method of demythologizing probes for thedeeper meaning hidden by the metaphor. "Its aim," saidBultmann, "is not to eliminate the mythological statementsbut to interpret them." In essence this is the same test weapplied in an earlier chapter to Wordsworth's ode and to poeticsymbolism in general: does the "is" really mean "is,"or does it perhaps mean "as if"? Suppose, then,said Bultmann, that the authors of the Bible wanted to convey theidea of God's transcendence. They could do so only by resortingto the crude category of space—resulting in a God who is"up there" in a place called heaven. According toRobinson, a more sophisticated age refined the veridical myth toconnote a God who was not "up there" but "outthere," somewhere beyond the flashing comets. But again thisis a crude metaphor, and it no longer satisfies modern man, whois intruding upon outer space with radio telescopes and rocketprobes. To remain relevant, the truth of God's transcendence mustbe demythologized or demetaphorized. It and other biblical truthsmust be retranslated in modern terms for men who are able todigest deeper levels of abstraction. But how? If God is not"up there" or "out there," where is he? From Dietrick Bonhoeffer, the bishop tookthe concept of a Christianity "without religion." Thisis certainly an enigmatic idea, and Bonhoeffer never had anopportunity to elaborate upon it; it was merely suggested inletters and notes which he wrote in a Nazi prison before he washanged in April 1945. But it has haunted many churchmen with amoth-to-flame fascination, and it would be difficult toexaggerate the fundamental influence it has had upon contemporarytheology. For most New Theologians it has served as a sort ofRorschach ink blot, and each has brought to it his owninterpretation. For Robinson it represented at one level arejection of churchiness and otherworldliness. God is neither"up there" nor "out there." He is rather, inBonhoeffer's words, "the 'beyond' in the midst of ourlife." And that is where we should seek him, in our midst. Traditionally, said Robinson, religion has impliedwithdrawal from the world to a special compartment of life where,in a sort of spiritual vacuum, one prays and thinks holythoughts. Too often, in Ronald Gregor Smith's phrase, it hasimplied "a kind of battle against the world on behalf ofGod." One seeks God only in the sanctuary, in the gaps oflife. Inevitably, this attitude has made worship possible, orprofitable, for only a comparatively small cadre of religiouslyminded people—for the praying type. And something else. IfGod is used simply as a deus ex machina to explain man'sunanswered questions about life and the universe, what happenswhen these questions, one after one, are answered? God is pushedfurther and further back by the tidal advance of knowledge, saidBonhoeffer. Man has less and less need of him. "As in thescientific field," said Bonhoeffer, "so in humanaffairs generally, what we call 'God' is being more and moreedged out of life, losing more and more ground. Catholic andProtestant historians are agreed that it is in this developmentthat the great defection from God, from Christ, is to bediscerned." Indeed, Robinson agreed, Julian Huxley expressedthe same idea or was thinking in the same vein when he observedthat, operationally, God "is beginning to resemble not aruler but the last fading smile of a cosmic Cheshire Cat."The world has come of age, said Bonhoeffer, and men in a worldcome of age should accept their adulthood; they should go abouttheir business just as if God did not exist, not clingingto his hand every time there is a street to cross. "Godallows himself to be edged out of the world, and that is exactlythe way, the only way, in which he can be with us and helpus." Like a parent who wants his child to be self-reliant. But how does one worship in a post-religious world?By accepting the world, said Robinson. By seeking the sacred inthe secular, the holy in the common, the beyond in our midst. Oneshould seek God "in the hungry, the naked, the homeless andthe prisoner." Prayer should not be a withdrawal from theworld to God but a penetration through the world to God; fornothing, after all, is really secular: the whole world is holy. From Paul Tillich, the bishop took theconcept of defining God as the Ground of Being. Tillich rejectedthe view that God is in any sense a Being. This rejection appliesof course to the God of Deism, who started the world ticking withmechanistic precision and then went off somewhere far away andremote, very much, as Robinson put it, "like a rich aunt inAustralia." But Tillich also rejected the more familiar Godof Theism, in so far as that implies some kind of supernaturalPerson—a separate Being who exists in an intimaterelationship with the world which he transcends. Theismnecessarily does imply this kind of God, said Tillich. It implies"a being beside others" who is simply a part ofreality—the most important part, but still only a part; itimplies that God "is a being, not being-itself."Tillich proposed that theology replace this Being with the Groundof Being, and that a new dimension be adopted to conceptualizethis reality. As a substitute for height (as in "upthere") or distance (as in "out there"), Tillichsuggested that we think of God in terms of depth (as in "inour midst"). Robinson took up the suggestion, defining God as"the ultimate depth of all our being, the creative groundand meaning of all our existence." The bishop wrote that traditional Christiantheology has concerned itself with adducing proofs for theexistence of God, and the psychological implication, at least, isthat God might not exist. Well, then, what happens if we speak of God simplyas ultimate reality or the Ground of our Being—as opposed,for example, to a Being? Then it is no longer necessary to debate theexistence of God, since nobody doubts there is an ultimatereality. The whole problem is reduced to speculation about the natureof this ultimate reality, or God. A lot of people didn't like that. It seemed muchtoo easy, for one thing. And perhaps there is a basic flaw in theargument, as we shall see later. In any case, the bishop alsoused the Ground of Being as a wedge for the most awesome effortof all —demythologizing God himself. Behind the variousmythological expressions, what is the ontology of God? What isthe nature of ultimate reality, and what in truth is the realmeaning of transcendence? From Martin Buber, the bishop took theconcept of the I-Thou relationship. We have already referred tothis concept; let us examine it now in more detail. Buber was amystic, and he began his argument with the proposition that allmen are born with a sense of cosmic connection. The sense of"I" or individual self is not present at birth, and infact the child at first does not distinguish between himself andthe shining world which his eyes have opened upon. In the womb hehad known a life "of purely natural combination, bodilyinteraction and flowing one to the other," and after birthhe still rests for a time "in the womb of the great mother,the undivided primal world that precedes form." Buberrecalled the saying of the Jews: "In the mother's body manknows the universe, in birth he forgets it." But he does notforget it all at once, and he never forgets it completely. Beforehis sense of natural connection with the world fades graduallyaway, the child is given time to establish a sense of spiritualconnection—which Buber referred to as relation. Graduallythere develops a sense of "I" or self— "theseparation of the body from the world round aboutit"—but the world nevertheless is still perceived asexisting in relation to the self. It is perceived as Thou, andthis is the I-Thou relationship. But the sense of "I"grows ever stronger, until at last it snaps the fragile bond ofrelation between subject and object, I and Thou. Thou becomes It(or He or She), and I-It is the primary word of separation. The world perceived as It is something to be usedand exploited, and it is perceived in space and time—whereasthe world as Thou is not perceived in space and time. The worldperceived as It is chopped into isolated segments, and thesegments are ranked in an artificial order; they are organizedfor cause-and-effect analysis, so that man can "get hisbearings." Man no longer looks at the world in relation:"instead of looking at it he observes it, instead ofaccepting it as it is, he turns it to his own account." Andwhy? "Only as It can it enter the structure ofknowledge." This is necessary for survival, because mancannot live without It. "But he who lives with It alone isnot a man," and the memory of Thou never dies altogether:there are "short, uncanny moments" when it reappears,"lyric and dramatic episodes, seductive and magical."The memory of that undivided primal world lingers as "asecret image of desire," and Buber implied that this is thereal meaning of the Freudian wish to retreat to the womb. Not atall the sign of an unhealthy pathology, it represents a naturallonging to re-establish the cosmic connection. Man of coursecannot crawl back into the womb, in this life at least, but hecan relate to the world; he can look for the thing-in-itself,seeing "each thing simply as being." He can say"Thou" to the world, and the world in turn will say"Thou" back to him. In this relationship a man affirmsthe reality of the world—and he affirms also the reality ofhimself. For the "I" is very real. With the emergenceof personal life, a man cannot deny his "I," but he canchoose what sort of "I" it will be—since the"I" of I-Thou is not the same as the "I" ofI-It. A man can choose to be a person or an individual,and all men are either persons or individuals: the "I"of I-Thou is a person, and the "I" of I-It is anindividual. In I-Thou a man does not and cannot surrender hispersonality, since the essence of I-Thou is personal relation: an"I" relating to the Thou. A person does not lose"his special being, his being different." But he doesnot revel in his special being as the individual does; he simplyaccepts it as a necessary part of being in general. He seeks forthe Thou, which he sees in the eyes of every man and everycreature. He lives in the here and now, fully aware that"the one thing that matters is visible, full acceptance ofthe present." He recognizes that true love is the"responsibility of an I for a Thou," and this leads himat last "to the dreadful point—to love all men."He hallows this life, and thus he meets the living God who ispresent in every relational event. In every finite Thou hecatches a glimpse of the eternal Thou. I-Thou was the final ingredient in Robinson'seclectic omelet; he was ready now to face the question ofGod—and the question of God, he acknowledged, was thequestion of transcendence. It was certainly the question as faras the Western God was concerned—no doubt aboutthat—and the bishop therefore did his best to salvage theconcept. That really was the whole point of his book, althoughmany of his critics received just the opposite impression. Thetask, he said, was "to validate the idea of transcendencefor modern man." Robinson began with an all-out attack on Theistictranscendence, agreeing with Tillich that the atheists were quitecorrect in rejecting a transcendent Being or supreme Person. Thebishop conceded the fact that classical Christian theology doesnot in fact picture God as a Person, and "the Church's besttheologians have not laid themselves open to such attack."Nevertheless, he said, "popular Christianity has alwaysposited such a supreme personality," and the question reallywas whether or not popular theology could afford to sacrifice theconcept. To do so, R. W. Hepburn had written, "seems at onceto take one quite outside Christianity." Robinson felt,however, that the concept could be abandoned—indeed it mustbe, since the average layman was finding it harder and harder totake seriously. People must be told, then, that there is noreason they should take it seriously. "If Christianity is tosurvive . . . there is no time to lose in detaching it from thisscheme of thought." But to what does one attach it? To what doestranscendence refer, if not to a transcendent Being? Robinson groped for an answer. And he found one, hethought, in man's divine attributes—love, wisdom, justice.Feuerbach was looking over his shoulder now, and the bishop knewhe was treading "on very dangerous ground." One slipand he could easily plunge into the bottomless chasm of humanismor pantheism, making of man's nature the ens rea lissimum.The problem perhaps was to identify God as the source of ourhigher aspirations, without at the same time making us synonymouswith the source—that is to say, without making man and Godidentical. In any case, the bishop pushed on with the idea ofdefining God as the Ground of our Being or as ultimate reality.If God is ultimate reality, what, then, is this ultimate reality?Tillich had proposed that we think of it in terms of depth, youwill remember, and Robinson quoted Tillich's seminal passage: The name of this infinite and inexhaustible depth and ground of all being is God. That depth is what the word God means. And if that word has not much meaning for you, translate it, and speak of the depths of your life, of the source of your being, of your ultimate concern, of what you take seriously without any reservation. Perhaps, in order to do so, you must forget everything traditional that you have learned about God, perhaps even that word itself. For if you know that God means depth, you know much about him. You cannot then call yourself an atheist or unbeliever. For you cannot think or say: Life has no depth! Life is shallow. [Furthermore] . . . speak of the depth of history, of the ground and aim of our social life, and of what you take seriously without reservation in your moral and political activities. Perhaps you should call this depth hope, simply hope. One is reminded also of Tillich's "courage tobe" as an argument for faith. Why this courage? Where doesit come from? In the same sense, why do men hope—and wheredoes their hope originate if not in the very depths of theirBeing? In the last analysis, depth meant for Tillich "thosedeep things for which religion stands: the feeling for theinexhaustible mystery of life, the grip of an ultimate meaning ofexistence." And this mystery—this ultimatemeaning—is the source of the biblical intuition that thereis something which transcends our everyday life and theworld of appearances. There is, to use a clich�, more here thanmeets the eye. And this "more" is thetranscendent—the not seen. It is that which we normally donot perceive or recognize, but which nevertheless makes suchurgent demands upon us. It is the truth about ourselves and thetruth about Being itself. "To call God transcendent in thissense," said Tillich, "does not mean that one mustestablish a 'superworld' of divine objects. It does mean that,within itself, the finite world points beyond itself. In otherwords, it is self-transcendent." As Robinson expressed it:"The necessity for the name 'God' lies in the fact that ourbeing has depths which naturalism, whether evolutionary,mechanistic, dialectical or humanistic, cannot or will notrecognize." And in Tillich's words again: "We arealways held and comprehended by something that is greater than weare, that has a claim upon us, and that demands response fromus." This is the Ground of our Being, and we can no moreescape it than Francis Thompson could escape the Hound of Heaven.A trumpet sounds from the hid battlements of Eternity, and aVoice declares: "All things betray thee, who betrayest Me .. . Naught shelters thee, who wilt not shelter Me . . . Lo!naught contents thee, who content'st not Me." To thine own Self be true. Is that what thismeans? Is that what God means? At Wabash I had a long talk with Robinson in thelibrary of the Caleb Mills House, and I asked him, among otherthings, "However that word God is finally translated, do youbelieve that it transcends our Being?" He replied,"Yes. I believe, obviously, that God represents a realitywhich in a real sense encounters us as it were from without. Itis not something that we think up for ourselves. In many ways Iwould find it much easier to invent a very different kind of God,far less uncomfortable to live with. There is this, I think,overmastering reality which challenges us, judges us, confrontsus, questions our whole being. It is this element ofotherness—of unconditional grace and demand—which itseems to me traditional Christianity has meant by transcendence.This is a dimension of experience in life which I've no desirewhatever to deny. What I am concerned with is to try and findsome way of expressing this dimension which doesn't put God rightat the edge of our whole experience and world." An unconditional demand would seem to imply abuilt-in demand which is forced upon us by the very nature of ourBeing. It would seem to imply that we are not completely free tochoose our own destiny and to make of ourselves whatever weplease. Or, to put it another way—and the distinction isimportant—we are free to choose, but our freedom isless than perfect: if we deny the unconditional demand, we willsuffer for it. We will suffer the anguish of alienation from theGround of our Being. To boil it down, Sartre was wrong. There isan essence (unconditional) which precedes our existence and whichgives our existence its meaning and direction; it tells us whatwe should do and where we should go. Whether we heed it or not isup to us. But what is this essence? What is the Ground of ourBeing? What is ultimate reality? In three words, what is God? In his book, Robinson used three words to answerthose questions. And he took the three words from another book.To understand his meaning, we must return for a moment to Buber,to whom the bishop owes a large debt, and we must ask what Bubermeant by the eternal Thou, as opposed simply to Thou. Buber had no objection to the word God.Anticipating what was to come, perhaps, he wrote in I and Thou,first published in 1923: "Many men wish to reject the wordGod as a legitimate usage, because it is so misused. It is indeedthe most heavily laden of all the words used by men. For thatvery reason it is the most imperishable and mostindispensable." Buber had no sympathy with the Easternconcept of absorption in the Absolute, in "the One thinkingEssence." He spoke of relation, not absorption. He opposedthe doctrine that "universal being and self-being are thesame." He told of a Face that is sometimes seen, briefly,when one looks deep into the eyes of a finite Thou. This is God,the eternal Thou. And this is transcendent. "Every sphere iscompassed in the eternal Thou, but it is not compassed inthem." "God comprises, but is not, the universe. Sotoo, God comprises, but is not, my Self." Nor did Buberrefrain from speaking of God as a Person; in a 1957 postscript tohis book, he wrote: The description of God as a Person is indispensable for everyone who like myself means by "God" not a principle (although mystics like Eckhart sometimes identify him with "Being") and like myself means by "God" not an idea (although philosophers like Plato at times could hold that he was this): but who rather means by "God," as I do, him who—whatever else he may be—enters into a direct relation with us men in creative, revealing and redeeming acts, and thus makes it possible for us to enter into a direct relation with him. This ground and meaning of our existence constitutes a mutuality, arising again and again, such as can subsist only between persons. The concept of personal being is indeed completely incapable of declaring what God's essential being is, but it is both permitted and necessary to say that God is also a Person.... From this attribute would stem my and all men's being as person . . . As a Person God gives personal life, he makes us as persons become capable of meeting with him and with one another. But no limitation can come upon him as the absolute Person, either from us or from our relations with one another; in fact we can dedicate to him not merely our persons but also our relations to one another. Buber conceded that there was an apparentcontradiction in the concept of God as an Absolute Person whocannot be limited and the assertion that his total Being is infact limited "by the plurality of other independententities" (namely, us). It is possible that Buber here wasaddressing himself to Tillich's criticism of the Theistic God whois only a part of reality, "a being beside others."Buber said, however, that this was not really a contradiction: itwas a paradox. And he added the enigmatic statement: "It isas the absolute Person that God enters into direct relation withus. The contradiction yields to deeper insight." Robinson in his book referred to Buber only inpassing, as it were, and did not give him equal billing withBultmann, Bonhoeffer, and Tillich as a major source ofinspiration. Wedded as he was to Tillich's denial of Theism, thebishop certainly did not refer his readers to the passage we havecited on God as a Person. Nevertheless, his final conclusionsabout God or ultimate reality might very well appear to be aliberal interpretation of that passage, based perhaps on a"deeper insight." At Wabash I mentioned to Robinsonthat his concept of transcendence seemed to have a strong streakof Buber in it, and the bishop agreed. "I think what Buberis saying is fundamental," he said. "And in fact thisgoes back a long way in my own theological experience, because Idid my Ph.D. thesis on Martin Buber, which has never beenpublished. This was twenty to twenty-five years ago. Andtherefore this represents a long-standing influence on mythinking. And I think the kind of thing Buber is trying to get atin this I-Thou relationship—the way he sees every finiteThou as a sort of glimpse through, a 'window through' intosomething which meets us in, with, and under every relationshipof life—this is very near the heart of what I am trying tosay." Did Robinson in fact demythologize Buber? Was Buberin fact asking to be demythologized? What might it be, that"deeper insight"? Although he rejected the idea that God is a Person,the bishop did affirm that God is personal. This mayappear contradictory at first reading, but we must remember thatRobinson was speaking of God as ultimate reality—as thetruth about existence. "For this way of thinking," hewrote, "to say that 'God is personal' is to say that'reality at its very deepest level is personal,' that personalityis of ultimate significance in the constitution of theuniverse, that in personal relationships we touch the finalmeaning of existence as nowhere else." And he quotedFeuerbach: "To predicate personality of God is nothing elsethan to predicate personality as the absolute essence." But personality in itself is not yet the absoluteessence. If it is only in personal relationships that we touchthe final meaning of existence, what, then, is that finalmeaning? What, then, is God? The bishop now was prepared toanswer the question. God, he said, is love. "To assert that 'God is love' is to believethat in love one comes into touch with the most fundamentalreality in the universe, that Being itself ultimately has thischaracter." This is the "more" which does not meetthe eye. This is the truth about ourselves and the truth aboutBeing itself. This is the unconditional demand that is made ofus: that we love one another. And this truth, this ultimatereality, we have objectivized as God. But God as love does notimply "a super-Being beyond the world endowed with personalqualities." No. "To believe in God as love means tobelieve that in pure personal relationship we encounter, notmerely what ought to be, but what is, the deepest, veriest truthabout the structure of reality." It means to believe thatlove is the Ground of our Being. It means that "theologicalstatements are not a description of 'the highest Being' but ananalysis of the depths of personal relationships." The bishop continued: "A statement is'theological' not because it relates to a particular Being called'God' but because it asks ultimate questions about themeaning of existence: it asks what, at the level of theos,at the level of its deepest mystery, is the reality andsignificance of our life." And this reality, this finaltruth, this God is love. Who, then, was Jesus—the son of God? Robinson demythologized him, too. Jesus was not aGod-man who came from "out there," pretending to be aman. He was not a divine visitant who chose to live "likeone of the natives." According to the bishop, thetraditional view of Jesus leaves one with the impression that"God took a space ship and arrived on this planet in theform of a man." It leaves the impression that Jesus"was not really one of us . . . he came from outside."And that word incarnation: in itself, it "conjures up theidea of a divine substance being plunged in flesh and coated withit like chocolate or silver plating." But Jesus in fact wasa man; he was in fact one of us. Nevertheless, Jesus also revealed to the world theWord of God. He was a man, yes—but a man who was completelyunited with the Ground of his Being. He made himself"utterly transparent" to the Ground of Being and thusoffered his fellow-men a window through to ultimate reality. Hedid this by emptying himself of self; he was "the man forothers," and his whole life was a testimony to the fact thatthe Ground of all Being is love. I asked the bishop whether theI-Thou relation did not imply that all men are a windowthrough to the eternal Thou—hadn't Buber in fact said thesame thing about a cat?— and Robinson answered: "Can I just say two things? First, thiswindow-through metaphor is obviously very inadequate and justsuggests that God is there to be looked at, whereas the NewTestament takes a far more dynamic view. I mean, here in a realsense is the activity and love and purpose of God being revealedand poured out and acting through this man's life. The secondquestion relates to the uniqueness of Christ. I think I certainlywould not want to say that he is unique in the sense that he isquite abnormal. I think that it's worth asking: Is Christ uniquebecause he is normal, or because he is abnormal? Now, I think agreat many people would take from the Gospels as they read themtoday that he is unique because he is abnormal—in the sensethat he did all kinds of things we couldn't do, was born in anentirely different way, had all kinds of miraculous powers, andso on. Well now, if that is the picture of Christ, then he seemsto me a man who has very little to do with our life at all. Itseems to me what the New Testament fundamentally is saying isthat here is someone who is uniquely normal, what all human lifeshould be, what a genuinely human existence ought to be. And, onthe whole, this is not true of any other man—we are in areal sense failing to be what we were meant to be. Now, in thatsense I would certainly say that Christ is unique. But I don'tthink he's unique in a sense that cuts him off from the whole ofthe rest of humanity. And one of the troubles about so much ofthe mythological view of the New Testament is that, for mantoday, its effect is to sever this person from everybody else.After all, the New Testament itself talks about Christ as thefirstborn of many brothers—meaning that there's a realsolidarity here with the whole of the rest of humanity—and Idon't want to draw his uniqueness in any sense which denies thissolidarity, but rather to say that he is the uniquely normalhuman being." In his book Robinson ridiculed supernaturalinterpretations of the Atonement—the idea that a divinePerson descended from heaven to save men from sin "in theway that a man might put his finger into a glass of water torescue a struggling insect." He suggested that sin and hellare metaphors for man's estrangement from the Ground of hisBeing, while union with the Ground of Being "is the meaningof heaven," and the experience of grace is the experience ofbeing accepted in that heaven where, in Tillich's words,"everything is transformed." On the level of worship,the bishop called for a "worldly holiness" and a"sacred secularity" in which the beyond is sought atthe center of life, "between man and man"—for Godis discovered only in the here and now, in the concrete moment,in personal relationships: he is not discovered in some otherworld, nor is he to be found in the self alone. Finally, the NewTheologian proposed a New Morality—a modern ethic, based onthe Ground of Being, which would take as its credo SaintAugustine's injunction: "Love God, and do what youlike." He even suggested that premarital sex might be wrongonly in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, arguing that"the only intrinsic evil is lack of love." In an agethat was turning its back on supernatural legalism, he said, hewas only trying to offer a reasonable system, founded on theabsolute priority of love, which could answer that troublesomequestion, "Why not?" Thus a boy would not takeliberties with a girl unless he loved her; and if he loved her,he would not take liberties with her. Or so it seemed to thebishop. (See his book Christian Morals Today.) Robinson warned his readers not to equate theeternal Thou with the finite Thou, "nor God with man ornature." This, he pointed out, would be pantheism orhumanism, and "Christianity must challenge the assumption ofnaturalism that God is merely a redundant name for nature or forhumanity." With Tillich, he said, he wished instead to pushbeyond both supernaturalism and naturalism; it was not hisintention, he said, "to substitute an immanent for atranscendent Deity," but rather to reaffirm transcendence ina new translation. The bishop attempted to demonstrate,therefore, that his position was not the same as humanism on theone hand or pantheism on the other. To rebut the charge of humanism, he returned to hisstatement that God is love; this could not be turned around, hesaid, to imply that love is God. In other words, divine love isnot simply a projection of human love; on the contrary, humanlove is a projection of divine love: it occurs on this earthbecause love is the Ground of Being. We recognize human love assacred because we see in it the ultimate truth about reality; wesee in it "the divine agape of the universe." We lovebecause the Ground of our Being demands that we love. This demandupon us is unconditional—beyond our control asindividuals—and therefore it transcends us. And this elementof transcendence is what finally distinguishes the humanist fromthe radical Christian. The humanist says love ought to bethe final truth about existence; the radical Christian says itis. Furthermore, the radical Christian says that this final truthis revealed to us in Jesus Christ, and its validity "standsor falls" with that revelation. So this in turn is whatfinally distinguishes both radical and orthodox Christianity fromall other theologies, Eastern and Western—and, we might add,from the psychedelic cults. Turning to the next charge, the bishop concededthat his rejection of Theism might raise in some minds thespecter of the Eastern God. He acknowledged that it was dangerousto abandon the concept of God as a separate Being. Indeed, hesaid, traditionalists might find it hard to believe that hisposition "must not result in a theology of mere immanence,not to say of pantheism." But, he said, there was oneelement which ultimately distinguished his view from thepantheistic or immanentist position—and this was the elementof personal freedom: the freedom of the individual person toaccept or deny the Ground of his Being. Pantheism is purelymechanistic or deterministic; concern for the other is asautomatic as two plus two, since in fact there is no other butonly the monistic One, and this concern cannot properly bedescribed as love, which is a relationship between persons andnot the Selfish awareness of an Absolute Identity. For example,you are concerned for the welfare of your arms and legs, but youwould hardly refer to this concern as love. I am extrapolatingnow— trying to read the bishop's mind, as it were—but Itrust this is close to his meaning. The "I" is real, asis the Thou, but the two are bound together by God. And God islove. This is what it means to say that God is personal but not aPerson. Love is the very Ground of our Being; but so too isindependence an essential aspect of our Being: indeed it must be,if love is also, for the one implies the other. Extrapolating again, it might be suggested that weworship not God—the word itself would seem to indicate aPerson— but rather perhaps a symbolic X. Maybe we shouldoffer up our prayers to Love, which in fact is what we do. Allday long the radio blares the message, flooding our homes and ourautos with songs of love and little else—news, sports, andlove: that is the prescribed formula—and our literature,too, seems preoccupied with the theme. Some call it sex; but isit really God? What sends the unhappy young man wandering thelonely streets of night in search of Her? Is it God who sendshim, the Ground of his Being? If God is love we are a piousnation. We shall not belabor the possible parallels betweenRobinson's demythologized Christianity and many of the Eastern orpsychedelic concepts we have already discussed. They should beobvious. What especially stands out, of course, is the idea ofimmanence, and the reader will decide for himself whether thebishop has managed to slam the door in time. Or has pantheismslipped in? To many it may appear that the bishop is hanging byhis fingernails over those chasms we mentioned, as far astranscendence is concerned, and it would be worthwhile to takeone last look at his definition of this term. It seems fair to say that Robinson has made theterm transcendent synonymous with the term unconditional.Love is a built-in aspect of existence; it is not ours tocommand; it is the essence which precedes our existence; it isthe "more" which does not meet the eye and which doesnot yield itself to the scrutiny of an empirical science. As thebishop put it to me: "Here is something before which yousay, yes, this is it. Here I stand, I can no other. I think this issomething in a real sense that confronts one, engages one, fromoutside. It's not something one thinks up for oneself. Itclearly, as I see it, is describing how things are. Yousay, well, here is something fundamentally true which I cannotescape." For example perhaps, one does not think upbreathing for oneself. But some critics might argue that an unconditional"more" is not really the same as a transcendent"other," and "in a real sense" is, after all,a deceptive phrase; it sounds positive, but actually it weakensand modifies more than it reinforces—that is to say, itimplies "as if," not "is." Itis significant that the bishop did not say simply: "This issomething that confronts one from outside." Because he didnot say this, and probably could not, it is debatable whetherRobinson was successful in his effort to validate transcendencefor popular theology, since transcendence has always implied"outside," "other," or "separate,"and the bishop's God displays none of these qualities. It is notenough to say this God transcends the individual, sincetranscendence has always implied something more than just this;it has implied a divinity that transcends mankind as awhole—and not in the sense of being unconditional, butrather in the sense of being separate and superior (at least partlyseparate, and wholly superior). Robinson of course was well aware of this, and itwas precisely this implication he was trying to combat with hisnew definition. It might be argued that Robinson did not actuallyredefine transcendence; it might be argued that he substituted analtogether different concept. "Deep," for example, isnot a redefinition of "tall," and unconditional, inthis sense, is not a redefinition of transcendent. But this maybe quibbling; substitution and redefinition shade into eachother, and perhaps there is a sense in which the bishop's God"as it were" transcends us. ("As it were" isanother of the bishop's favorite phrases.) If you think about ita long while, there will be moments when you say yes—andmoments when you say no, or maybe. It is not an easy concept toget your mind around; it is, if you like, rather vague (ormysterious), and you will see perhaps why we objected to talk ofa vague pantheism. Pantheism is very easy. By comparison, one canwell appreciate the frustration of the critic who describedRobinson as a confused man who is confusing others. There are,however, a great many people who would say that the bishop hasprovided them with something other than confusion. From one pointof view, he may have taken away their silver—but returnedthem gold. In an era of subjective chaos, he has made religionmeaningful again for untold thousands. While he may well havescuttled transcendence in its traditional interpretation—mayindeed have lost it altogether—his system does retain theWestern concept of pluralism. And this in the final test couldprove to have more significance even than transcendence. Perhaps the bishop himself has acknowledged this.You will recall the argument, derived from Tillich, that atheismcollapses if you define God simply as ultimate reality. Then itis necessary to debate only the nature of this ultimate reality,the bishop said. And he added this: "One can only ask whatultimate reality is like—whether, for instance, in the lastanalysis what lies at the heart of things and governs theirworking is to be described in personal or impersonalcategories." That perhaps is the real question, and nottranscendence. That perhaps is the basis of the more fundamentalchallenge which is offered to the West by LSD and by Easternmetaphysics. The bishop of course took the position that ultimatereality is personal, and this is another way of saying that it ispluralistic: "love," "relation,""personal"—all these are pluralistic words,opposed to monism. They preserve the integrity both of Thou and"I." If God is love, he cannot be Atman. If God ispersonal, there is no One. We have said, however, that the instant remedy foratheism contains within it a possible flaw. As Robinson saw it,"one cannot argue whether ultimate reality exists," andwe have quoted Tillich's assertion: nobody can say or think thatlife has no depth, that life is shallow. But in fact men can anddo assert that ultimate reality does not exist, that life isshallow and has no depth. Existence, some say, is absurd. Life isa joke —a rather ghastly one at that—and there is noultimate reality in the sense of an unconditional purpose ormeaning. For atheistic existentialists, such as Sartre, there isno Ground of Being, no unconditional, no primary state of Beingin any sense; not only is there no God, there is no such thingeven as a definite human nature, for existence precedes essence.And what does this mean? "It means," said Sartre,"that, first of all, man exists, turns up, appears on thescene, and, only afterward, defines himself." In thebeginning is subjectivity. In the beginning, man is nothing."Only afterward will he be something, and he himself willhave made what he will be.... Man is nothing else but what hemakes of himself." He must choose what he will be, and thatterrible responsibility is his alone. Man, to his horror, is bornfree. He is, indeed, "condemned to be free." He is"condemned every moment to invent man." There are nodeterminisms. There is, said Sartre, "no human nature for meto depend on." "We are alone, with no excuses." Robinson perhaps recognized his own error, for healso wrote: "The question of God is the question whetherthis depth of being is a reality or an illusion." And thenext question, then, is obvious. True or false—how does one decide? How doesone determine whether the Ground of Being is real or not? There is first of all the possibility of rationalproof. But those who hold to this possibility have had manycenturies in which to produce their evidence, and the evidencehas not been universally convincing. There is next the possibility ofrevelation—and especially, for the bishop, the possibilityof revelation through Jesus Christ. I asked Robinson why theradical Christian says that love is the final truth, as opposedto the humanist who says it ought to be, and the bishop said:"I think that this is defined and vindicated in Christ. Andpersonally, unless I saw this in Christ, and really felt thatthis was the clue, then there are so many things in our modernworld which would suggest otherwise that I should find it verydifficult to hang on to this. But this is in a sense, I think,the sort of knot in the thread." But the knot was tiedalmost two thousand years ago, and there are signs today it iscoming undone. The revelation existed when the modern world cameinto being, and men ever since have paid less and less heed toit. Today men have eyes to see, and they do not see; they haveears to hear, and they do not hear. Or so it might appear to thechurch at least. "Often enough," said Buber, "wethink there is nothing to hear, but long before we have ourselvesput wax in our ears." So the problem perhaps is basicenough. How can men be made to look and see, listen and hear? Howcan the scales be removed from their eyes and the wax from theirears? Robinson's solution was to demythologize, orredefine, and this for many has been richly rewarding. But is itenough? In itself, after all, it is rational analysisagain—and this alone has never been enough. It may serve toilluminate or to justify a truth that has been intuitivelyperceived, however vaguely. But what if that perception waslacking to begin with? Are we not thrown back once more on theprimary necessity for a direct inner experience of the ultimatereality, which is God and the Ground of our Being? This issue is implicit in the New Theology'sresponse to secularization. Many New Theologians have takenBonhoeffer to mean that the church should turn exclusively tothis world, becoming secular itself—that religion should bemade "relevant" by involving it full scale in socialand political issues, and, in a more shallow sense, by adaptingit to contemporary mores and the modern idiom (beat prayers, jamsessions at the altar). But is this what people really want fromreligion? Or do they seek instead that intimate, personalencounter which in turn is the ultimate basis for socialaction? Are the secularizers putting the cart before the horse?In their reaction against otherworldliness, do they threaten afurther diminution of that mystical element for which LSD seemsto demonstrate a widespread hunger? There is no simple answer,but the problem is there. And so LSD perhaps challenges not onlyorthodoxy but also one aspect at least of radical theology. Robinson himself is not limited to this one aspect;he is not to be identified with the secularizersalone—although Altizer has so identified him. Certainly hehas a good deal of sympathy for this school, which deriveslargely from Bonhoeffer. But, as he put it to me, "There isa whole other side which I took over from Tillich, and there is awhole lot for instance in Teilhard de Chardin, and others, whichI think is equally important." This other side, of course,represents the mystical-philosophical approach totheology—or, in other words, the metaphysical school."What I'm trying to do," Robinson said, "is tocombine this with the sort of thing that the prophets ofsecularization are saying, and I don't want to have to choosebetween them." The bishop indeed has shared Saint Thomas'penchant for synthesis—he has not been an either/or thinker,and this no doubt explains why some have thought him confused orconfusing. While many of his basic viewpoints were drawn frommystical philosophy, however, and while mystics such as Tillichand Buber have been his own inspiration, the bishop in his booknevertheless took a dim view of mysticism for the average person,and of mysticism as a solution. He wrote: Our contention has been that God is to be met not by a "religious" turning away from the world but in unconditional concern for "the other" seen through to its ultimate depths.... That there are veridical experiences of the type usually called "mystical" or "religious" no one would be so foolish as to deny, and a man may thank God for them as St. Paul did for his visions. But the capacity for religious or mystical awareness, as for aesthetic or psychic awareness, is largely a question of natural endowment. Women, for instance, appear to be naturally more religious—and more psychic—than men. To make the knowledge of God depend upon such experiences is like making it depend on an ear for music. There are those who are tone-deaf, and there are those who would not claim to have any clearly distinguishable "religious" experiences. Again, in our own conversation, I asked Robinson ifBonhoeffer was not, among other things, rejecting what the bishopreferred to as churchiness. "Yes," said Robinson."He's also certainly rejecting any view of religion whichsees it just as a compartment of life and sees the church as asort of religious club for those who like that sort ofthing—which indeed it very largely is. That is one of thetroubles. It exists to meet the needs of religiously mindedpeople—which seems to me a great distortion of the realfunction of the church, which is much more concerned with themaking holy of the common, with the transformation of the wholeof life, and not simply in providing the same sort of functionthat, say, a musical club does for those who like music." Obviously, as the bishop has interpreted it,Bonhoeffer's rejection of "religion" is nothing more orless than a rejection of mysticism in the sense that we havedefined it. The question remains, how does one manage to seethe holy in the common, and how is the whole of life to betransformed unless there is, to begin with, some inner experiencecorresponding to a mystical awareness? You cannot simply tellpeople to see the holy, or point it out to them, and no NewTheology, however radical, is going to transform the whole oflife. If people cannot find ultimate reality in Jesus Christ,they are not going to find it in Tillich. It could be argued thatmore churchiness is just what is needed. Robinson of course hadno intrinsic objection to mysticism; on the contrary, he wasmerely facing the fact that most people cannot achieve the state. Or could not, the drug movement would say. Ifeverybody in the world would take LSD tonight, under the properconditions, it is possible that tomorrow there would be millionsmore of the praying type. Here, then, in its full scope, is LSD's challengeto New Theology. As for New Theology's own challenge to orthodoxy,the traditionalists have taken comfort in the fact that Robinsonsince publication of his book has more or less dropped thatphrase Ground of Being. The idea seems to be that this was somesort of capitulation, and a collective sigh of relief was heard.Robinson indicated to me, however, that he had tended to"shear off" the phrase simply because "itobviously seems to cause so much misunderstanding." A greatmany people, he said, "have assumed this is a purelyimpersonal phrase and is the enemy of belief in God as in anysense a personal reality." That of course is not the way heinterpreted it himself. I asked him if the book still stood, orif he had changed his viewpoint in any fundamental area. "Ithink basically it still stands," he said. He had not infact read the book since it was last in proof. "But Iwouldn't say that radically I have regretted anything I havewritten, or changed it." When they were not denouncing him for heresy, thebishop's critics tried the opposite tack. After all, he wassaying nothing more than the church itself had always said. Itwas old stuff. During a public debate at Wabash, for example,Professor J. V. Langmead Casserley of Seabury-Western TheologicalSeminary declared the bishop was "profoundly in harmony withthe deepest theological opinions of the church." The bishopwas being honest to God perhaps, but dishonest to history. Well,the bishop never said his stuff was new. He did say it was notbeing communicated—a fact attested to, perhaps, by theincredible spark-to-tinder response his book produced in thepews. Robinson has been criticized for fogginess, as noted, andCasserley charged he had "befuddled the minds of men bothinside and outside the church to a quite unprecedenteddegree." But there was one man at least for whom thebishop's meaning seemed perfectly clear. And that was Thomas J.J. Altizer. In a talk I had with him, Altizer had no difficultywhatever in assessing the bishop—as an opponent. Heidentified Robinson as one who was trying desperately to salvagethe core of traditional Christian theology, which Altizerrejected. It was rather astonishing to find the bishop emerging,from one point of view, as a kind of Red Cross Knight anddefender of the faith. To mix the metaphor, and possibly tostrain it, he might be described as a man trying to jettisonexcess cargo from an aircraft which was dropping perilously closeto those peaks identified on theological charts as Altizer andHamilton, Nietzsche and Sartre. From another point of view, however, it might besaid that Robinson opened the door—and Altizer slipped in. Contents Page | Chapter 10 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-24IA087-000632-B031-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065456 text/html 44434HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:54:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:32:10 GMTContent-length: 44215 The Private Sea - Chapter 10 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library l0. The Death of God Thomas J. J. Altizer, the Young Turk of Christiantheology, had gee-whizzed to fame on the strength of a singlefour-letter word. He was holding on to that word for dear life.And then, for one breathless moment, it appeared as if he mightlet it dribble through his fingers. The word was "dead." As in "God isDead." The occasion was a symposium at NorthwesternUniversity, in the Chicago suburb of Evanston, where Altizerappeared on a panel with Walter Kaufmann, the Princetonphilosopher, and Harvey Cox, author of The Secular City.Altizer had become the most controversial spokesman for theultra-radical Death of God theology. Again, this was in 1966,shortly before my meeting with Bishop Robinson at Wabash, and Iattended the symposium in hopes of discovering just what it wasthat Altizer had been trying to say. Nobody seemed certain. As it developed, nobody hadreally asked him before. After the symposium I did ask him, andlater I had a lengthy interview with him following his return toAtlanta and his duties as associate professor of Bible andreligion at Emory University. If nothing else, Altizer made itperfectly clear exactly what he meant. He arrived at the Northwestern symposium in acanary-yellow sport coat, black slacks, ice-blue shirt, flame-redtie, baby-blue wool socks, and brown brogans. He had tousledblack hair and looked a little like the movie actor Glenn Ford.When he addressed the audience, however, he no longer looked likeGlenn Ford. He looked and sounded like one of Plato's divinemadmen. He had charisma, and lots of it. And what he said waspure poetry. Everybody agreed it was poetry, because it was verybeautiful, and nobody could understand it. "I apologize for my presence," he said."I'm incapable of speaking about man. I find myself almostspeechless. Almost the only word that may be spoken about man inour time is a word that attempts to express the darkness ofourselves. And this darkness is the body of the dead God.... Iffaith can but whisper in our world, it can take a step towardlife. And we can never take that step until we truly know thatGod is Dead. We can say with thanksgiving, 'God is Dead. ThankGod.'" It was not only what Altizer said; it was histremulous, Margaret O'Brien way of saying it. A professor winced,turned and whispered, "How can he bear to do it—striphimself naked this way?" "He's sick," said one."Inspired," said another. Altizer had been described as speaking at times inmystical overtones, but that did not go far enough. Rather, hepresented the image of a full-fledged, card-carryingvisionary—a profane mystic haunted by an apocalyptic visionof cosmic dimensions. At one point, responding to a sharplyworded question, he told the audience in Billy Budd-ishfrustration: "Sometimes I feel like a man who stutters andcan't speak. Sometimes I feel like a man in a room where aforeign and untranslatable language is being spoken—but hehas to speak nevertheless." As he did speak, his references to the dead Godbecame even more enigmatic. They were voiced in the present andfuture tenses. "God is." "God will." As itturned out later, this was significant. Before the audience, Altizer did tend to expresshimself in arcane symbolism. But later, at a student bullsession, a different Altizer took the floor. This was Altizer thescholar, Altizer the theologian, Altizer the metaphysician. Thevision was switched off, intellect was switched on, and Altizerhimself was no longer obscure; he was instead a thoughtful manwho was doing his best to express an obscure idea: like amathematician who has been asked to describe the taste ofpeppermint. He was friendly, amusing, intelligent, and eager tocommunicate. He knew what he meant; questioned carefully, he saidwhat he meant—and he did not mean what most people hadseemed to think he meant. Listening to him, it appearedincreasingly ironic that Altizer had somehow come to beidentified with that mainstream phenomenon known as the NewTheology, in so far as that refers to the secularization of thechurch and a this-worldly involvement in social problems; itseemed even more ironic that the New Theology had come to beidentified with Altizer. This was a gigantic error, Altizeragreed. Grinning, puffing on a fragrant pipe, he explained hisvision. What it boiled down to was a highly unorthodoxinterpretation of the Incarnation: of the Word becoming flesh inthe person of Jesus Christ. What Altizer was talking about wastranscendence, and immanence. We have said it is possible to conceive of God asboth transcendent and immanent, and we recalled theanalogy to the relationship between Shakespeare and thecharacters in The Tempest. Shakespeare obviously isimmanent in his characters, since they owe their existence tohim; but he also transcends them, in the sense that they do notexhaust his being: he has a separate existence above and beyondthem. Altizer began with a fairly traditional view of Godsomewhat along these lines, accepting the idea of atranscendent-immanent divinity. And he also accepted theIncarnation as a historic fact: God manifesting himself in theworld in the flesh of Jesus. For years, however, he brooded upon the fullsignificance of this event. He immersed himself in a study ofEastern mysticism, Nietzsche, Hegel, William Blake—and hethought hard about the Incarnation. Then, one day while he wasreading, it came to him. It all fell in place. The Incarnation happened. So did the Crucifixion. But not the Resurrection! This idea is the essence of Altizer's theology. Godhad incarnated himself in the body of Jesus; but when Jesus died,God did not "jump back up into heaven." He remained inthe world. He is in the world now. What God did, said Altizer,was "empty himself of transcendence." He became totallyimmanent in the universe. He became part of the universe. But hedid not, immediately, become all of the universe. At first he was immanent only in Jesus. Since thedeath of Jesus he has continued to embed himself deeper anddeeper into the fabric of the universe. No longer transcendent inany sense, he is in the process even now of becoming ever moreimmanent. Jesus, to Altizer, was "the originalChrist." Christ was that point where God entered the world.And Altizer retains the word Christ to signify the God whoremains in the world, becoming more and more a part of it. Theword "spirit" might do just as well, said Altizer. Butfor various reasons he would prefer to "stick with the wordChrist." More often than not, however, Altizer in hisconversation spoke neither of Christ nor of spirit. He kept righton speaking of "God." When this was called to hisattention, he conceded: "In a certain sense I treat Christas God. But the word bears an entirely different meaning from thedominant meaning of God. That's why I resist the word God."He resisted it all evening with little success. Altizer described the movement toward greaterimmanence as an evolutionary, creative process; it is leadingtoward a final Christ: an apocalyptic new godhead in which Godwill be all there is. Altizer spoke of "a new world thatwill dawn at the end of the old world." He spoke of "atotally new creation—new man, new world, new life."When he speaks of the death of God, said Altizer, he is speakingof the passage from transcendence to immanence. Eventually thenew and different godhead will be realized, he said. But evennow, before it is realized, man can rejoice in a new sense offreedom. Man finds himself in darkness, said Altizer."And this darkness is the body of the dead God." Butonce the darkness is recognized for what it is, it can beaccepted. "Only a rotting body in a tomb," saidAltizer. "It can't bind us to it, once we have known ittruly as an empty darkness. Then, at that moment, we can truly beliberated from it." The transcendent power has ended, andman is free. Shakespeare has entered his own play, Altizerseemed to be saying. Eventually he will be the play—and thenhe will write a final act which incorporates the preceding fivebut is wholly different. "I make the Incarnation everything,"Altizer summed up, adding, necessarily, that he gives the rest ofthe Bible "only a very limited allegiance." Hisinterpretation of the Incarnation was entirely consistent, hesaid. "Christ has come, and you hurl him back into heaven.This is a complete betrayal of Christ. Only by seeing God's deathin Christ can we be true to Christ." At the bull session, the Northwestern studentsfired questions at Altizer, and, as they did so, it was possibleto trace many of his concepts back to their sources. A whollyimmanent God, after all, is scarcely a new idea: it is the ideaof Eastern pantheism, pure and simple, and Altizer conceded hewas talking pantheism. The God of the East is "veryreal," he said, and "infinitely more realistic"than the traditional Western God. One could opt for this God, hesaid. But there is one important sense in which Altizer woulddistinguish his position from the Eastern view, and we shallreturn to this point in a later chapter. Briefly, for now,Altizer's theology suggests that the cosmic process isevolutionary—that it is leading up to something—whileEastern metaphysics supposedly rejects the evolutionaryhypothesis. The East "looks backward to a primordialtotality" (according to Altizer), and Altizer on the otherhand "looks forward" to an eschatological totalitywhich is utterly transformed and aware of itself. Altizer of course had taken his God-is-Dead tagfrom Nietzsche, and the new sense of freedom echoed Blake'smystical emphasis upon man: his delight in man's liberty and hisrejection of any transcendent authority, his absorption withJesus and his denial of God. Altizer acknowledged his debt to Blake andNietzsche. There also seemed nothing new in the idea of anevolving spirit. That derived from Hegel, as Altizer was pleasedto point out. But it also sounded very much like Henri Bergson'svital force. As a matter of fact, it sounded even more likeTeilhard de Chardin's view of the universe. Again, we shall havemore to say about this in another chapter, and we shall limitourselves for the moment to only one aspect of Teilhard'smetaphysics. Teilhard, a Jesuit paleontologist, had proposed anevolutionary theory based upon the increasing complexification ofinert matter. He proposed that mankind was moving toward therealization of a new godhead which Teilhard referred to as theOmega point. And he saw in this process the hand of God. The key to it all: the Incarnation. Teilhard described evolution as "a prodigiousbiological operation—that of the RedeemingIncarnation." He added: "As early as in St. Paul andSt. John we read that to create, to fulfill and to purify theworld is, for God, to unify it by uniting it organically withhimself." And how would God unify the world? Teilhardanswered: "By partially immersing himself in things, bybecoming 'element,' and then, from this point of vantage in theheart of matter, assuming the control and leadership of what wenow call evolution." This immersion, said Teilhard, wasthrough Christ—who "put himself in the position(maintained ever since) to subdue under himself . . . the generalascent of consciousness into which he inserted himself.... Andwhen he has gathered everything together and transformedeverything, he will close in upon himself and his conquests,thereby rejoining, in a final gesture, the divine focus he hasnever left. Then, as St. Paul tells us, God shall be all inall." I asked Altizer about this, and Altizeracknowledged his IOU to Teilhard. (He suggested later that I mayhave overwritten the amount a bit, but I doubt it.) He largelyaccepted Teilhard's view, Altizer said. It represented "themost important theological work in a long time." That seemed to leave Altizer with little to callhis own, apart from his unique view of the Incarnation. Eventhere, he appeared to be separated from Teilhard by a singleword: "partially." The students jumped on what was left. "That which was God," said Altizer,"will finally be real and present again in a wholly newform—if you like, in Teilhard's Omega point." Well, then, God wasn't really dead, was he? Altizermore or less conceded than "transformed" might be moreaccurate—that the passage from transcendence to immanencemeant "a totally new form of the godhead." "So weshouldn't panic?" asked a student. "Well," said Altizer, "the Christianchurch should. Because I'm saying that everything they stand foris dead." Pressed again on his word choice, Altizer said ofGod: "I think he's dead in a very crucial way . . . in hisoriginal divine form. Everything the Christian has called God isdead." All this sounded remarkably close to the minimalconcession that theologians had been trying to wring from Altizerfor some time. God lives, but man's concept of him is outdated.In my subsequent interview with him, after his return to Georgia,Altizer picked up his word and ran with it again: a less drasticword might fail to make the point, he said—and, as anewspaperman, I could certainly appreciate this. Suppose thatfirst story coming out of Atlanta had begun: "A theologianhere says God is immanent." The story would never have comeout of Atlanta in the first place; the complex and productivearguments behind the catchword might never have seen the light,and Altizer, at best, would be an obscure Dixie heretic. The word was not important really. What seemed toupset the Northwestern students far more was Altizer'sfundamentally apocalyptic view of the world. Once understood,Altizer appeared to stand in direct contradiction to the radicaltheology his name had come to dominate—because the mainthrust of that theology had probably been messianic andpragmatic. Radical theology is a big tent, and it hassheltered other theologians who also have said that God is Dead.But these others have not meant that God is Dead in Altizer'ssense—nor indeed have they really meant that God is Dead inany sense. Some of the people who are associated with this phrasehave meant to say simply that the word God is dead; theyhave abandoned the word as a semantic wreck which means allthings to all men, and they have tried to clarify the conceptthrough linguistic analysis. Others have studied God talk as a culturalphenomenon, asserting that man creates God in his own image, soto speak—that his idea of God is molded by his culturalprejudices—and they have tried to identify the real divinitywhich exists perhaps behind the man-made idols. Still others havemeant that God is hidden or mysterious, as Job found himto be, beyond the power of human comprehension, and they havecalled upon us to abandon the vain effort to understand Godmetaphysically, recommending instead that we do God's work byseeking social justice here on earth. Still another school appears to derive itsinspiration largely from Bonhoeffer. Its advocates speak of Godas absent in the sense that modern man no longer iscapable of experiencing God: the reality of God has somehow gonedead on him. But absence is not the same as death, and Altizer'sfellow radical William Hamilton, for example, has referred to"our waiting for God," implying that God perhaps willone day return: it may be that he has simply withdrawn for atime, in order that we may achieve our adulthood in Bonhoeffer's"world come of age." In one of his essays, Hamiltonsaid he followed Bonhoeffer in rejecting religion—whichis to say, "any system of thought or action in which God orthe gods serve as fulfiller of needs or solver of problems."Hamilton described radical theology as a movement from the churchto the world—a letting go of God's hand, as it were. And headded: "This combination of a certain kind of God-rejectionwith a certain kind of world-affirmation is the point where Ijoin the death of God movement.... If God is not needed, if it isto the world and not God that we repair for our needs andproblems, then perhaps we may come to see that he is to beenjoyed and delighted in.... Our waiting for God, ourgodlessness, is partly a search for a language and a style bywhich we might be enabled to stand before him once again,delighting in his presence." In other words, we won't comehome again until we have made it all by ourselves in the bigcity, or rather the big cosmos—and then won't Father beproud of us? Then we can sit on the front-porch swing togetherand trade stories, man to man, and really get to know each other.No more of this writing home for money; enough of this juveniledependency relationship: Andy Hardy is growing up. We are fallinginto parody here, but it is not our intention to poke fun; we aremerely trying to communicate a rather difficult idea, somewhat inthe manner of an editorial-page cartoonist. Hamilton, in anycase, has probably been the best-known Death of God theologiannext to Altizer, and Hamilton clearly has not been saying thesame thing that Altizer has been saying. Altizer really stands by himself. Only he has takena position which might be construed to imply an actual Death ofGod, and even in his case a stretch of the imagination isrequired to justify that word Death. He is in fact talking aboutthe Transformation of God. Nevertheless, Altizer has been theonly Death of God theologian to propose a really radicalmetaphysics. He has been the only one to suggest that an actual changehas occurred in the nature or ontology of God. The orthodoxatheist says that God never existed in the first place. BishopRobinson and the demythologizers say we ought to change our ideasabout God. Altizer alone says that God himself has changed. Altizer also rejects the idea that theology hasanything to do with social action. In fact he scoffs at the idea,and he ridicules the secularizers who are trying to make thechurch "relevant." ("Suddenly the church hadsomething to do.") He is not against good works, of course;but he feels that the secularizers are simply putting old wineinto new bottles, and Altizer wants a new wine. He can argue, anddoes, that good works have nothing to do with the relevance ofthe church; he can argue, and does, that the business oftheologians is theology; he can argue, and does, that only he anda few others have been doing theology. Harvey Cox is a physician,Altizer is a metaphysician. Only Altizer has been asking ultimatequestions about the nature of God and reality. The secularizers have been responding to historyand to social forces, and many people, missing his meaning, havesupposed that Altizer is doing the same thing. They interpret hismessage as a kind of existential reaction to the modern world andthe impact of technology; they think he is this-worldly, as thesecularizers are. But that is wrong. Altizer did not start withthe world, he said. He started with his vision. That is what heis talking about, and that is what concerns him: not the world assuch, but a vision of the world. Altizer at Northwestern fulminated againstotherworldliness. He implied he was this-worldly, since after allhe had equated God with this world. It seemed fair, however, toput him in his own category and describe him instead asinner-worldly. He told the Northwestern students that civil rightswas a "phony nineteenth-century issue" as far as churchrelevance was concerned. In fact, he said, since divine authorityhad collapsed (since the transcendent deity was dead), there wasabsolutely no basis left for moral decision-making. "AChristian can't make decisions on Viet Nam," he said. Norhad a Christian much to hope for at the moment. There was, saidAltizer, no messianic hope for "this world, this history,this society." There was only the apocalyptic hope for"the total transformation of all things." "Suppose I accept your dead God?" said aco-ed. "Where do I get my Brownie points?" Altizer could offer her only Omega points—anda sense of freedom to do something or other. Whatever she wantedto, apparently. He did not offer the God-is-love message ofBishop Robinson and the secularizers. In several hours, in fact,the word love never came up. Just that other word. Altizer returned to Atlanta, and we later had thefollowing conversation: Q. Let me see if I understand your viewpointcorrectly, from what you said the other night. You believe, doyou not, that there once was a transcendent God? A. Yes. Q. Was this God wholly transcendent, or was he alsoimmanent in the world? A. Both transcendent and immanent. Q. Did he create the world? A. This gets more difficult theologically. I do notbelieve in a literal creation or creation story. Frankly, Ihaven't worked this out. It's merely tentative. But I think interms of a kind of evolution of the cosmos. There was an originaltotality in which all things were one—no separation betweennature, man, and God. And out of this totality there evolved theworld or the cosmos as a distinct entity—and also God. Ithink in a certain sense God appears as creator in conjunctionwith the world's coming to exist apart from God. Q. As I understand it, you believe God emptiedhimself of transcendence and became immanent in theworld—that he incarnated himself in the person of Jesus.That sounds orthodox, to a point. But you stop with theIncarnation. You reject the Resurrection. You say, "God didnot jump back up into heaven." You say he stayed right herein the world after the Crucifixion. Is that correct? A. Correct. I believe the fullness, the totality ofGod passed into Christ, moving ever more deeply and fully andcomprehensively into the world, flesh, consciousness, andexperience. Q. Why did God decide to do this? A. He didn't decide. I understand the Incarnationas implicit and essential in the whole process of cosmicmovement. There was no arbitrary point where a decision wasreached. Q. So God is no longer transcendent but is immanentright now in the world? A. That's right.... Q. But in what is he immanent? In mankind? A. I wouldn't say only mankind. As I told you atNorthwestern, I reverence Teilhard's vision and largely acceptit. Q. By that, I take it you mean God is immanent inthe cosmos as a whole? A. Really yes, in the entire cosmos. Q. You speak of Jesus as the original Christ. Doyou mean by that there have been other, latter-day Christs? A. Originally the Incarnation was in the man Jesus.And then, following the Crucifixion, Christ progressively entersthe fullness of history and experience, ever more fully andcomprehensively becoming actual in the world . . . a forwardmovement . . . Christ becoming ever more actual, ever more real,ever more incarnate. Q. You mean this is an evolutionary process thatisn't finished yet? A. I like to think of this immanence itself as agradual process. God once was real and actual as a transcendentlord. He negated himself. Nevertheless, his epiphany ormanifestation as lord continues to linger in human experience,and it has a certain reality in that experience. I call this thedead body of God. It's real in human experience. And it willcontinue to be real until it is totally negated by the totaldawning of the incarnate Christ. Q. You mean there are parts of the cosmos in whichChrist is not yet wholly incarnate? A. Yes. Q. All this sounds rather like pantheism. Is it? A. I think it is . . . in the same sense thatTeilhard's vision is. In the cosmic process, it's a kind ofdynamic pantheism— God ever becoming other than he was inthe past—but nevertheless pantheism in that God eventuallywill be all in all. Call it a dynamic-process pantheism. Q. Could your immanent God in any sense beinterpreted to mean the Holy Ghost? A. Possibly. I'd almost be willing to use the wordspirit. I'd be willing. In part I do. It's just that this wordspirit is so kicked around these days. I'd rather stick with theword Christ. Q. But doesn't all this say something entirelydifferent from God is dead? You keep speaking of God in thepresent tense and the future tense. You agreed at Northwestern, Ibelieve, that transformed—completely transformed—wasperhaps more accurate than dead. That it was the church's conceptof God that was utterly dead. Isn't that what you said atNorthwestern? A. Well, I also want to say the transcendent lordis dead. He's become totally immanent, totally flesh, totallyworld. If I just speak of transformation, I fear the whole pointwill be lost. I'm really saying that the God a Christian prays toand worships is dead. Q. Dead? You start with a transcendent God and youend up with an immanent God. It seems to me you've killed theadjective, not the noun. The noun is God, and the noun remains. A. Yes. All right. But it doesn't remain in thesense that it still is what it was before. That which God hasbecome is wholly other. And there is, to my knowledge, no form ofChristian doctrine that admits or asserts this—that God hasdecisively transformed himself. I think God as God has died, andGod has passed into Christ. And he lives in Christ . . . but onlylives in Christ himself. If you like, God the father is dead. Q. Would you call yourself an atheist? A. Yes. I do. Q. The question arises, how do you know all this? Ibelieve you have stated that it came to you one day while youwere reading in the University of Chicago library. Could youdescribe the nature of your experience? A. That must be about ten years ago now. It was thesummer of 1955, I guess. I was reading Erich Heller's essay onNietzsche and Rilke. It was a very intense personal experience.I'd been thinking about these things for years, of course.Suddenly I was overwhelmed.... I felt it. I sensed it. And oncehaving sensed it, I've never been able to lose that sense. Q. I assume this wasn't something you arrived at bya purely rational process, from empirical evidence. Would it befair to call it a revelation? A. I'm afraid that would mislead too many people. Ithink this theological position is simply a consistentconsequence of thinking fully and radically about the meaning ofthe Incarnation. Once you grant that God fully and finally becameman in Jesus Christ, you can largely think through this wholething. Also, it's rooted in what I believe to be modern andcontemporary Christian experience and thinking. And I employpeople like Blake and Nietzsche as spokesmen for this radicalChristian vision. I base my work on theirs. Q. You often speak of your vision. Wasn't thisreally a personal vision you had? A. Let's put it this way. I believe there does infact exist a great body of materials of various kinds thatreflect and embody a modern radical Christian vision. Forexample, the works of William Blake. I haven't had these visions.I'm no visionary. I seek to be an interpreter of them. Thenthere's also Hegel's logic as a conceptual expression of the samething. You can build on the vision and think it through. Hegelallows you to see how Blake's vision is really a consistentresolution of the Christian faith. Q. But you didn't start with Hegel. Wouldn't yousay this understanding of yours came originally from anon-rational source? A. Oh yes. Every kind of understanding comesoriginally from a source other than the empirical, the rational.I'd include Freud and Marx in that category. Q. Would it be fair, then, to describe your visionas basically mystical in nature? A. There is a higher vision; or, if you like, aradically profane mystical vision. There is such a thing as amodern mystical vision, yes. But it's not the same as traditional[otherworldly] mysticism. It's radically profane. It's directedto the here and now—to life, flesh, energy. Q. You told the students the other night youcouldn't help them make up their minds on Viet Nam and otherissues. You said your view provided no basis for moraldecision-making. What did you mean? A. Well, basically this. My view does not lead toan ethical system or set of moral laws. I don't think anyone canthink responsibly about ethical problems today. Man has lost theability. Q. You said civil rights was a phonynineteenth-century issue. What did you mean by that? A. The problem itself, it seems to me, is basicallya matter of a group of people, Negroes, entering bourgeois,middle-class society. And that basically is an eighteenth- ornineteenth-century problem. It's an old problem, not a problempeculiar to the twentieth century. I think the church has falselyprided itself on being able to speak relevantly on this issue,when it's not really a contemporary issue at all. Further, we arenow moving into a phase of the problem that's highly technicaland modern. And as we do, the church will have increasingly lessand less to say. It will have to be solved by techniciansbasically—by economists and sociologists. Q. You mean the church shouldn't speak out on theissue? A. No, that's not the point. The church should notpride itself on being relevant. These church people congratulatethemselves. They say, "See how relevant the church is."And I think that's a great illusion. Q. Are you saying there's no teleological orultimate basis for any kind of a morality at all? A. All I'm saying is, as far as I can see rightnow, there is no source of moral or human insight intocontemporary human and social problems. This is a period ofterrible darkness we're going through. Either there is no basisfor morality or I just can't see it. Nobody else can see iteither. But I think it will come. I hope it will. Q. Shouldn't clergymen involve themselves in civilrights marches? A. Oh sure, sure. But we've reached the pointalready where there aren't going to be any civil rights marches.There won't be any role for churchmen to play. Their basic jobwas to identify the problem, to attract public attention. And nowthey've done that. Q. And now they have another job? A. That's the great problem. What is that job? Ithink the church has to be totally reformed. Q. Until you came along, the mainstream ofChristian upheaval seemed partly at least a reaction to socialforces—Bonhoeffer reacting to the Nazis, Cox tourbanization, Robinson to secularization. The reformers seemed tobe calling for social involvement and more or less suspendingjudgment on the fine points of theology. That is, they seemed tostart with the world. But you seem to start with this innervision of yours. Is that a fair statement? A. Yes. It's fair to say I started with the visionrather than the world. Q. And your vision should in no way be interpretedas a call to social action, to solve the problems of the world? A. That's right. That's not for me. But I don'twant to say it can't involve social action. Each one must findhis own way. It's a new kind of freedom if you like. This is whythe Death of God is pretty crucial. There's no longer any kind ofdivine law to follow. It's no longer there. Q. How would you differentiate yourself from peoplelike Harvey Cox and Bishop Robinson, who say Christians shouldseek God by involving themselves directly in the problems of theworld? A. The people I call secularists, they're basicallychurch reformers. They're reacting to a form of Christianreligiosity which has turned itself completely away from ourworld. They want basically to restructure the form of the church,to make the church relevant. They're not concerned withtransforming the heart of the Christian gospel. They think that'sthe same, and that's given, always. I myself, and Hamilton andothers, belong to a radical group who believe the very heart ofthe Christian center has got to be transformed. The transcendentGod the church has worshiped is no more. One difference is, Coxis not really a theologian. He's not interested in constructing atheological vision or system. Robinson, too. I'm concerned with afull theological understanding of contemporary faith. Q. In other words, you're more metaphysical? A. Yes. Except that word is such a . . . it makespeople see red. I'm not a Thomist or anything like that. But I amconcerned with an ultimate vision, with a full understanding offaith in the world today. Teilhard was metaphysical in thissense. Q. As one of the students asked the other night,"Where do I get my Brownie points?" What good does yourvision do, and what's in it for me? Isn't it just morbidintrospection, this naming of the darkness? A. I think it's liberating to know God is Dead.Otherwise, inevitably, consciously or unconsciously, we will lookupon reality as being something alien. Something we can't reallyknow. We'll be victims of it, slaves of it, because it'smysterious. To know God is Dead is to be liberated from thethreat of an unknown world, the threat of mystery. Q. What is the nature of the light you say you seeburning beyond the darkness? A. That dawns in accordance with the degree withwhich darkness is unveiled. And it's a light that makes possiblefreedom from oppression right now. To the extent that we'reliberated from darkness, we are able to give ourselves to life.And life itself becomes light. Darkness becomes light. Q. This ultimate consummation we're movingtoward—is the nature of it predestined? Or is theevolutionary process creative, in the Bergsonian sense? A. Something like the latter. Except thateverything that happens in the world will be a part of that finalOmega point. Q. You said the other night that God in a certainsense remains transcendent. What did you mean? A. We were speaking in the context of Judaism. Ithink the Jew can indeed know a transcendent God. The Jew livesin a kind of eternal covenant with God, and he can preserve thisbecause he lives in exile—because he is not totally involvedin our history. Q. How can this be? Are you saying there are twoGods, a Jewish God who's alive and a Christian God who's Dead? A. The Jew actually is in communion with thatancient epiphany of God—has preserved and perpetuated thatmoment in faith. Q. But you said that was over. Are you saying Jewsworship a God who isn't there—a false God? A. It's a false God as far as the Christian isconcerned. But I see no reason for the Christian to attack it assuch. What must be attacked are the forms of Judaism thatmaintain themselves within Christianity. That's the real danger. Q. But is it a false God as far as the Jew isconcerned? Are you simply saying the Jew has a right to worshipas he pleases? A. No. I think It's possible for the Jew actuallyto be in communion with this God. Christians must be totallyimmersed in history. Jews don't have to be. They're in exile. Q. I think there was another sense in which yousaid God remains transcendent. You were debating the point with aphilosophy major, and finally you agreed with him. A. Oh! The problem there was, he was usingtranscendent in a different sense—to refer to somethingbeyond the given, beyond the brute actuality of experience. Hewas using it in terms of vision. That's in a sense transcendent.In that sense, everything I say is transcendental. Altizer said he represents a far more basicchallenge to orthodox Christianity than the secularizers do, andno doubt he does —for he represents that influx of Easternideas we talked about: he represents pantheism. And pantheism isin the air, no question about that. The doctrine of transcendenceis challenged today as never before, and in Altizer'stheology—as in LSD cultism—Eastern immanence is givenfull and final expression. In one of his articles, Altizer calledupon the American theologian to "cast off his Germantutors" and "open himself both to the religious worldof the East and to the deeper sensibility of the Westernpresent." He added: "From the East we may once morelearn the meaning of the sacred.... We can encounter in the Easta form of the sacred which Christianity has never known, a formwhich is increasingly showing itself to be relevant to oursituation." Obviously, the leap to the East is just as evidentin radical theology as it is in the drug movement, at least in sofar as this implies a leap from transcendence toimmanence—and if Altizer has been the only importanttheologian so far to embrace pantheism without reservation, lessradical radicals have been embracing it with reservations. On asuperficial level at least, it is not much of a jump fromRobinson's position to Altizer's (which is not to imply thatAltizer derives from Robinson; in fact, Altizer was publishinghis views for a non-popular reader ship several years before Honestto God saw print), and radical theology on the whole can becharacterized essentially as a movement in the direction ofimmanence. It is significant perhaps that Harvey Cox, thatsquarest of all the radicals, was able to defend transcendence atNorthwestern only in a very limited way. He suggested it was"too early" to foreclose the possibility of atranscendent God; the discussion, he said, should "remainopen." It could be that man is simply incapable of answeringthe question one way or the other. Once the shock effect has worn off, the Death ofGod slogan may lose much of its appeal, and Altizer perhaps willsuffer an eclipse. Once understood, his apocalyptic message isnot likely to capture the imagination of this messianic PeaceCorps generation, and his unique view of the Incarnation issubject to considerable criticism. To some degree at least,Altizer has owed his success to the fact that few people haveactually grasped his meaning—the attacks against him havenot been well informed—and, from one point of view, the bestway to attack him is to explain him fully. But the loss of anunfortunate slogan will not put an end to the radical examinationof transcendence, and Altizer's path to immanence is not the onlyone. Altizer is both in and out of the radicalmainstream. He is in it so far as he leans toward immanence; heis out of it so far as he rejects the messianic hope for thisworld in the here and now. Particularly is he out of it in hisapparent rejection (or neglect) of a primary essence or conditionof Being which might provide the basis for an ethical system.This essence or condition has meanwhile been given its due by thedrug movement and by the bishop of Woolwich—and it also iscentral to that emerging phenomenon which is sometimes describedas humanistic psychology. Contents Page | Chapter 11 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-25IA087-000632-B031-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065506 text/html 35442HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:54:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:32:01 GMTContent-length: 35223 The Private Sea - Chapter 11 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 11. Humanistic psychology It is said that Freud had an almost pathologic fearof metaphysics. According to Jung, Freud was appalled by the"occult" implications he encountered in his explorationof the human psyche. Probing ever deeper into the mysteries ofthe unconscious region, he heard whispers perhaps from thatunseen world William James talked about—and they frightenedhim. Freud confessed to him, said Jung, "that itwas necessary to make a dogma of his sexual theory because thiswas the sole bulwark of reason against a possible 'outburst ofthe black flood of occultism."' Consider, for example, theidea of intra-uterine memories, or recollections of life in thewomb. If carried further this might suggest the possibility atleast of pre-uterine memories—which in turn might lend somesupport to the Eastern doctrine of reincarnation. Freud refusedto consider such implications, and this necessarily resulted inhis negative attitude toward the unconscious, which he regardedas a sort of garbage heap for man's brute instincts. As aconsequence, said Jung, psychology became for the most part"the science of conscious contents, measured as far aspossible by collective standards." But suppose for a momentthat the unconscious is something more than this. What if it isin fact man's link to ultimate reality and the Ground of hisBeing? Psychology has finally started to consider thispossibility, urged on in part by psychedelic evidence. In apioneering study, humanistic psychologist Abraham H. Maslowproposed that his fellow psychologists move Toward aPsychology of Being, and Maslow's unorthodox theories haverecently inspired something of a Freud is Dead movement. Thedevelopment is comparable in many ways to the radical upheaval intheology, and Maslow might well be described as the Bonhoeffer orRobinson of psychology. What does this mean, a psychology of Being? Maslow began by agreeing in a sense with Robinsonand disagreeing with Sartre. He began with the assertion thatevery man has "an essential biologically based innernature." This inner nature "is to some degree'natural,' intrinsic, given, and, in a certain limited sense,unchangeable, or, at least, unchanging." (That is to say, itis unconditional—from Robinson's viewpoint, transcendent.)Moreover, it is not bad or evil: it is either neutral incharacter or positively good. Man therefore would do well todiscover and develop it; rather than suppress it, he shouldfollow it: he should live his life according to its dictates.Psychology likewise should acknowledge it and seek to understandit. Freudian psychology is preoccupied with pathology;it is primarily a sick psychology, or a psychology of sickness.But it fails to define health. Or rather it tends simply toequate healthy behavior with successful adjustment to the socialenvironment, nothing more, and it regards conscience as a sort oflearned response: an internalization of one's "shall"and "shall not" parents. It is situational andsubjective. It does not suggest the existence of any values,goals, or ideals in any sense absolute, objective, orunconditional, and it does not provide for the possibility of anultimate reality or ultimate state of Being. On the other hand, Being psychology is a psychologyof health. It defines healthy behavior in terms of successfuladjustment to one's essential inner nature, and it regardsconscience as the "unconscious or preconscious"perception of that nature. It affirms, of course, the existence(or potential existence) of an ultimate reality or state ofBeing, and it says, in effect, "to thine own Self betrue." It does not ask what men do: it asks what they shoulddo. It asks what men are, but it also asks what men might be andshould become. Being psychology indicates that man has a built-inpotential, as it were, like the oak which is hidden in the acorn,and conscience is the intuitive awareness of that potential. TheFreudian superego may also exist, but its demands are imposedfrom outside: from the society and the culture, transmitted bythe parents. The conscience of Being, by comparison, isintrinsic; its demands are imposed from within, by the essentialinner nature: it is an inner voice which insists that we be trueto that nature, true to the future, true to the truth. Being psychology, or B-psychology, is differentfrom Deficiency psychology, or D-psychology. D-psychology studiessick people whose basic needs have not been satisfied—whoare afflicted, so to speak, with psychic deficiency diseases.B-psychology studies healthy people whose basic needs have beensatisfied— and who therefore can devote their energies tolife, to the world, and to growth: to the actualization of theiressential inner natures. Maslow developed his theories in part by studying aclass of healthy people he described variously as meta-motivated,growth-dominated, and self-actualizing. He also referred to thistype as inner-determined rather than outer-determined, recallingthe sociologist David Riesman's distinction between theinner-directed individualist and the other-directed conformist.He said further that self-actualizing people appear to be capableof a special kind of love and a special kind of cognition. Thesehe termed B-love and B-cognition, as opposed to D-love andD-Cognition, the letters again standing for Being on the one handand Deficiency on the other. What is more, he said, a capacityfor B-love and B-cognition will sometimes enable aself-actualizer to achieve a special kind of experience—anintense, if fleeting, moment of utter joy and completefulfillment. This Maslow called a "peak experience." D-love is a selfish love in which the lover seeksprimarily to satisfy his own needs; in short, it is I-It love.B-love is unselfish, non-possessive admiration for the Being ofanother person; in short, it is I-Thou love. Similarly,D-cognition can be summed up here as the I-It mode of perceptionand understanding, while B-cognition refers to an I-Thou view ofthe world. In B-cognition during a peak experience, saidMaslow, an object is not perceived in terms of use, purpose, orrelation to anything else; it is perceived as a whole. "Itis seen as if it were all there was in the universe, as if itwere all of Being, synonymous with the universe." TheB-cognizer becomes totally absorbed with the object to theexclusion of all else, and he admires it without comparing it,evaluating it, judging it, or desiring to possess it; above all,he does not rubricize the object, which means to say hedoes not attempt to classify it or put it in a category withother objects. The B-cognizer, moreover, is relatively"ego-transcending, self-forgetful, ego-less." He alsois non-motivated in terms of future action; he regards the peakexperience as a "self-validating" end in itself and notas the means to some future end. A "very characteristicdisorientation to time and space" occurs, and the B-cognizerfinds himself, subjectively, outside of time and space. He is"most here-now, most free of the past and of thefuture." He is therefore "non-striving, non-needing,non-wishing." His perception is nondualistic, and he thusdenies the existence of evil—or views it rather as"only a partial phenomenon, a product of not seeing theworld whole and unified." Being as such is good, or neutral.And finally, the peak experience is beyondabstractions—including verbal abstractions. It cannot reallybe put into words, since it is after all a view of the whole, andwords cannot express the whole. B-psychology's description of a healthy person'speak experience sounds very much, of course, like James'sdescription of mystical religious experience, Buber's descriptionof I-Thou experience, the drug cultist's description ofpsychedelic experience, and the Zen Buddhist's description ofsatori. Maslow's essential inner nature, as we have alreadyindicated, sounds very much like Tillich's Ground of Being andBishop Robinson's transcendent or unconditional God. And theB-psychologist's attitude toward the unconscious would certainlyappear to support the view of James and Jung. "Because theroots of ill health were found first in the unconscious,"wrote Maslow, "it has been our tendency to think of theunconscious as bad, evil, crazy, dirty or dangerous, and to thinkof the primary processes as distorting the truth. But nowthat we have found these depths to be also the source ofcreativeness, of art, of love, of humor and play, and even ofcertain kinds of truth and knowledge, we can begin to speak of ahealthy unconscious, of healthy regressions. . . . We can now gointo primary process cognitions for certain kinds of knowledge,not only about the self but also about the world." Maslow, unlike Robinson, did not attempt to say inso many words what man's essential inner nature might be. But aclue to his thought is provided perhaps by his expression ofwonder at "the mystery of communication between alone-nessesvia, e.g., intuition and empathy, love and altruism,identification with others, and homonomy in general." Maslowadded: "We take these for granted. It would be better if weregarded them as miracles to be explained." The scientist Lecomte du Nouy expressed the sameidea in his book Human Destiny when he pointed out that"the appearance of moral and spiritual ideas remains anabsolute mystery." How, then, are we to account for our"unaccountable aspirations"? The scientific unbelieverinsists upon cause and effect —and then refuses toacknowledge any cause creating such effects as love, conscience,charity, and sacrifice. The cause is denied because it cannot beseen. Thus, as physicist David Bohm has noted, nineteenth-centurypositivists such as Mach held that the idea of atoms wasmeaningless and "nonsensical" because atoms could notthen be observed. But even science will sometimes accept theevidence of things not seen, as in the case of the outer planets.The existence of some unseen planet was first suspected becauseof perturbations in the orbit of Uranus; when a proper telescopewas brought to bear, giant Neptune swam into view—and Plutolater was similarly discovered. So what would happen if we wereto focus our attention on the phenomena of love and morality,searching in the same way for the source of these perturbations?What might swim into view in this case? Evidence of an essential inner nature led Maslow toreconsider the possibility that mankind might be able to developa humanistic morality or scientific ethic. As it is, Westernmorality tends to be legalistic and authoritarian; our basicrules of conduct are handed down from above, as it were, in theform of commandments, on tablets of stone, and we are expected toobey them without asking questions. Thou shalt not kill, forexample. No doubt that is a very good law, and there is probablya very good reason for it—but we are not told what thereason is. Similarly, no particular reason is given for the lessbasic rules of conduct which are imposed upon us by mundaneauthority. As a general proposition, all in all, we are expectedto behave this way or that way because God said so, or ourparents said so, or Congress said so, or Emily Post said so. The system does work, in a fashion, if we sensethat the laws in question are for some reason good ones. Thusmost of us feel intuitively that the law against killing is agood law, which explains why it has remained on the books for somany years in so many lands, and most of us therefore do not killother people, unless of course we are told to by Congress or thePresident. But the system breaks down too, and especially so inan age of empiricism when people develop the disturbing habit ofdemanding a reason for everything. We are distressed, forexample, when criminals and juvenile delinquents band together ingangs, make their own rules, and refuse to honor the laws ofsociety. We wonder why it happens. But society itself is a gang—it is simply a very big gang—and its rules are no moresacrosanct than the Mafia's unless some valid reason can beproduced to recommend them: a reason, preferably, which willdemonstrate that the rules as such are grounded in the verynature of things. This is why men have dreamed of discovering a"natural law" which is grounded in the nature of Beingitself, demonstrably true and irrefutable: a law which no mancould possibly deny, having once understood it. Such a law indeed is central to the Tibetan conceptof Dharmakaya. As the Evans-Wentz edition of the TibetanBook of the Dead tells us: "Dharmakaya is thenorm of all existence, the standard of truth, the measure ofrighteousness, the good law; it is that in the constitution ofthings which makes certain modes of conduct beneficial andcertain other modes detrimental." In the East, for instance,human compassion is a matter of elementary logic based upon thesupposedly monistic character of mankind. "When you're cut,I bleed. Therefore, I had better see to it that you are notcut." In the West the idea of a natural law can be tracedback to Plato's assertion that virtue and knowledge are the samething: that all real virtue springs from knowledge alone. SaintAugustine perhaps was hinting at something of this sort when,addressing himself to God, he bemoaned the crimes of Sodom."But how can men's insults touch you, who are undefiled? Orwhat injury can be committed against you, who cannot be hurt? Butyour vengeance is in that which men do against themselves,because when they sin against you, they are acting wickedlyagainst their own souls, and iniquity gives itself thelie." Robinson likewise in his New Morality wasattempting to establish an ethic based on love, the Ground ofBeing, and he believed that this could be accomplished by demythologizing the legalistic Christian ethic. The West of courseinsists that the character of mankind is pluralistic andpersonal, not monistic and impersonal; in East and West alike,however, those who affirm the existence of a natural law are infundamental agreement on one point: they all base their argumentson the existence of a primary state of Being. Natural morality isnot possible unless Sartre was wrong and such a primary state ofBeing actually exists; it matters not in this case whether yourefer to that state as Atman or as an essential inner nature.Here, then, we discover a critical point of convergence whichbrings together the drug movement, radical theology,B-psychology, and Eastern metaphysics. Maslow, for his own part, conceded that all pastattempts to realize a natural morality had failed. But he addedthat contemporary developments in psychology "make itpossible for us for the first time to feel confident that thisage-old hope may be fulfilled if only we work hard enough."If men knew what they really were like, and what they were meantto become, the very nature of their Being would emerge as "acourt of ultimate appeal for the determination of good andbad." It would at last become possible to establish a systemof "morals-from-within."In the past, all efforts toestablish such a system have been frustrated by man's apparentinability to determine what his essential inner nature actuallyis. It is all very well to say there is a primary state ofBeing—but how does one form any precise knowledge of it? Maslow thought he now saw a way to solve thisproblem. The first step would be for psychology to abandon itsexclusive interest in sickness. Let psychology turn its attentionalso to a study of health, and of ends and values as well.Specifically, let it study the habits and attitudes of healthy,self-actualizing people: the growth-dominated B-cognizers andB-lovers who have peak experiences. Maslow said that "itlooks as if there were a single ultimate value formankind, a far goal toward which all men strive." All men tosome degree are struggling to attain that goal, which is therealization of their essential inner nature; but theself-actualizers by comparison have the goal already in sight.Presumably, then, psychology could learn a good deal by keepingthe self-actualizers under close observation—by examining,for example, the hedonic choices they make in the courseof their daily lives: by taking careful note of the things thatdelight them. And why do this? Because, said Maslow, such peoplewill automatically make the right choices. They will choosevirtue just as we choose a dessert, because virtue delights them."They spontaneously tend to do right because that is whatthey want to do, what they need to do, what theyenjoy . . ." To such self-disciplined people, said Maslow,we can safely say: "Do as you will, and it will probably beall right." And if this sounds familiar, it may remind us ofthat Augustinian directive from which Robinson constructed hisNew Morality. Through the self-actualizers, therefore, psychologycan discover "which values men trend toward." Indeed,said Maslow, "it is possible that we may soon even definetherapy as a search for values." This in turn calls to minda cartoon which appeared in the New Yorker, I believe,quite a long time ago. A psychiatrist glares down at thefree-associating patient on his couch and snarls, "Youcur!" Or something to that effect. The idea seemed funny atthe time, but in a sense it is just the sort of attitude Maslowhas proposed. Psychology should start making value judgments. Itshould say: "Here is what it is like to be fullyhuman." "This is wrong." "That isright." Maslow failed to dispose entirely of one problem:who decides what health is, and who chooses the self-actualizers?If such an all-wise person exists, then why bother with theself-actualizers? Why not study him instead? Again we meet one ofthose saber-toothed circles, and here again the matter mightrest—if Maslow stood alone in the witness box. As we havealready indicated, however, the case for a primary state of Beingis bolstered by the supporting testimony of psychedelicexperience, mystical experience, radical theology, and theEastern movement as such. Coming together as they do, all ofthese give added weight to Maslow's argument, just as Maslow'sargument gives added weight to them. Also, each of them providesas it were an additional laboratory tool with which to probe theunconscious—and thereby to test the assertions ofB-psychology. It is not necessary to depend upon peak experiencealone, or any one person's definition of a peak experience. Thepsychedelics would appear to be especially promising in thisconnection, and, in so far as it enables men to know themselvesbetter, LSD makes a natural morality far more of a possibilitythan it has ever been before. There is some evidence that LSD ineffect anesthetizes the Freudian superego—puts to sleepthose internalized parents—and thus allows the intrinsicconscience to take over. If you grant the validity of a primary state ofBeing, what are the practical implications of this? What would anatural morality actually mean in terms of human conduct? Theanswer is obvious if you assume that the primary state ismonistic in character—you're cut, I bleed—and thisinterpretation in fact suggests a possible distinction betweenlaw and justice. If mankind were a single man, and that man had agangrenous arm, law would simply whack off the arm to save theman. Justice would first do all it could to save the arm. Justicewould not be interested in punishing the arm, for the sake ofpunishment—and while justice itself might consent finally toradical surgery, it would do so only as a last resort. Lawrecognizes the integrity of the whole. Justice recognizes theintegrity of the whole, but it recognizes also the parts'participation in that whole. Monism therefore provides a firmbasis for decision-making in interpersonal relationships. It is aquestion simply of how much you are willing to hurt yourself. Arethe gains worth the pains—always remembering that the painsare really yours? (If Stalin had been a monist, for example, hemight have hesitated over his decision to liquidate the kulaks.)Indeed, this does seem to be the direction in which our courtsystem is presently moving, to the despair of many good citizens. As a general observation, in fact, whatever ourvoiced convictions, it might be said that we act as if life weremonistic. I am struck by this personally whenever I see a fireengine racing to a fire, or the United Nations in emergencysession—whenever society mobilizes its resources in somedramatic fashion to protect the welfare of individuals or thecommon good. And what, for that matter, is the real meaning ofour personal and social gregariousness? But after all, it is possible to account for suchphenomena without resorting to an unqualified monism. While itseeks to preserve the integrity of individual personality,Western religious tradition has been just as insistent that thereare bonds which in some ineffable way unite us all. We are toldthis again now by radical theology, by B-psychology, andespecially perhaps by the drug movement. Whether or not mankindis utterly monistic, psychedelic experience does seem to hint ata brotherhood which is something more than brotherhood—andto this extent it may help to provide a rationale for socialaction, including civil rights. As the LSD researcher Willis W.Harman has said in connection with those who somehow manage tobreak the spell of cultural hypnosis, whatever the means, a manwho is privileged to look at ultimate reality will knowthereafter from his own experience "that we are elements ofa greater whole, and that what one does to another he doesineluctably to himself." A monistic awareness, qualified or not, might alsoexplain why LSD has proved helpful in treating alcoholics, whosay they no longer feel isolated from the rest of the world, andin easing the anguish of terminal patients, who have reported newinsights into the real meaning of life, death, and immortality. In so far as it confirms an unconditional humannature, LSD might also be helpful in solving anotherphilosophical problem. Implicit in the idea of a natural ethicbased upon a primary state of Being is a possible validation offree will—as opposed to a mechanistic determinism. Themodern argument for free will has been founded very often uponthe science of quantum physics and Heisenberg's famous Principleof Uncertainty or Indeterminacy. Heisenberg said it is impossiblefor science to predict the behavior of an individual particle atthe atomic level, since the very act of observation andmeasurement will influence the behavior of the particle. (Thishas been compared with the difficulty a blind man would encounterif he attempted to learn about a snowflake by touching one. ) Butsome physicists have gone even further; carrying uncertainty tothe point of indeterminacy, they have asserted that individualparticles actually behave in a chaotic, capricious, and lawlessmanner. You can never tell what a particular particle is going todo next, and thus there is no causality or determinism in themicrocosmos. The laws of nature are derived only when you applythe theory of statistical probability to a vast number ofparticles; then individual capriciousness will cancel out, and itis possible to predict how matter will behave in the macrocosmos.Flip a coin once and it will come up either heads or tails. Flipit a million times and it will almost certainly come up heads ahalf-million times and tails a half-million times. Some philosophers and theologians have seized uponthis idea, finding in microcosmic anarchy a possiblejustification for the thesis that man himself has free will. Thisof course links free will inexorably to physics, and it isperhaps a rather dangerous position. In the first place, thereare those who suggest that the lawlessness of the particles isonly apparent; as Bohm has proposed, an explanation formicrocosmic behavior may yet be discovered at some deeper levelof causation below the atomic and subatomic. And where would thatleave free will, if not on a sawed-off limb? More to the point,as philosopher Ernst Cassirer has argued, ethics would surely bein a sorry position if it had to take refuge in the gaps ofscientific knowledge—in a mere possibility which is,essentially, negative in nature. Should freedom be equated withcauselessness? Is that the kind of ethic you would really preferif you had your choice? Could you trust such an ethic, and couldyou trust any person whose actions were determined by acapricious whim? Or would you prefer instead an ethic which isgrounded in reason, and would you rather do business withsomebody whose conduct is determined by his essential innernature? Describing Spinoza's views on the subject, Cassirerwrote: "To act freely does not mean to act arbitrarily orwithout prior decision; it means rather to act in accordance witha decision which is in harmony with the essence of our reason.This essence and with it the specific priority of reason consistsof the knowledge of the whole." True ethical judgment, saidCassirer, does not put a high value on capricious behavior;rather, "it values a course of action that springs from thebasic substratum of the personality and is firmly anchored init." Natural morality is predicated of course on justsuch a substratum—on a primary state of Being—and itsuggests in turn a kind of freedom we might describe as ontologicalfreedom. This has nothing to do with anarchy or lawlessness.It implies a freedom to be yourself—or more exactly, afreedom to become that which you were meant to be. In this sense,freedom for Beethoven would not mean a freedom to become a sailoror an architect or an outlaw: it would mean simply a freedom tobecome a composer of music. In the same sense, freedom for theacorn would be a freedom to become an oak tree—not ahibiscus or a sugar maple, but only an oak. Freedom, in otherwords, means the freedom to realize your essential inner nature,and Beethoven for example would be subject to a blind determinismonly if his father, say, forced him to study medicine.Ontological freedom applies both to the individual and to thewhole, and it is valid even if the whole should prove to be infact monistic. Here too Spinoza has spoken. If we arenothing more than parts of a whole which is in the process ofrealizing itself, we nevertheless contribute to that whole, eachand every one of us. It is an expression of us, just as much aswe are an expression of it. In so far as we partake of the whole,we each of us determine in part what the whole is and shall be.If we are cogs in a machine, we are not merely the servants ofthe machine: we each of us in part comprise the machine, and itis just as much subservient to us as we are subservient to it. Infact, we are the machine, and the machine is us. (What was itBergson said? The universe is a machine for the making of God?)In so far as the whole is free, then we also are free—in sofar as we partake of the whole. The sense of a dictatorialdeterminism arises only when we fail to recognize our trueidentity or essential inner nature, and it matters not whetherthat identity is pluralistic or monistic. The sense of freedomarises with our awareness of our identity—of ourdestiny, if you will—and we recognize that we are free whenwe understand that we are responding either to our own innernature or to the inner nature of a whole in which we partake.This perhaps is a deeper meaning of the saying "You shallknow the truth and the truth shall set you free." The truthis our essential inner nature, pluralistic or otherwise, and, tothe extent that it provides us with a greater awareness of thetruth, the psychedelic experience sets us free—as do alsothe peak and mystical experiences. Or so at least the argumentmight run. In his important book The Secular City,Harvey Cox has asserted that "the era of metaphysics isdead" and that "politics replaces metaphysics as thelanguage of theology." Perhaps metaphysics is dead for Cox,who apparently subscribes to the doctrine of God's hiddenness.But obviously it is very much alive for Altizer, for BishopRobinson, for B-psychology, for the drug cults, for the Easternmovement. In this case Cox may have completely misread the signsof the times, for it appears far more likely that we arewitnesses today to a significant rebirth of metaphysics. As wehave shown, even psychology is now asking ultimate ontologicalquestions about the nature of Being. And perhaps it wasinevitable that psychology should do this. As Tillich hasindicated, there are two kinds of anxiety—neurotic andexistential—and only ontology can distinguish the one fromthe other. Neurotic anxiety is unreal, or rather has a misplacedobject of attention, while existential anxiety is the result of arealistic analysis of the way things actually are. Clearly it isimportant to distinguish the two, and that is why Tillichcomplained about "the lack of an ontological analysis ofanxiety and a sharp distinction between existential andpathological anxiety." Two decades ago, at the end of the war, JacquesMaritain wrote: "What is essentially needed is a renewal ofmetaphysics. . . . What is needed first and foremost is arediscovery of Being, and by the same token a rediscovery oflove. This means, axiomatically, a rediscovery of God. Theexistential philosophies which are today in fashion are but asign of a certain deep want and desire to find again the sense ofBeing." He said further: "In perceiving Being Reasonknows God." Those words have a prophetic ring now. Arediscovery of Being is central to the contemporary developmentswe have discussed, and from one point of view it might be saidthat man today is making another desperate effort to find his Godagain. But, as noted, the rediscovered God has seemed more oftenthan not to be the Eastern God, and the new metaphysics has beendeeply influenced by mysticism. Today's radical ontology maytherefore be subject to a Western-oriented criticism, including amajor objection which was expressed some years ago, in anotherconnection, by no one less than Tillich: "Mysticism," said Tillich, "does nottake seriously the concrete and the doubt concerning theconcrete. It plunges directly into the ground of being andmeaning, and leaves the concrete, the world of finite values andmeanings, behind. Therefore it does not solve the problem ofmeaninglessness. In terms of the present religious situation thismeans that Eastern mysticism is not the solution of the problemsof Western Existentialism, although many people attempt thissolution." Buber raised the same point in rejecting theEastern concept of a mystical union with the godhead: "Whatdoes it help my soul that it can be withdrawn anew from thisworld here into unity, when this world itself has of necessity nopart in the unity—what does all 'enjoyment of God' profit alife that is rent in two? If that abundantly rich heavenly momenthas nothing to do with my poor earthly moment—what has itthen to do with me, who have still to live, in all seriousnessstill to live, on earth?" This brings us back to questions we asked earlier.Are the East and the West as diametrically opposed as they appearto be? Or are they both perhaps attempting to say the same thing,in different ways? Contents Page | Chapter 12 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-26IA087-000632-B032-9http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065528 text/html 39206HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:55:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:53 GMTContent-length: 38987 The Private Sea - Chapter 12 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 12. The Jordan and the Ganges Nature does not count, said Bergson. Neither doesit measure. The French philosopher, who died in 1941, has beenharshly judged for his anti-intellectualism and for the essentialrole he assigned to intuition in man's perception of ultimatereality. But his views on the limitations of the intellect haveacquired a new significance today in light of the contemporarydevelopments we have discussed in this book, and they may helpilluminate an important aspect of drug cultism and relatedmovements. In Bergson, indeed, those movements may yet discovertheir metaphysician. In criticizing intellect, and therefore science aswell, Bergson asserted that intellect has its eyes turned alwaysto the rear. By this he meant that the rational mind is concernedprimarily with prediction based on past experience, or in otherwords with the anticipation that cause-and-effect events willrepeat themselves in the future. And intellect favors this kindof perception because intellect is interested only in action, orin using things by acting upon them (I-It). Lecomte du Nouy madethe same point, no doubt taking it from Bergson, when hecommented, "The aim of science is to foresee, and not, ashas often been said, to understand." Of course it doesforesee. It is highly successful as far as its own limited goalsare concerned, and the world's work could not be done without it.But it does not understand, and philosophers delude themselves,said Bergson, "when they import into the domain ofspeculation a method of thinking made for action."Cause-and-effect prediction is valid enough in one sense, but theintellect in another sense has actually created cause and effect.It has done so by artificially dividing and, as it were, freezingin time a reality which in fact consists of a dynamic andindivisible Whole. The intellect cannot comprehend movement, andit cannot comprehend the Whole. In short, it cannot comprehendlife. Dividing? Freezing? What did Bergson mean? In the first instance, to borrow an example whichBergson used himself, suppose for a moment that reality consistedof a curved line. Science imagines it can grasp the ultimatetruth about life by chopping the Whole into pieces—byreducing reality to ever smaller units of matter and energy.Science therefore would divide the curved line into individualpoints or segments, and it would then try to explain the Whole interms of its parts. But each of the individual segments would, initself, be almost a straight line—and the smaller thesegment, the greater the illusion of straightness. Thus, byrestricting its vision, science quite likely would propose thatreality consists of a straight line, or rather a series ofstraight lines. Following the same sort of logic, we can imaginescience announcing the discovery that Wordsworth's ode iscomposed of twenty-six basic particles (the letters of thealphabet), and while this observation is perfectly correct, ithardly captures the meaning and significance of the poem as aWhole. As for movement, Bergson likened the intellect to amotion picture camera. The intellect simulates movement by takinga series of snapshots, each one of which is frozen in time forpurpose of analysis. Intellect studies these snapshots and thinksthat in doing so it is studying true motion. But clearly it isnot. This Bergson referred to as the cinematographical fallacy,which has its basis in "the absurd proposition that movementis made of immobilities." And thus Bergson explained theparadoxes of the ancient Greek philosopher Zeno, including theparadox of the arrow fired from a point A to a point B. Accordingto Zeno, the flying arrow must successively occupy a series oflesser points between A and B. and it must obviously be at restat each such point, at least for a moment; therefore it ismotionless during the entire course of its passage. Or again, thearrow in its flight must first cover half the distance from A toB. But before it can do that, it must first cover half thedistance from A to the midpoint. And half of that distance. Andhalf of that distance. And so on, until at last we seethat it is impossible for the arrow to get started at all. But weknow that the arrow does travel from A to B. so there must besomething wrong with Zeno's argument, and Bergson resolved theproblem by suggesting that the flight is in fact "anindivisible movement." Once the flight is over, you cancount as many imaginary points as you like along its trajectory.The fact remains that the flight itself was accomplished "inone stroke," from A to B. although a certain amount of timewas required for this flight. Thus Bergson accused the intellectof neglecting time, or duration, as an actual factor in themosaic of reality. Science deals with points of time, he said,but it does not deal with time itself or with motion as such. On the other hand, said Bergson, instinct directlyinstalls itself within movement and reality. It refuses torecognize those points of time and those snapshots of life whichare nothing more than "arrests of our attention."Instinct thereby provides us with a form of knowledge which is"practically useless, except to increase pure understandingof reality." Bergson did not advocate that we rely solely oninstinct. Nor did he deny the necessary function of theintellect. But he did reject an utter reliance on intellect aloneor instinct alone. The one is necessary for survival, the otherfor understanding. "There are things that intelligence aloneis able to seek, but which, by itself, it will never find. Thesethings instinct alone could find; but it will never seekthem." But intuition can both seek and find them.Intuition for Bergson was a combination of instinct andintelligence—it was instinct guided by intelligence—andthe same happy marriage has been proposed by many others,including Gibran. Thus instinct is the wind which fills the sailsof our little ship, as it skims over the waves of this earthlyexistence. And intellect is the rudder with which we steer theship. Similarly, life is complicated only when we consider itsparts rather than the Whole, and its apparent complexityincreases in proportion with the number of parts which wesynthetically ascribe to that Whole. And this perhaps is thebasis of the Hindu teaching: "He who knows OM knowsall." (He who knows the monistic One knows all.) If theconsciousness that slumbers in instinct should awake, saidBergson, "it would give up to us the most intimate secretsof life." It would do so by revealing to us the Whole,philosophy being nothing less than man's attempt to dissolve oncemore into that Whole from which he has estrangedhimself—that Whole where there are no measurements and nolaws (only science has laws, not nature), where "there isnothing left but the reality that flows, together with theknowledge ever renewed that it impresses on us of its presentstate." That, in brief, was Bergson's case against aslavish reliance on the rational intellect, and it would seemthat his point of view today is reflected to a considerableextent in the assertions of radical theology, psychology, andpharmacology. Maslow, for example, has expressed his criticism of"the need-motivated kind of perception, which shapesthings . . . in the manner of a butcher chopping apart acarcass." We must give up, he said, "our 3,000-year-oldhabit of dichotomizing, splitting and separating in the style ofAristotelian logic.... Difficult though it may be, we must learnto think holistically rather than atomistically." In thesame sense, in the context of Zen, Suzuki stated that the centralfact of life "cannot be brought to the dissecting table ofthe intellect," and he said further: "To stop the flowof life and to look into it is not the business of Zen."Taking a metaphor from chess, Dr. Sidney Cohen described LSDperception as a kind of knight's-move thinking which leaps overlogical premises and formal syllogisms. Huxley called for arecognition of the non-verbal humanities, or "the arts ofbeing directly aware of the given facts of our existence."There is New Theology's emphasis upon "presentness" andhere-now, derived especially from Bonhoeffer, Bultmann, andBuber. We could give many more examples, but perhaps we have madeour point—that the psychic pendulum may be swinging againfrom the rational and the conscious to the intuitive and theunconscious, for better or for worse, resulting in a phenomenonwhich Maslow has termed "the current call back to rawexperience as prior to any concepts or abstractions." Our acceptance of the intellect's perceptions hasalways been tempered, to some degree at least, with doubt anduncertainty. Consider a nightmare. What does it represent, if nota temporary suspension of the natural order we normally perceive?And what does it express, if not a concealed fear that cause andeffect are not wholly to be trusted or depended upon—thatthey may break down at any moment in waking life, leaving usnaked and defenseless? We sense perhaps that the ordered universewith its immutable laws is not real at all but our own invention,and there is no guarantee that those laws tomorrow may not berescinded. In the nightmare they are rescinded, revealing to usour subliminal anxiety. But anxiety can turn to joy—and does so in themystical, peak, and psychedelic experiences. We are suggesting,then, that there is a common factor in all of thesemeta-experiences. The common factor is an apparent suspension ofcause and effect—and this in turn is the result of atemporary paralysis of the intellect, as Bergson defined theintellect. Simply that and nothing more—or that and nothingless. We are suggesting also, as indicated earlier, that theintellect is the basis for the myth of the Demiurge, thatimperfect deity who is the cause of the fall from pure Being, thecreation of matter, our phenomenal existence, and the Net ofIllusion. And such an interpretation might well enable us toaccommodate within the radical Western framework many fundamentaldoctrines of Eastern metaphysics. After all, it is possible todemythologize the East as well as the West, and such an effortnow could lead at last to that reconciliation which has long beenpredicted. In the East, as also in Plato's philosophy, the Netof Illusion has commonly been blamed on the body, or morespecifically the senses, with the assertion that the worldperceived by the senses is not real. The Eastern viewpoint hastherefore appeared to be world-denying, and as such it has foundsmall favor in the West, where men for the most part have obeyedan impulse to affirm the world, sorry as it may seem. But thereis an alternative theory, and the contemporary meta-experiencemight seem to confirm it. It is not the body which is at fault,but only a part of the body: namely, the noetic brain, orthat prefrontal bulge, pronounced in man, which accounts for therational process and the rational way of viewing the world. Thus the world itself is real enough; it is onlyour way of looking at the world which is not real. It is our modeof perception that leads us astray, and it is not the senseswhich deceive us but rather the mind or intellect which receivesand interprets the sensory input. That evolutionary gift, thecerebral cortex, has enabled us so far to survive and to prosper,but it also has distorted our vision of ultimate reality. Itdirects our vision in such a way that we can see the world nowonly in a symbolic fashion, in terms of use and action. We knowwhat happens, for example, when a man puts on a pair of thoseinverting spectacles which cause all images to appear upsidedown; after a time the man will adjust to the situation, and theimages will appear to him right side up again. In the same way,perhaps, there is something which determines that we shall alwayssee things in a certain manner: a kind of internal processingcenter for the raw data from the senses. No doubt this is for ourown good, just as the rigid rules and the white lies of theparent are no doubt intended for the welfare of the child. But itis nevertheless restrictive, and it is based in a sense on a formof deceit. It might be argued, then, that Eastern wisdomconceals an esoteric teaching along the lines of this sameproposition. The East, it may be, has also meant "asif." The Net of Illusion does not refer to the world atall; it refers to our perception of the world. By the same token,OM is not an immaterial abstraction which transcends the world ofmatter and earthly existence; it is the world we live in but donot see: it is here-now, I-Thou, and "the reality thatflows." Nirvana therefore does not imply a release from thebody which leaves the world behind; it implies a mental orspiritual awakening which allows us to look at the world as itactually is. It does not deny the world. It affirms the world butrejects all partial views of it. It rejects the intellect, and itrejects the supposed order which intellect imagines it perceivesin cause-and-effect relationships. As Spinoza suggested, thisorder perhaps is self-realizing. It is what we look for, what weare used to, and what we expect. If the world tomorrow shouldfall into disorder, we should soon perceive this too as perfectorder. In Mahayana Buddhism, the East itself has appearedto move toward a similar interpretation—from a denial of theworld to a more perfect affirmation of the world—and thismovement, as we have seen, comes to full expression in theteachings of Japanese Zen Buddhism. The goal of Zen is satori.And satori is not a denial of the world, nor is it a formof release from the world. It is, said Suzuki, the acquiringof a new viewpoint. It is a new way of looking at things, andit is designed specifically to overcome the intellect's way oflooking at things. It is designed to destroy the intellect. AsSuzuki put it: "Satori may be defined as intuitivelooking-into, in contradiction to intellectual and logicalunderstanding." It is not interested in concepts,abstractions, and a limited perception; "it does not care somuch for the elaboration of particulars as for a comprehensivegrasp of the whole, and this intuitively." It is interestedin the here and now, and it accepts the world. "What was upin the heavens, Zen has brought down to earth." It tooproclaims the reality that flows. Thus the Zen master denies thatreality is this, that, or the other thing; and when he is askedwhat is left, he slaps his pupil and declares, "You fool,what is this?" Satori, then, is a new kind ofperception; but it is nevertheless a perception of this world."It is not that something different is seen, but that onesees differently." All this would seem to indicate that the radicalWest and the demythologized East are not so far apart concerningthe Net of Illusion, and the worldly Westerner need not hesitatefor this reason to join that so-called leap to the East. FromDietrich Bonhoeffer to James Bond, the contemporary emphasis uponthis world and this time is wholly compatible with the esotericinterpretation of Eastern thought. In so far as they confirm thereality of this world, the new insights into the nature ofmeta-experiences challenge the orthodox Hindu as much as they dothe orthodox Baptist, and we may be experiencing today not somuch a leap to the East as the emergence at last of a possibleEast-West synthesis: a historic blending, as it were, of thewaters of the Jordan and the Ganges. If the East and West should agree that the world isreal, however, where would this leave the question ofimmortality? And what of reincarnation? Reincarnation has been represented as a cycle ofdeath and rebirth, while nirvana has been represented as arelease from this cycle—and a release thereby from theworld. After a final death, according to the popular Westernview, one merges with the Absolute and thus achieves immortalityin a state of pure Being somewhere beyond the pitiful world ofappearances and phenomena. We have said, however, that the worldbeyond the world of appearances is this world seen in adifferent way. We have said that nirvana is realized in thisworld by living men, not in some other world by dead men. Nirvanais the pure experience of the present moment in this world hereand now. That at least was the esoteric interpretation, andwe might very well ask, then, what this interpretation has to sayon the question of death and immortality. Does it not in factneglect the question altogether, leaving unanswered the fate ofman when life is ended and death occurs? The esoteric reply might be that life never endsand that death is just one more delusion of the intellect.Immortal life is not experienced in some ethereal realm beyondthis world; it is experienced in this world, here, and that wasthe deeper meaning of the statement that nirvana is realized inthis world by living men. To see the world as it really is meansto understand that life is immortal. And thus the myth of theterrible wheel of death and rebirth. The wheel is caused by theintellect, and it is nothing more than the rational way oflooking at things. The wheel is the I-It mind. It does not meanthat we are cursed to return again and again to this world, forthere is no other place we could possibly go. There is onlythis world. There is nothing else. The myth means that we arecompelled by the intellect to go on and on imagining there issomething else, and also to go on and on imagining the worldexists as the intellect portrays it. To escape from the wheelmeans simply to become aware that the world it portrays is notthe real world at all, or not the whole world. To escape from thewheel means to understand that death is false and that life isimmortal. You shall know the truth and the truth shall set youfree, from death as well as mechanism. If the intellect by naturecannot understand life, it follows that the intellect by naturecannot understand death. Its view of death results from the factthat it looks only at the parts, not at the Whole. If it wouldonce look at the Whole, it would see immediately that life isimmortal. This interpretation would seem to justifyimmortality on a strictly monistic basis, by sacrificingpluralism; it preserves the One only by denying the reality ofthe individual selves. And what of the Western emphasis onpersonal survival of the individual self or soul? The esotericdoctrine would be that it is precisely our insistence on personalimmortality which makes us blind to our actual immortality. Theindividual ego or personality has no real significance, andtherefore the death of this personality has no real significanceand should not be regretted. It is only because we insist on thesignificance of the one that the fact of the other seems soterribly important to us. And anyway, what do we really mean bypersonal? The truth is, the Western emphasis on this element haslately become at least somewhat less emphatic. In rejecting whathe called the religious interpretation of Christianity,Bonhoeffer wrote from his prison in Berlin: In my view, that means to speak on the one hand metaphysically and on the other hand individualistically. Neither of these is relevant to the Bible message or to the man of today. Is it not true to say that individualistic concern for personal salvation has almost completely left us all? Are we not really under the impression that there are more important things than bothering about such a matter? (Perhaps not more important than the matter itself, but more than bothering about it.) I know it sounds pretty monstrous to say that. But is it not, at bottom, even biblical? Is there any concern in the Old Testament about saving one's soul at all? Is not righteousness and the Kingdom of God on earth the focus of everything, and is not Romans 3.14 ff., too, the culmination of the view that in God alone is righteousness, and not in an individualistic doctrine of salvation? It is not with the next world that we are concerned, but with this world . . . Tillich wrote: Even if the so-called arguments for the "immortality of the soul" had argumentative power (which they do not have) they would not convince existentially. For existentially everybody is aware of the complete loss of self which biological extinction implies. The unsophisticated mind knows instinctively what sophisticated ontology formulates: that reality has the basic structure of self-world correlation and that with the disappearance of the one side, the world, the other side, the self, also disappears, and what remains is their common ground but not their structural correlation. Again, what do we mean by personal—and bypersonal survival? The meta-experience suggests that we are allexpressions or aspects of a primary state of Being. And this isimmortal. Therefore, we too are immortal—for we are it. Ineach of us the primary state comes briefly to a sharp focus: wesuddenly appear, like the dew that condenses from the stillmorning air, or a wave that lifts from the surface of the sea.The dew burns away, the wave drops, and we die. But there is noreal death. There is something elemental which survives andre-expresses itself. Thus a great actor might look back on theroles he has created and might also forget some of his lesserperformances; but he does not imagine that he himself died withthe closing of a play: he goes on, growing in talent, and evenhis failures may serve to instruct him. Similarly, what dies whena man dies is simply a role. What dies is merely a point of focuswhere Being had concentrated itself. What dies, in the lastanalysis, are only the particular memories which Being hadaccumulated at this point or that point, in this role or theother. And even the better of these are preserved by speech andby pen. What dies are only particular points of view. And thebetter of these are also preserved, for so long as they seemvalid: until still better replace them. All this is what the meta-experience seems to tellus, and no doubt it does not look very convincing or comfortingon the printed page. Perhaps it appears to say only that lifegoes on—meaning that life goes on but you do not. Butdescriptions of the meta-experience are not the same as theexperience, and the experience would seem to mean something morethan life goes on: it would seem to mean that you go ontoo—although not in the traditional sense of reappearingsomewhere after death with all of your thoughts, memories, andpersonal cachets intact. However desirable this latter kind ofsurvival might normally appear to us, the fact remains that themeta-experiencer finds it neither desirable nor in any senseimportant. In a state of unsanity, it just doesn't matter. Possibly the West could assimilate thisinterpretation of immortality, if it had to, since nobody reallybelieves in personal survival anyway. We might be able to accepta monistic structure after death. What is far more difficult toaccept is the thought that life has this character here upon theearth. The idea that other people do not really exist as separateentities can be a terrifying idea—pure hell, infact—for it leaves you more alone even than Sartre wouldleave you. Not we are alone, with no excuses, but I am alone.There is an appalling difference between those two statements,and it is really the fundamental difference between the Westernview and the Eastern. If life after death can be purchased onlyby paying the price of earthly pluralism, there are many perhapswho would not care to pay that price—who would give up theformer, if they could, to retain the latter. And obviously youcannot have both a monistic immortality and a pluralisticmortality, since monistic survival is predicated on theassumption that life itself is monistic. There may therefore be adeep and basic wisdom reflected in the West's instinctiverejection of this horror. On the other hand, however, it could bea matter not of wisdom but of courage, or the lack of it: to saythat the idea is terrifying is not to say that it is not true. Inany case, it is a question to be faced—posed again now bythe meta-experience. And it is hard. Very hard. This is why wesaid earlier that the Eastern challenge to pluralism is morecritical even than the challenge to transcendence. Meta-experience does not really deny thepossibility of some unseen dimension which transcends theexperience; it simply fails to provide us with any evidence tosupport the possibility—and, further, it does not suggestany need for this hypothesis. If there is a transcendent power,well and good. If not, that is all right too. The realitysuggested by the experience is reality enough, if that is allthere is, and the experience therefore has nothing to do with theexistence or non-existence of a separate God. The experiencetells us only that our normal perception of the world is limitedand limiting: that we are deceived in our perception by a mentalprocess, the seat of which can be anatomically localized in thehuman brain—which can even in fact be excised by surgery.The experience tells us to stop living only in the past and thefuture, or in a present moment which is perceived always in termsof the past and the future. It tells us that we need no longer beestranged from reality and from ourselves. The Eden story can nowcome to its inevitable and happy conclusion; the flaming swordhas been extinguished, and we are free at last to re-enter thegarden. It tells us this, and it does not tell us there is notranscendent God. After all, how could it? Negatives are hard toprove in any instance, and I cannot, for example, conclusivelydemonstrate that there is not at this moment a pink owl perchedin a lime tree on the fifth moon of Jupiter. Nor do I especiallycare whether there is or isn't. But only a fool would insist thathis vision necessarily takes in the whole of reality, and onewonders if God himself could ever be sure there was not somewheresome other God who transcends him. Thus the meta-experience tellsus only what it sees; it speaks to us of this world—and itmay be that this esoteric interpretation at least partiallyanswers the objection of Tillich and Buber that mysticism isworld-denying and therefore an inadequate response to existentialanxiety. The meta-experience, then, is not directlyconcerned with the question of God; but it is not for this reasonany the less fundamental in its assertions. As William James putit to us, quoting Leuba: "Does God really exist? How does heexist? What is he? are so many irrelevant questions. Not God, butlife, more life, a larger, richer, more satisfying life, is, inthe last analysis, the end of religion. The love of life, at anyand every level of development, is the religious impulse." Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that themeta-experience offers an accurate perception of ultimatereality. We still must ask whether it is wise or prudent to seekthat experience and achieve that perception. For one thing, the experience suggests that symbolsserve only to distort our view of the actual world. But I cannever forget Helen Keller's story of that day at the well house,at the age of seven, when she first learned the meaning oflanguage. Before that, she said, she had been only a wild littleanimal lost in the dark, unable to give love or receive it."Before that supreme event there was nothing in me exceptthe instinct to eat and drink and sleep. My days were a blank,without past, present, or future, without hope or anticipation,without interest or joy." Then Anne Sullivan held one of herhands under the running pump, and into the other she spelled out"w-a-t-e-r." The meta-experiencer would say of coursethat "w-a-t-e-r" and water are two different things;but Miss Keller has given us her own reaction. "I knew thenthat 'w-a-t-e-r' meant the wonderful cool something that wasflowing over my hand. That living word awakened my soul, gave itlight, hope, joy, set it free!" Or again: "All at oncethere was a strange stir within me —a misty consciousness, asense of something remembered.... Nothingness was blotted out....That word 'water' dropped into my mind like the sun in a frozenwinter world." And we might do well to remember this beforewe decide to blow out that sun. An obvious objection to the meta-experience is thatit denies or ignores the existence of evil—which itconsiders simply a dualistic deception. And this was the mainobjection James had to the optimistic mysticism of Whitman. Youcannot ignore evil, said James, for "the skull will grin inat the banquet." "Here on our very hearths and in ourgardens," he said, "the infernal cat plays with thepanting mouse, or holds the hot bird fluttering in her jaws.Crocodiles and rattlesnakes and pythons are at this momentvessels of life as real as we are; their loathsome existencefills every minute of every day that drags its lengthalong." For his part, James preferred an optimism whichfirst acknowledged evil and yet saw hope. Only this could wereally trust. There are the clear and present dangers whichthreaten the individual who is in the grips of a meta-experience:running in front of cars, leaping from windows with theexpectation of flying, a generalized indifference to injury anddeath. But there is also a less clear and even more presentdanger which threatens the vitality and welfare of societyitself, and this is the danger of a quietistic indifference tosocial goals and social rewards. Until very recently there waslittle cause for concern about this, and Maslow provides us withan excellent example. While he conceded there was a possiblequietistic danger inherent in the peak experience, he added thatthe experience came rarely even to self-actualizing people, andas late as 1962 he wrote: "Therefore the problem posed hereis more an ultimate than an immediate one, more a theoreticalproblem than a practical one." Now LSD has made the problemboth immediate and practical, and the issue must be dealt with. Prohibitive laws are one answer, and certainlythere is little to be said for the so-called Gumball Machinetheory that psychedelics should be freely dispensed to thegeneral population, with no restrictions. We do after all havegun laws (though not very good ones); we have laws regarding thepurchase and consumption of liquor; and there are regulations andlicensing procedures for people who want to drive autos or flyairplanes. In view of the potential dangers of an immediatenature, it might seem fair to put psychedelics in the samecategory as alcohol, guns, planes, and cars. But in fact thegovernmental response has been to outlaw them almost altogether.This apparently has succeeded only in frustrating some veryimportant research by scientists, and it is doubtful in any casewhether legal measures can resolve the more basic questions thatare raised by the drug movement. There is the other side of the Delphic coin. KnowThyself, yes. But also Nothing in Excess. As Suzukiput it: "There is also such a thing as too much attachmentto the experience of satori, which is to bedetested." This appears to be a very neat answer, but it ismuch too easy telling people to behave themselves, and urgingmoderation in this thing of all things is no solution. LSD maynot be addictive, but truth is. This brings us to the test James suggested for therevelations of drunkenness. "If merely 'feeling good' coulddecide," said James, "drunkenness would be thesupremely valid human experience." The question is—doesthe experience work out when it is inserted into the environment?This is another way of asking whether the individual continues tofunction and survive, and whether or not the world's work stillgets done. But the psychedelic quietist would reply that noneof these things matters. It is the environment that is out ofjoint, and the world's work is ridiculous. As for survival, lifeis eternal— especially so for a psychic mutant. And just bythe way, there is nothing evil about pythons and rattlesnakes. This is not to say that all drug cultists arequietists. In fact, there is a fundamental dichotomy within thedrug movement, and this is reflected in the programs andphilosophies of the two major psychedelic churches—theChurch of the Awakening and the Neo-American Church—thatexisted before Timothy Leary's League for Spiritual Discovery wasfounded in 1966. The Church of the Awakening, mentioned earlier,might be described as the middle-class right wing of themovement. Many of its members are businessmen or professionalpeople, and the church insists that even psychedelic religion hasboth an internal and an external function—the latter to beexpressed in terms of "love," "service," and"growth." In its statement of purpose, the church adds: It is important to recognize and to understand the existence of these two functions, internal and external; to recognize that we have a basic need and urge to learn, and an equally basic one to serve, to share. Next, of course, there must be an aspiration of the achievement of these objectives within the heart of each of us. And then, this knowledge and aspiration must be channeled into action. We must do something about it! The Neo-American Church, on the other hand,represents more or less the bohemian left wing of the drugmovement. It would seem to be dedicated only to "theappreciation of Transcendental Reality," and, although thechurch officially advocates a kind of revolutionary nihilism, themembership in general appears to be more interested in withdrawalthan revolt. The inclination is to "turn on and dropout." There are individual exceptions, of course, but thisis the overall impression one gets. The Neo-American Church to date has received farmore publicity than the Church of the Awakening has, and it hasbeen more aggressive in recruiting new members—particularlyamong the young. While a cleavage does exist, then, it would seemnevertheless that there are now many more quietists thanactivists within the drug movement as a whole, and the problemgrows more pressing with every day that passes. The psychedelic quietist of course does notconsider his attitude a problem—he considers-it asolution—and in fact he might argue that there is precedentfor his decision to withdraw from the mainstream, renouncing thegoals and rewards of society. Would not identical consequencesfollow if Christians started to take the New Testament literally? The quietist asserts that there is no destinationahead of us; we are already there. He announces, in effect, thathe is getting off the bus. It may be, then, that the question comes down tothis: Is the cosmic bus going anywhere? Contents Page | Chapter 13 | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-27IA087-000632-B032-49http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065554 text/html 25647HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:55:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:45 GMTContent-length: 25428 The Private Sea - Chapter 13 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 13. OM or Omega? There may often be good reasons for bad laws. Thesexual act, for example, is condoned only if the partnersinvolved are a male and a female who are married (to each other),and any deviation from that pattern is proscribed as sinful andevil. It is difficult to believe, however, that there is anythingintrinsically wicked in the performance of a mechanical actengaged in by consenting partners. Young people especially aremore and more inclined to ask, "Why not?" And thereasons offered are not very convincing. But the reasons offered may not be the realreasons. Human society is founded pragmatically on thefamily unit, and it has therefore been necessary to encouragematrimony and to challenge at once any conduct or philosophywhich appears to threaten the stability of that institution. Thusthe marriage relationship is represented as the only legitimatesource of sexual gratification, and thus also the myth ispromulgated that sex outside the marriage bed is a personal sinagainst your body and soul—a violation of heavenly law. Butthe law is man-made, not celestial, and the sin in fact may bereal enough—but it is social, not personal. It is a sinagainst the social structure and therefore a sin against thecommon good. Such an idea of course is hard to convey, andsociety (or life) has relied instead upon a necessary fiction.There are many today who recognize the fiction and who seek todestroy it; but they fail to recognize the reason for thefiction, or the purpose it has served, or the problems involvedin replacing it. Their efforts therefore are met with a blind andinstinctive resistance, which they assess as mere prudishness.But it is more than prudishness; it is life trying to protectitself, as best it can, in the only way it knows how. In the same sense, perhaps, there would appear tobe an instinctive reaction against the drug movement's monisticpronouncements—as also its quietistic emphasis upon the pureexperience of the here-now present moment. Assuming that life (orsociety) has some dumb understanding of its own welfare, or itsown destiny, we might inquire into the source of this reaction. As for monism, an analogy could be made to thehuman body and the cells which compose it. The body is a monisticwhole in which the cells all partake, although the cells can haveno notion of that fact: each is assigned its specializedfunction, thus enabling the body to go about its business. Whatwould happen, then, if these dutiful cells or selves shouldsomehow gain awareness of the greater Self in which theyparticipate? What would happen if they ceased their functioningto con template the body? Most likely, the body would not likethat very much and would order the cells to stop it at once. Forthe greater Self has its greater business to attend to. If thehand indeed is divided into five fingers, the better to do itswork, this clearly implies, does it not, that there is work to bedone? And it cannot be done if the fingers are curled inward in aself-admiring fist. A similar interpretation is possible in the case of"presentness." As we have seen, a here-now rejection ofthe intellect's perception is a rejection in essence of the pastand the future—especially the future—and this brings usagain to another East-West dichotomy which seems at least to bebasic in nature. It is said that the orthodox East looks backwardto a primordial totality (and in this sense perhaps itacknowledges the past, but not in the sense of using the past topredict future action). The demythologized East does not lookbackward; but neither does it look forward: it is concerned alonewith the here-now present moment. This is another way of sayingthat it accepts the status quo. The West on the other hand looksboth backward and forward—but especially forward. It looksto the future. And it does so with the implication that there isunfinished business to be conducted there; otherwise its constantpeering into the future is a matter simply of perceptualdeception, as charged. Thus the myth of the Demiurge comes intoconflict with the myth of Ulysses. The Ulysses myth is a Western myth. It does notaccept the status quo of the present moment but suggests insteadthat life is evolving. This process in turn points toward afuture purpose, and acceptance of the present moment would defeatthat purpose. Darwin of course showed that life is constantlytransforming itself—changing its forms, in the manner ofProteus—but he failed to show that it is truly evolving inthe sense of having a definite direction, purpose, and goal.Others in the West, however, have said that life is evolving inprecisely this sense. Hegel has said it, Nietzsche has said it,Bergson has said it, Altizer has said it, Maslow has saidit—and Teilhard de Chardin has said it. Hegel depicted the universe as an absolute Mindwhich is seeking to fulfill itself and know itself. Nietzscheproclaimed the Overman and the will to power; man is but abridge, he said, and life is that which must ever surpass itself.Bergson spoke of a vital force which advances, creatively, towarda distant future end which cannot be predicted because it is notpredetermined. Altizer asserted that God himself is evolving,from transcendence to immanence, and he specifically rejected"the backward movement of Oriental mysticism." Herejected the orthodox Eastern view of a "lost paradise"we can only regain through "a reversal of the cosmos.""Above all," said Altizer, "a reborn and radicalChristian faith must renounce every temptation to return to anoriginal or primordial sacred, or to follow a backward pathleading to an earlier and presumably purer form of theWord." In the same context, Maslow has distinguished betweenBeing and Becoming; between a "high Nirvana" and"low Nirvana"; between the "the Heaven ahead"(of growth) and "the Heaven behind" (of regression).Nowhere in recent times, however, has the concept of agoal-directed cosmos been given richer expression than is foundin the metaphysical system of the scientist-priest Teilhard, whodeveloped a profoundly unorthodox theory of universal evolution. Teilhard, a Jesuit, had been forbidden to publishthat theory during his lifetime; but his views have attractedwidespread attention since his death in 1955, and respect for hissystem has continued to grow both inside and outside the RomanCatholic Church. For many of the faithful, with the passage oftime, Teilhard's ideas have appeared to be more and more profoundand less and less unorthodox—which is hardly surprising, forthey represent in fact an attempted reconciliation of scientificknowledge and religious tradition. It is difficult to say whetherTeilhard was a mystical scientist or a scientific mystic, but heis worth listening to in either case. He speaks to thecontemporary situation. And what is more, he addresses himselfdirectly to the issues raised by psychedelic quietism. Teilhard proposed, to start, that evolution is notjust willy-nilly Darwinian transformism. It has a definitedirection. In the beginning, in the primordial chaos, theindividual particles of unorganized matter contained certainelementary "liberties," but matter by and large wassubject to the laws of chance and statistical determinism. Aftera time, however, the particles began to organize—first insimple forms, then in complex forms. As eons passed, the formsbecame increasingly complex. And this complexity resulted at lastin a new phenomenon: it resulted in consciousness. Forconsciousness is a product of complexity. At first there was a primitive animalconsciousness. Then, further complexification produced the humanbrain—and rational consciousness. For the first time,evolution became aware of itself. This, then, is evolution's direction: towardincreasing complexity and (as a result) increasing consciousness.Thus, by tracing the pattern of psychical rather than physicaldevelopment, Teilhard laid the basis for a neo-anthropocentricitywhich restores man to the center of things as the most complexand conscious creation. Man is not just a speck lost in a remotecorner of infinite space. If the universe is a super-organismwhich is in the process now of realizing itself, then man is the"head" of that organism. But evolution did not stop with the emergence ofthe human brain. From that point on, complexification continuedin the form of social organization and humantechnology. Teilhard saw no reason to distinguish these from"natural" (biological) evolution; for there is nothingunnatural in nature, and the wireless is simply an extension ofthe evolving human mind. The computer and the space probe aresimilar extensions, Teilhard would have insisted, had he lived tosee their era, for what do they represent if not an enlargementof our total awareness? By the same logic, government at alllevels is an expansion of overall consciousness, throughcomplexification, which allows us to deal with an ever wider areaof concern, and the United Nations may be the harbinger of aglobal mind with global awareness. As we saw in an earlier chapter, Teilhard held thatthis process is directed from within by an indwelling Christ whotook charge of evolution by partially inserting himself intomatter. Teilhard stated further that the process will leadeventually to a final state of super-organization andsuper-awareness he referred to as the Omega point. At this stage,in a hyper-centration of cosmic matter, mankind will reflect uponitself at a single point—and will leave the earth behind tobecome pure spirit. Mankind will abandon this world to rejoin thegodhead—not by space ship, but spiritually and inwardly. Ideally, this should happen. But, said Teilhard,there is no predestined guarantee that this will happen. TheOmega point must be attained by conscious effort. And alreadythere are ominous portents. Even now, "a whirlpool isbeginning to appear ahead of us, in the stream that carries usalong." In a magnificent construction, Teilhard divided thehuman race into two camps, the pessimists and the optimists, andthe latter camp he divided into buddhists, pluralists, andmonists. Man must choose his evolutionary path, saidTeilhard. And each of these divisions represents a potentialchoice or possible path. 1. The first choice is pessimism or optimism. Thequestion in this case is fundamental, and it is simply Hamlet'squestion asked on a grand scale. To Be or not to Be? That is thequestion the whole universe must ask itself. Does it make anysense to exist, or would it be better perhaps if there was nolife at all? In the early stages of evolution, the universeinstinctively chooses life over non-life and Being overnon-Being; it instinctively chooses to Be. But what happens whenlife becomes conscious and therefore aware of itself? Is it notpossible that Being will reject its own existence, seeing nopoint to it all, and that thinking men will go on strike againstan evolutionary course which seems to have no real meaning and nofinal purpose? Even now the world has split into two opposingfactions, and those in one faction say that life is notworthwhile. Why bother, then, to go any further? These are thepessimists; let us leave them behind. 2. That leaves the optimists, and they must choosebetween the optimism of withdrawal and the optimism of evolution.The optimists of withdrawal are the buddhists, who wish to quitthe world at once; they acknowledge that Being as Being is good,but they deny that the awareness of true Being can be found inthe forward-looking world of appearances. There is nowhere to go,they say. We are already there. The idea of a goal ahead isdelusional, they say, and we need only to realize this; thesolution, it follows, is to "break away from theevolutionary determinism, break the spell, withdraw." Letthem cut the threads, then, and let them retire to theirfuture-denying nirvana. 3. That leaves the optimists of evolution:"the believers in some ultimate value in the tangibleevolution of things." They are faithful to the future,"faithful to Earth." But they too have a decision tomake, and their choice is between pluralism and monism. Thepluralists are concerned primarily with their personal freedomand individual uniqueness, "in opposition to others."For the monists, "nothing exists or finally matters exceptthe Whole." Which shall it be? "This," saidTeilhard, "is the ultimate choice, by way of which Mankindmust finally be divided, knowing its own mind." AndTeilhard, for his part, chose monism. Only in union, said Teilhard, can man ever hope toachieve his final destiny, and a separatist individualism isultimately self-destructive: "the element burns up all itsfuture in a flying spark." Let us plunge forward intomonism, "even though something in us perish." For it iswritten that he who loses his soul shall save it—and in trueassociations, as opposed to collective heaps, the combination ofseparate elements does not eliminate their differences. It exaltsthem. As in the specialized cells of the body, "true uniondifferentiates." This is true even in the case of theanthill or beehive—the palace of honey—wherespecialization is based upon such biological functions asnutrition and reproduction. How much truer it must be, then, inthe case of a spiritual association in which individualpersonalities will conspire together to create "a commonconsciousness." In such a union "each element achievescompleteness, not directly in a separate consummation, but byincorporation in a higher pole of consciousness in which alone itcan enter into contact with all others." Tillich wasexpressing the same thought when he denied that union with theGround of Being means a loss of self in a larger whole. "Ifthe self participates in the power of being-itself," saidTillich, "it receives itself back. For the power of beingacts through the power of the individual selves. It does notswallow them as every limited whole, every collectivism, andevery conformism does." Teilhard died before psychedelic quietism became anissue, but his second set of alternatives—withdrawal orevolution— goes nevertheless to the heart of that issue. AndTeilhard has not left us to wonder which of the two alternativeshe would recommend as the proper and logical choice. This isimplicit, he said, in the fact that life up to now has followed"a precise line of direction." There has been anunmistakable progression toward an increase of consciousness anda greater awareness. What we must do, therefore, is select thatpath which points ahead in the same direction—"the onewhich seems best able to develop and preserve in us the highestdegree of consciousness." It might be argued that the meta-experiencerepresents an advanced level of consciousness, as opposed to aregression, and it is possible even to interpret Eastern doctrineas evolutionary. There is, for example, the concept of "thedays and nights of Brahma," contained in the Hindu holybook, the Bhagavad-Gita. This suggests the image mentionedearlier of a games-playing God who acts out the cosmic drama forhis own amusement, pretending to be Many when actually he is One.The drama continues for a thousand ages—until theSelf-deception is at last revealed, and the One once more isaware of his Oneness. Whereupon the whole cycle is repeated,forever and ever. There is some support for this idea in themodern astrophysical theory of an "oscillating"universe, which holds that all of the galaxies comprising theuniverse were once contained in a primordial atom of incredibledensity. At some point in the past this atom exploded, sendingall the raw material of the universe flying out intospace—the galaxies evolving with the passage of time. Thereis considerable evidence that this so-called expansion of theuniverse is still going on—in fact there seems little doubtof it—but recent observations indicate that the outwardflight of the galaxies will one day slow to a stop, and theuniverse will then contract again into a new primordial atom.Indeed, the process may have occurred countless times alreadysince the dawn of creation. Or so we are told. The theory isbased, I believe, on the estimated force of the original impetusand the estimated amount of stellar material. No doubt science has weighed and measured theuniverse very accurately and thus can predict what it will dosome billions of years from now. But it might be easier to acceptthe idea of oscillation as final if science were just a triflemore accurate in predicting tomorrow's weather in Omaha. Will itrain there or won't it? However that may be, we have already seenthe danger of marrying physics to metaphysics (in connection withfree will), and it is doubtful in any case that Eastern evolutionis anything like Western evolution. The Eastern future is not acreative future, in the Western sense, but rather an eternalrepetition of the past. This does not mean the East is wrong andthe West is right, but it does mean there is an essentialdifference in their assertions on this point. The Western futureis clearly denied both by Eastern metaphysics and by psychedelicquietism. Shall we rest on our oars? Are we already there? Addressing himself to the buddhists among us,Teilhard agreed that the concept of an ultimate withdrawal fromthe phenomenal rat race "fits in very well with the finaldemands of a world of evolutionary structure." But he madeone proviso: "that the world in question shall have reacheda stage of development so advanced that its 'soul' can bedetached without losing any of its completeness, as somethingwholly formed." And to this he added: But have we any reason to suppose that human consciousness today has achieved so high a degree of richness and perfection that it can derive nothing more from the sap of the earth? Again we may turn to history for an answer. Let us suppose, for example, that the strivings and the progress of civilization had come to an end at the time of Buddha, or in the first centuries of the Christian era. Can we believe that nothing essential, of vision and action and love, would have been lost to the Spirit of Earth? Clearly we cannot. And this simple observation alone suffices to guide our decision. So long as a fruit continues to grow and ripen we refrain from picking it. In the same way, so long as the world around us continues, even in suffering and disorder, to yield a harvest of problems, ideas and new forces, it is a sign that we must continue to press forward in the conquest of matter. Any immediate withdrawal . . . would certainly be premature. He also said, elsewhere: "God creates andshapes us through the process of evolution.... God awaits us whenthe evolutionary process is complete; to rise above the world,therefore, does not mean to despise or reject it, but to passthrough it and sublime it." Teilhard may or may not have demonstrated thatevolution has a goal or a purpose. It is possible, however, thathe did show evolution to have at least a direction, and thatalone would be no small gift in this age of uncertainty. Given asense of direction, if nothing else, there are many perhaps whowould be willing, in an act of faith, to accept the idea of anunguessed future purpose. And after all, at this stage in ourdevelopment, who has the wisdom to deny that possibility? Isanyone so all-knowing, when all of us together would seem to knowso little? If we are estranged from one level of reality andlocked in a world of action, it may be that we are estranged fora reason—and a reason, moreover, which we cannot yetforesee. If there is a Whole which is seeking to know itself, itmay be that the Whole aspires to a more perfect knowledge of itsparts as well as its Oneness—that the Whole demands of usthat we first conquer the earth, moon, and stars before we turninward. If there is a deeper level of reality, revealed bypsychedelics, there could well be another level still deeper thanthat. Anything and everything is possible, and nothing as yet isimpossible. This is not to say that the psychedelic insight isnot true; we are merely suggesting that it may not be the wholetruth. If a little learning is a dangerous thing, there is dangerindeed in any total commitment to a partial understanding, andsome of the drug cultists might at least be a little lesscavalier in their decision to reverse the apparent direction ofthe universal tides. Perhaps some knowledge comes to us too soon,before we know how to use it or what to make of it, as wascertainly true with the atom. But it is too late for regrets, inthe case of the atom or the case now at hand. A decision of somesort must obviously be made, and it is essentially a very simpledecision—though by no means an easy one. Backward to OM? Or forward to Omega? Shall we accept the myth of the Demiurge, whichsuggests that our salvation lies in the simple acceptance of thehere-now present moment—concealed by the intellect? Or shallwe accept the myth of Ulysses, which suggests that life is aprocess of evolutionary growth toward some distant future goal wecannot as yet perceive? These are the central questions posed atthis time by the mystical, peak, and LSD experiences. Teilhard felt that mankind as a whole has reachedits decision and has chosen its path. If that choice in fact hasbeen made, as he supposed, then it is much easier to understandsociety's angry and dogmatic reaction to those uncompromisingindividuals who insist that the meta-experience points toward atotal withdrawal and nowhere else. When Ulysses found his men feeding upon the floweryfood, in the land of the lotus eaters, he did not pause forthought. He asked them no questions, and he offered them noarguments. He laid hold of the men, and he led them, weeping andsore against their will, back to the swift ships. He knew where he was going. He was going to Ithaca. Contents Page | Postscript | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-28IA087-000632-B032-76http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/bradenp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065609 text/html 30198HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:55:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:33:13 GMTContent-length: 29979 The Private Sea - Postscript Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library Postscript "Four o'clock, and all's wrong." So says the voice on the tape recorder as I listento it now. My voice. Having been reminded often enough of thoseschoolmen who would not look through Galileo's telescope, Iparticipated in a psychedelic experiment on May 16, 1966, at theRidgeway psychiatric hospital in Chicago. Present were Dr. A. I.Jackman, a psychiatrist; Dr. Herbert Maltz, clinical director ofthe hospital, and a psychedelic guide I shall refer to here asJim. We used Huxley's drug, mescaline, because LSD at that timehad been taken off the legal market. The two produce identicaleffects, I was told, the only difference being that a muchstronger dosage is required in the case of mescaline, which isadministered in milligrams rather than micrograms. I was firstgiven a thorough medical examination, including anelectrocardiogram, and we then retired to a small but pleasantlyfurnished consultation room on the second floor of the hospital,where the drapes were drawn against the afternoon sunlight. At 2P.M. Dr. Jackman handed me a paper cup of water and five whitecapsules, each of them containing seventy milligrams ofmescaline; a half-hour later I took two more capsules, for atotal dose of 490 milligrams. Nothing happened for more than an hour. Before going further, I should speak very brieflyabout myself and various subjective factors which may haveinfluenced my reaction to the drug. While I had always beeninterested in the implications of religious perception, I was notnormally given to mystical states of mind; some slightsignificance might be attached here, however, to a phenomenon Ihad experienced occasionally since early childhood. This wouldhappen once or twice a year, I suppose, and would last ten orfifteen seconds at most. In moments of abstraction, my immediateenvironment would suddenly appear to take on a new and wordlessmeaning I could not define; time would stop, all objects wouldlose their names, and the world would seem somehow peaceful andperfect. The landscape would first appear to blur, as if the filmin a movie projector had jumped its track, and then it would comeclear again in a slightly different focus: it would look quitethe same as before, but in some subtle way its meaning would havechanged. Just how is hard to say. I had always had vivid memories of my infancy,including a few sunlit memories of the cradle itself in the veryfirst days of my life, and the experience often reminded me ofthose pristine recollections—of that holy time, at the dawnof life, when I lay innocent in sunbeams. Curiously, certainpieces of music would often serve to evoke the experience: Clairde lune, for one, which I always associated with sunlight,and "Zing Went the Strings of My Heart." I neversupposed that the experience was important, and I never mentionedit to anybody, although I did give it a name. I called it"the Shift." I had never heard of a peak experience, ofcourse, and maybe it was something of the sort; maybe it was apint-size satori. In any case, it occurred less frequentlyas I grew older. I became a newspaperman, and newspapermen arenot very mystical. I was taught to be critical and objective, andI was prepared to be both when I swallowed the seven capsules. The atmosphere of a psychiatric hospital was farfrom ideal for a psychedelic setting, but I knew at least that Iwas in good hands should anything go wrong, and I felt noapprehension whatever about taking the drug. In fact, I had beenlooking forward to it. I had read many accounts of good trips andbad trips, and I fully expected to experience an ego loss, butthat prospect didn't trouble me. Finally, I should point out thatI had recently been reading a fair amount of Eastern literature,and indeed I had just reread the Tibetan Book of the Dead. After about seventy minutes, Jim told me, "Youlook different." I asked him in what way I looked different,and he said, "You're somehow younger." I smiled andpointed to a framed picture hanging on one wall. "That waterstain on the left-hand side of the glass," I said. "Wasthat there before?" "I think something is beginning to happen toyou," said Dr. Jackman. Twenty minutes later I felt a numbness creepingover my body, and I said that I seemed to be losing my muscularcontrol. "But again, nothing special." I yawned andadded: "That's interesting. The coffee in this cup looksgreen . . . sort of a greenish cast to it." I had beenchain-smoking cigarettes, and I told Jim apologetically: "Idon't want to put out the last cigarette. I'm such a smoker. Ikeep thinking just one more cigarette before . . ." Jimreached down and switched on a tape recorder, filling the roomwith symphonic music set at low volume. That annoyed me for somereason. It seemed prearranged. "Jim," I told him,"your whiskers have got a greenish tint to them." I had been sitting on a long couch, my kneescrossed, head nodding. I felt so weak and listless, as if Ihadn't slept for days. "Jim," I said, "did youusually start with visual things? I've been waiting forcolors." I looked down at my tweed jacket and mygreen-and-white striped shirt, then farther down at my crossedlegs. Black pants, black socks, black shoes. The only troublewas, the legs weren't mine. They looked alien and somehowsinister. I knew they were attached to my body, and I knew Icould move them, but they weren't my legs. They weren't me. Orbetter yet, I wasn't them. It was just as if I werelooking at the legs of some stranger sitting next to me in a bar,or on a train. So primly crossed. So black. And the silk-hosedankles, so damned self-satisfied. I didn't like them at all."I didn't think my legs looked like that," I said."I thought they looked different . . . but the point is, I'mabout one quarter-inch outside myself now. That's how I feel, Imean. I'm sitting here, but I've also moved about a quarter-inchoutside my body, and that's why I can look at my body now and seeit just the same way other people see it. Funny, too. I'dexpected all these visual things first. Colors . . .jewels." So tired. So numb. Just one more cigarette. Jim helped me off with my jacket and shoes, and Istretched out on the couch. I complained again about my lack ofmotor control, and Dr. Maltz had me tug at his fingers and thenpress my open palm against his palm in an effort to resist it."You have not actually lost any strength," he said.Then he tested me with a pin, jabbing at the back of my hand withthe dull end and sharp end. I told him each time which end itwas, and finally I said, "That hurt—but so what?"I felt the pain, but it didn't matter. Jim had turned up the music. The whole long-playingtape seemed to be Beethoven, and I didn't like it. The Eroicain particular sounded ponderous and threatening. Nothing humanthere; it was pure mathematics, written on Olympus. "Feelgood," I said. "Feel different. It's like, ah . .." I opened my eyes. "I feel like I got great bighands. You know? When I open my eyes, I'm back in the room. Andeverything looks normal. When I close them, though, I feel sortof disembodied. And I'm not sure yet which way I want to go.Maybe I'd rather stay here and watch it happen. I have thefeeling I'd drift off if I closed my eyes. It's just a questionof whether I want to get disembodied or not. I have the feelingthat . . . I have the feeling that . . . It's very relaxing.Especially in the small of the back. It's like I'm floating inclouds without any body, and it's very nice to get rid of yourbody. I feel this loss of weight and loss of tension, like it allran out of me. Especially in the small of the back. That's whereI'd localize it. It's like I drank a hundred martinis withoutpassing out. Still able to think and remember. It's like beingdrunk without being drunk. You know? But just the same, I don'tfeel all that great . . . feel different." I rolled to one side and started to repeat thefirst-person pronoun, nominative case. "I, I, I . . . I, I,I . . . I, I, I . . . Ai, Ai, Ai . . . Yi, Yi, Yi . . .Ai-Yi-Yi-Yi . . . Yo, Yo, Yo . . . Yo, Yo, Yo . . . Spanish for I. . . Yo, Yo, Yo . . . Yo-Yo, Yo-Yo . . . capitalized trademark .. . Duncan Yo-Yo . . . That's it, we're all Duncan Yo-Yos.Spanish word for I, means we're all a bunch of Yo-Yos. Up anddown on a string. Conclusive proof of Leary's Game Theory.... Butnot really, of course." Struck by a sudden thought, I sat up in alarm. "What happened?"' I asked. "Whathappened to all the other people?" I was still puzzling that over when my gaze fellagain on the cold black dregs in my coffee cup. I stuck a fingerin the coffee and became a continuum with it and the plastic cup."Ah, it feels so good . . . so good. I feel real good. Dr.Jackman, you're a Yo-Yo." I knew I was being obnoxious, andI didn't like that, either. "When does everything start toget exquisite?" I asked. "Nothing I expected hashappened yet. This is a bore, so far." I fell backhelplessly on the couch, and Dr. Jackman told me, "You'rejust at the beginning." "The beginning?" I drifted off, mumbling incoherently, and thedoctors left. I was alone now with Jim. "Poor littleworld," I said. "Poor little world . . . poor littleworld." Later I opened my eyes and found that Jim had gone,too. I sat up and looked around for him, rubbing my eyes with myfists. But the room was deserted. "Jim? Did you go away, Jim, or are you reallyhere? Maybe you're still here, and I just can't see you. Could itactually happen? Of course it couldn't. But then, how can I tell?I'm under the influence of a drug. Oh, you shouldn't have goneaway, Jim. Did you go away, or didn't you? Are you there, Jim?Where are you?" The door opened. Jim came in. "I went to the washroom," he said."Is something the matter?" "No," I said. "Everything'sfine." A nurse brought us a meal, which we ate at thedesk. Corned beef hash, apricots, sliced pickles, and another potof coffee. I shoveled the food down impersonally, much as youwould stoke a furnace, and the process of eating seemed highlyhumorous. Biting into the pickles, I could sense their molecularstructure; I had a mouth full of cells and atoms, I thought, andI could feel my teeth grinding them about. How ridiculous chewingwas. It would have been much easier, I thought, simply to slipthe pickles in through my ribs. I knew it wouldn't work if Itried it, but I thought nevertheless that it should work. Afterall, there was no such thing as a solid; there were only thosespinning atoms, which in turn were only sparks of energy(whatever that was), and the emptiness of the atomic inner spacemust surely be calculated in millions and billions of micromiles.I stuck my finger in the coffee again—it was hot this time,but that didn't matter—and I imagined that the end of myfinger had disappeared. I laughed and said that Huxley hadn'tturned into a coffee cup, had he? I, on the other hand, had justturned into a coffee cup. Which is to say, I and the coffee cupwere the same thing, really; where the one ended, the otherbegan. The coffee cup, you might say, had turned into me.Certainly the pickles and hash had turned into me, and thoseHindus clearly had known what they were talking about: it was alla case of food living on food, and after that becoming food. After the meal I lay down again and shut my eyes.In the darkness of my mind I saw a Technicolor display ofweird-looking growths waving about, like plants in a current atthe bottom of the sea. There were stalks and sponges andfan-shaped objects: pink and green and purple. I thought I mightwander around down there for several centuries, and I wasn't atall sure that I wanted to. I thought about my family, and itdidn't seem fair to go away so long and leave thembehind—like Rip Van Winkle. What if they needed me forsomething, and what if they were all dead when I finally cameback? "Those are organisms," I said, imagining now thatI had recognized the growths. "I am looking inside my owneyeball. And those all are parts of my eyeball." Then I lay still for a time, drifting, and Jimsupposed that I was past the point of no return, comfortable andhappy. Coming up quietly, he slipped a set of stereophonicearphones onto my head, the big foam-rubber phones snapping overmy ears in a snug fit. A majestic Beethoven chord exploded insidemy brain, and I instantly disappeared. My body no longer existed,and neither did the world. The world and I had been utterlyannihilated. I could feel the pressure of the earphones; but inthe space between the phones, where my head should have been,there was absolutely nothing . . . nothing! I was Mindalone, lost in an icy blue grotto of sound. There was only themusic, and then bright colors that turned out to be musicalnotes. The notes danced along a silver staff of music thatstretched from one eternity to another, beyond the planets andstars and space itself. Red notes. Blue notes. But they had nosubstance or dimension, and nothing was real in that empty cavernbetween the two earphones. That unbounded abyss. The music rolledon in orgiastic waves of sound and color, and then I myself wasone of the notes. I was being swept along on the silver staff, attwice the speed of light, rushing farther and farther away frommy home back there in the Milky Way. In desperation, at the lastpossible moment, I reached up with hands I did not own, and Itore off the earphones. I was back in the room. But from that point on, itwent wrong. I sat in a chair, staring at the floor. Jim pulledback the drapes, filling the room with the last light of day.Outside in the streets I could hear auto horns honking, and oncea fire engine went by. I felt a terrible depression rising slowlyfrom the bottom of my soul. "Even out here where I am," I said,"I don't know what's going on." Nobody knew what wasgoing on. Nobody knew anything. It seemed to me that my sense of self wascompletely gone now. It had been ripped away by the music, and Ihad come back without it. Although I knew nothing, I felt thatsome awful truth was about to be revealed to me. It was lurkingsomewhere just beyond the borders of my comprehension, and verysoon now I should have to come face to face with it. I studied the room, and I realized that I nowformed a continuum with everything in sight. The room seemed toshimmer in the dying rays of sunlight, and I was aware once moreof the atomic substructure that underlay the visible world of thesenses. It struck me that the visible world was wholly real, andin no way a deception, but it nevertheless had this underlyingstructure which glowed and pulsed like a living force. And it allran together in a single composition. This is hard to describe,and the only analogy I can think of is in painting—forexample, Seurat's huge pointillist canvas, "A SundayAfternoon on the Grande Jatte." The figures on the grass arereal enough, and there is a logic to their placement anddevelopment; if you look closely, however, you will see that thefigures and the grass and the sparkling water are all composed oftiny dots of color, and these dots all blend together to form asingle scene and a single reality. The lady with her parasollooks out at the sailboats on the water, and she imagines perhapsthat they are far away and separate; but everything on the canvasis inexorably locked together in one flowing creation, and thelady in fact is an extension of the parasol, water, and boats. Ithought of that canvas as I sat in the room, drugged out of mymind, and it seemed to me that I was locked into my scene just asinexorably as Seurat's figures were locked into theirs. Dots ofenergy or dots of paint, it was all the same. But even thisseemed unsatisfactory, the more I thought of it, and then Iremembered those Van Gogh canvases in which sky and earth swirltogether like magnetic force fields. "That's it," Ithought. "The reality that flows . . . much better thandots." And I pitied poor Van Gogh, if that was his constantperception. Those raging cypress trees, like tongues of greenflame licking at the heavens—those whirling suns. No wonderhe cut off his ear. I tried to explain it to Jim. "Instead of trying to figure it out," hesaid, "just try to feel what's happening." But I didn't like what was happening. I wasstarting to remember something, and it seemed to have someconnection with sunlight and a cradle. But what could it be? Thenit came to me that I was gradually remembering my own identity,like an amnesia victim who slowly recovers his past. Finally itall fell together, and I remembered who I was. And it was sosimple, really. I was life. I was Being. I was the vibrant forcethat filled the room, and was the room. I was the world, theuniverse. I was everything. I was that which always was andalways would be. I was Jim, and Jim was me, and we were everybodyelse; and everybody else was us, and all of us put together werethe same thing, and that same thing was the only thing there was.We were not God. We were simply all that there was, and all thatthere was wasn't God. It was us, alone. And we were each other,and nowhere anywhere was there anything else but us, and we werealways the same, the one and only truth. "Jim," I said, "can you get me outof this?" "Uh-huh. You want to try it anotherhalf-hour?" "Yes," I said. "Let's try it anotherhalf-hour." Having been reunited with the Ground of my Being, Iwanted urgently to be estranged from it again as quickly aspossible. But I tried to hold on, at least for a while, and Itried to laugh at the terrifying idea that was building up in mymind. "I don't want to be God," I said. "I don'teven want to be city editor." But it did no good to laugh,and I stopped trying. Of course I wasn't God, I knew that. But Iwas All That There Was, and I didn't want to be that, either. Itwas dark now, and I could hear children playing somewhere outsidethe hospital— under a street lamp, no doubt—and theirlonely voices filled me with sadness. The children, Ithought. The children, and Jim, and me: we were all the God therewas. And it was sad and awful, because I wanted there to be aGod. For the children at least, if not for me. But the loss ofGod was not the worst of it; there was something far worse eventhan that. The loss of my little self was not the worst of it;nor indeed did I regret that at all. It was not what I had lost.It was what I had gained. I had gained the whole universe, itseemed, and that was more than I could cope with—more than Icould bear. I didn't want it. But who was I, who didn't want it? I was Everybody,the Self. And now I knew what the little selves were for, Ithought. They were a fiction designed to protect the Self fromthe knowledge of its own Being—to keep the Self from goingmad. For surely, without them, the Self might be driven toinsanity by the thought of its own audacity, and the thought ofits loneliness, and the thought as well of the danger it was in.And it was in danger, I knew that perfectly well. Since itwas All That There Was, there was nothing to assure it of its ownimmortality. And in fact, I could sense, there was that whichresisted both its Being and Becoming. And this something wasnothing more than Nothingness itself, against which the Self hadexerted its will to Become. Thus the ontic anxiety, as Tillichexpressed it: the ultimate fear of ultimate non-Being. Or so itseemed, as I struggled with my seven demons; and translating theSelf into selves once more, I imagined that I now understood withperfect clarity the meaning of a passage that had always hauntedme in Unamuno's story of the good priest Don Emmanuel. Thatsaintly man had preached to his flock the word of God and themessage of salvation, which gave them great joy. There werethose, however, who perceived that Don Emmanuel himself was atormented soul, and one day, while walking in the countryside, avillager named Lazarus begged the priest to tell him thetruth—the truth above all! And all a-tremble, Don Emmanuelwhispered into the ear of him who had asked: "The truth? Thetruth, Lazarus, is perhaps something so unbearable, so terrible,something so deadly, that simple people could not live withit!" Now I thought that I knew this truth: the deadlyand unbearable truth that nobody created us . . . we createdourselves. That was the horror that we could not live with, Ithought— anything rather than that—and I raved to Jim:"Tell the truth now, Jim. There is no God, is there? Oh God.It's awfully hard. Why does life have to be so hard? Why can'teverything be nice? Oh God . . . God. I don't want life to bethis way. Oh God, I can't face this. I'm not ready. I'm notready. I don't have what it takes. I don't have the courage tomeet it." Jim said: "It's an illusion we build up fromthe time we're little kids. We don't often encounter—" Shut up! "It's too soon, too soon. Toosoon, I tell you. Oh God, we're not supposed to look at this. Notnow. Maybe in a million years, or a billion years, or ten billionyears. But not now, not yet. It was wrong to do this. The drug .. . not right . . . we shouldn't be fooling with . . ." Myvoice trailed off, and I thought about Freud. I thought thatFreud didn't know what he was talking about, and the unconsciouswas very simple, really: the unconscious was this knowledge I nowhad of ultimate Being, and our repressions of it had their rootsin an existential terror, not neurosis. It was real, and it washorrifying. It was more than most of us could accept, and thus wetook refuge in smaller identities and well-defined roles,creating a limited world we could comfortably live in, pretendingall the time there was Something Else. But there was nothingelse, and deep down inside us we knew it, and we suffered. Ittook courage to Be, just as Tillich said, and most of us didn'thave that courage. So we rejected our Being—and not bykilling ourselves, because death was impossible, but by denyingour real identity. By refusing to face what we actually were. "Jim," I said, "we're all thereis." "That's right, buddy boy." "God, you're tough. You don't look it, butyou're really tough. I just wish that I . . . Jim . . . Can youget me out of this?" "Sure. Want to try another half-hourfirst?" "All right. Another half-hour." All That There Was. But even this—even this—wasnot the worst of it. I said that I was frightened by what I hadgained, and this was true. But I had lost something, too, and itwas more important to me than my wretched self, and moreimportant even than God. For along with my own self I had lostall the other selves as well. I had lost other people. And Imissed them very much. I wanted there to be someone else. Anyone else. Andif there had been just two of us—really two of us—andwe two were All That There Was, that would not have been so hard.But there was no one else; there was only the One. Sitting in that room, I could hear church bellsringing somewhere, a long way off, and I imagined that they wereChristmas bells. I thought of the holiday season, and the crowdsthronging the downtown streets in the winter night, and thestores all aglow like boxes of light. Snow falling, and carolsplaying on the loudspeakers. And everyone with a home to go to,and someone there to meet him, and maybe to love him. But someoneelse, in any case. I was not feeling sentimental about Christmasas such; I was thinking rather about the crowds ofpeople—all of them real, all of them different. And I missedthem so, the people. More than myself, more than God, more thananything. It wasn't right, I thought. "Jim," I said, "get me out ofthis." So he got the Thorazine, and he got me out of it.And the doctors let me go home, where there was someone to meetme. "I'm not going to hurt anybody," I said."I'm just going to hurt." I did, too, for several days. Then the mood woreoff, and I went back to the world I knew, and I worked in it.Sometimes I would catch glimpses of that different world I hadseen in the hospital room, and I would wonder if the experiencewas going to start all over again. But it never did. There wasonly one time, when I was flying alone in a little airplane, highover the Illinois prairie. Shut up in the cabin, I felt suddenlytrapped and afraid, and more alone than I cared to be. But Idropped down out of the clouds to a lower altitude, and I openeda window, and the feeling passed. Looking back on the experience, I recall severalthings. For one, I never forgot that I was under the influence ofa drug. For another, I was never wholly convinced that the drug'srevelations were true; even during the best moments and worstmoments, a part of me warned that the truth might lie elsewhere,and I suppose this was my reporter's instinct expressing itself.For example, the monistic phase might well have been initiated bymy momentary panic when Jim left me alone in the room. And mypre-experience reading could perhaps explain my failure to detectany hint of a transcendent reality. Also, I remember a persistentconviction that the experience itself was wrong. Not false,necessarily, but wrong. For some unguessed reason, I felt, itwould be better for us not to seek the experience, at least atthis time. And finally, whether my phantoms were real or unreal,I regret my cowardice in the face of them: I have the feelingsomehow that they might have appeared much friendlier had it beenin my power really to confront them. I include this epilogue simply as an item ofinterest, if it is, and certainly not as a testament. Obviouslythere were too many unknown factors involved to draw anyconclusions from the experience, and for my part I have not drawnany conclusions. Nevertheless, and just the same, it is somethingto think about. I shall think about it for the rest of my life. Contents Page | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-29IA031-000655-B030-154http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/bradencm.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122105945 text/html 23295HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:59:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:36:42 GMTContent-length: 23076 Commentary on Braden Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library Commentary on William Braden's Mescaline Experience by Peter Webster How is it possible for two persons of such obvious intellectualtalent as William Braden and Aldous Huxley to have such radicallydifferent experiences as a result of ingestion of a similar quantityof mescaline? Both Huxley and Braden brought to their first psychedelicexperiment a wide knowledge and understanding of science, religion,mysticism, literature and fine arts, yet Huxley's initial psychedelicexperience was a revelation, and led to the writing of TheDoors of Perception, a book which launched a movement, ifnot a revolution. William Braden's experiment, recounted in thePostscript of his book, The Private Sea, could not havebeen more opposite to Huxley's. Anguish and torment forced Mr.Braden to ask that the experience be terminated with the anti-psychoticdrug Thorazine, and several days of painful recovery, he tellsus, ensued. The so-called "bad trip" has been the occasional resultin both psychedelic research and the clandestine use of psychedelicssince the 1950s. Authorities of all persuasions have warned usof the ever-present risk, and that it is next to impossible topredict if a given personality will experience the negative aspectof psychedelic experience. It has also often been observed thata bad experience may even follow several positive, ecstatic ones,for no apparent reason. Even the careful control of the supposedprincipal determinants of the experience, set and setting,seems to leave a way open for negative experience, and indicatesa crucial lack in the understanding of how and why a bad experiencemay arise. Or so it has been repeatedly said. The set and setting hypothesis may fail to provide control orunderstanding of the occurrence of negative experience for a verygood reason: Although many investigators have attempted to understandthe content of psychedelic experience solely in terms of the setand setting of the experiment, I feel there is more of tautologythan scientific theory in this "explanation." Sayingthat the psychedelic experience depends on set and setting israther like saying that the weather is dependent on the contentsof the atmosphere. The weather IS the contents of the atmosphere,and the psychedelic experience IS the set and setting ofthe time and place in which the psychedelic drug is taken. Thisis, of course, the case with everyday experience as well: theset and setting of your day at the office IS the experienceof your day at the office. The set and setting hypothesis really"explains" nothing we don't already know. We will haveto delve a little deeper than a comparison of the set and settingof the experiences of Braden and Huxley to understand the extremedifference of result. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ There has been a continuing ignorance by a great many of the playersin the psychedelic controversy concerning the experience of tribalman, both past and present. The visionary realms sometimes attainedthrough the use of psychedelic drugs have been visited since timeimmemorial, and for a modern researcher to ignore what tribalman has to say on the subject of psychedelic experience is a seriousoversight. Especially guilty have been those on the side of Prohibitionof the psychedelic drugs, whether government minister or categorically-abstinentresearcher: the great majority of persons who have themselvesexperienced the psychedelic vision have subsequently educatedthemselves on the subject of shamanism and the use of psychedelicplants by the tribal practitioners of early medicine and religion.At the same time the Prohibitionists, including some eminent researchers,have gone so far as to insist that those having themselves takenpsychedelics are irrevocably tainted, and incapable of judgingthe results of their own investigations. The very existence ofsuch an attitudinal conflict among trained thinkers suggests thatmodern rationality may not be all that it is cracked up to be,and might also be an intimation of at least one of the sourcesof negative psychedelic experience. If one starts, of course, with the premise that tribal man isprimitive, ignorant, backward, incapable of rational thought,lost in delusion, etc., then a complete disregard for the hundred-thousandyears (or more) of tribal psychedelic research follows. Such apremise may play an important and stifling role in the outlookof many moderns, even those who believe themselves far more broad-minded,as the roots of prejudice are notoriously difficult to uncover.But the brain of Homo sapiens has had exactly its presentmacroscopic and neurological structure for at least 150 thousandyears, and although early man of course did not have the (notall that certain) advantage of modern culture as a tool, it ispreposterous to believe that a nervous system capable of creatingsymphonies and relativity theories was simply not employed tofull capacity before modern times. Evolution does not work likethat. The human brain would not have evolved to its present capabilityhad there been no aboriginal use for all that symphony- and relativity-theory-producinghardware. The chronic skeptic will demand, "well what doyou propose those primitives were doing with all that hardware?"If we would listen to them, instead of eradicate them, we mightbegin to know. Many modern thinkers, of course, have been listening. Butthey are not usually among the cohort of institutional professionalswho practice hard, reductionist science. They are rather specialistson mythology such as Joseph Campbell, anthropologists such asMichael Harner, ethno-botanists such as Gordon Wasson and RichardEvans Schultes, or psychedelic researchers such as Humphrey Osmondand Albert Hofmann. Recognition of such pioneers by mainstreamscience and society, not to mention Nobel Prizes and the like,will not likely occur soon. Yet these are the very workers, andfields of endeavor, which we must listen to very closely not onlyto understand what early man has to say, but also to understandthe nature of the psychedelic experience and cause of the occasional"bad trip." Only by listening to the psychedelic wisdomof the ages have we a chance for understanding how we modernsfit into this very large picture. In evolutionary time, we arebut a mere blip, an exaggeration, perhaps an aberration whichmight well soon self-destruct for lack of ageless wisdom, forlack of listening to our ancestors who, with perceptions and thoughtsevery bit as human, and every bit as potent as our own, ensuredhuman survival for greater than 99% of the time of human lifeon earth. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ A principal lesson from the psychedelic past, which applies notonly to the use of visionary plants but to the optimal structuringof society itself, is the importance of myth and ritual, bothfor daily and seasonal life, and for the seeking of ultimate ormystical understanding by a tribe or people. Today there are manywho would deny the importance, or even the presence of myth andritual as an underlying factor in their lives. But as with theatheist, such denial is as much a mythology and ritual as thedenial of God by the atheist is in a very real sense, a religion:An equivalent amount of faith is required to believe that Goddoes not exist (for there can be no absolute proof eitherway). A great and modern myth is that we no longer live by myths, buthard facts, and perhaps peoples of all times and places foundit difficult to know the myths they lived by, the underlyingparadigm of their metaphysic. But the principal difference withall tribal peoples as compared to us moderns, was that they all,without fail, developed elaborate ritual and shamanism as a centralguiding framework for their lives. The myth and ritual of tribalman was a living, evolving, all-encompassing structure, continuallybeing added to, and providing the long-term practical andmetaphysical understanding which kept such societies stable andfunctioning for periods of time which make a mockery of modernsocietal systems. For ritual today we have very primitive andimpotent relics indeed: empty "religious" charades onthe one hand, and a cut-throat tooth-and-nail paradigm of capitalisticcompetition to the death as our day-to-day program for survival.And compounding such a sickness-producing paradigm, the convictionthat we live by truth alone! If these be our myths and rituals,we do not need to take psychedelics to experience a bad trip,for we are already on one. The primary importance of myth and ritual for understanding thepsychedelic experience, as well as for structuring psychedelicexperiments is today illustrated most forcefully by the use ofpeyote by the Native American Church. In the ceremonies of theNAC, quite powerful doses of peyote are often ingested, and "badtrips" essentially never occur. The few documented casesof negative result have uniformly involved a misuse of the sacramentoutside of NAC ceremonies, non-compliance with the wisdom of theroad-men or psychedelic guides for the ceremonies, or thesimultaneous use of alcohol. Within the structure of the NAC,the peyote sacrament has continually been a very powerful andefficacious one: by the definition of sacrament which weuse in the Christian tradition, peyote seems to many to be farmore the genuine article than the wine or bread, whose potencyone must take on faith alone. (Note that the mescaline which Huxleyand Braden ingested, is the main active component of peyote.)So let's get this straight: the primitive, backward, ignorant,irrational Indian, laboring under a childish and simplistic religiousparadigm, can ingest heroic quantities of a potent "hallucinogen"and derive the most positive, reliable, reproducible and in everysense of the word, human effects from this "risky"behavior; yet one of us modern, rational, truth-loving supermenknow not whether the same dose might send us permanently overthe brink and into the looney-bin. I detect a faulty paradigmsomewhere. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Aldous Huxley writes in Heaven and Hell, a book writtentwo years after The Doors of Perception: I have spoken so far only of the blissful visionary experienceand of its interpretation in terms of theology, its translationinto art. But visionary experience is not always blissful. Itis sometimes terrible. There is hell as well as heaven. Like heaven, the visionary hell has its praeternatural light andits praeternatural significance. But the significance is intrinsicallyappalling and the light is 'the smoky light' of the TibetanBook of the Dead, the 'darkness visible' of Milton. In theJournal d'une Schizophrene, the autobiographical recordof a young girl's passage through madness, the world of the schizophrenicis called le Pays d'Eclairement - 'the country of lit-upness.'It is a name which a mystic might have used to denote his heaven. But for poor Renée, the schizophrenic, the illuminationis infernal - an intense electric glare without a shadow, ubiquitousand implacable. Everything that, for healthy visionaries, is asource of bliss, brings to Renee only fear and a nightmarish senseof unreality. The summer sunshine is malignant; the gleam of polishedsurfaces is suggestive, not of gems, but of machinery and enamelledtin; the intensity of existence which animates every object, whenseen at close range and out of its utilitarian context, is feltas a menace. And then there is the horror of infinity. For the healthy visionary,the perception of the infinite in a finite particular is a revelationof divine immanence; for Renée, it was a revelation ofwhat she calls 'the System,' the vast cosmic mechanism which existsonly to grind out guilt and punishment, solitude and unreality. Sanity is a matter of degree, and there are plenty of visionarieswho see the world as Renée saw it, but contrive, none theless, to live outside the asylum. For them, as for the positivevisionary, the universe is transfigured - but for the worse. Everythingin it, from the stars in the sky to the dust under their feet,is unspeakably sinister or disgusting every event is charged witha hateful significance every object manifests the presence ofan Indwelling Horror, infinite, all-powerful, eternal. This negatively transfigured world has found its way, from timeto time, into literature and the arts. It writhed and threatenedin Van Gogh's later landscapes; it was the setting and the themeof all Kafka's stories; it was Gericault's spiritual home; itwas inhabited by Goya during the years of his deafness and solitude;it was glimpsed by Browning when he wrote Childe Roland; it hadits place, over against the theophanies, in the novels of CharlesWilliams. The negative visionary experience is often accompanied by bodilysensations of a very special and characteristic kind. Blissfulvisions are generally associated with a sense of separation fromthe body, a feeling of deindividualization. (It is, no doubt,this feeling of deindividualization which makes it possible forthe Indians who practise the peyote cult to use the drug not merelyas a short cut to the visionary world, but also as an instrumentfor creating a loving solidarity within the participating group.)When the visionary experience is terrible and the world is transfiguredfor the worse, individualization is intensified and the negativevisionary finds himself associated with a body that seems to growprogressively more dense, more tightly packed, until he findshimself at last reduced to being the agonized consciousness ofan inspissated lump of matter, no bigger than a stone that canbe held between the hands. It is worth remarking, that many of the punishments describedin the various accounts of hell are punishments of pressure andconstriction. Dante's sinners are buried in mud, shut up in thetrunks of trees, frozen solid in blocks of ice, crushed beneathstones. The Inferno is psychologically true. Many of its painsare experienced by schizophrenics, and by those who have takenmescalin or lysergic acid under unfavourable conditions. What is the nature of these unfavourable conditions? How and whyis heaven turned into hell? In certain cases the negative visionaryexperience is the result of predominantly physical causes. Mescalintends, after ingestion, to accumulate in the liver. If the liveris diseased, the associated mind may find itself in hell. Butwhat is more important for our present purposes is the fact thatnegative visionary experience may be induced by purely psychologicalmeans. Fear and anger bar the way to the heavenly Other Worldand plunge the mescalin taker into hell. And what is true of the mescalin taker is also true of the personwho sees visions spontaneously or under hypnosis. Upon this psychologicalfoundation has been reared the theological doctrine of savingfaith - a doctrine to be met with in all the great religious traditionsof the world. Eschatologists have always found it difficult toreconcile their rationality and their morality with the brutefacts of psychological experience. As rationalists and moralists,they feel that good behaviour should be rewarded and that thevirtuous deserve to go to heaven. But as psychologists they knowthat virtue is not the sole or sufficient condition of blissfulvisionary experience. They know that works alone are powerlessand that it is faith, or loving confidence, which guarantees thatvisionary experience shall be blissful. Negative emotions - the fear which is the absence of confidence,the hatred, anger or malice which exclude love - are the guaranteethat visionary experience, if and when it comes, shall be appalling.The Pharisee is a virtuous man; but his virtue is of the kindwhich is compatible with negative emotion. His visionary experiencesare therefore likely to be infernal rather than blissful. The nature of the mind is such that the sinner who repents andmakes an act of faith in a higher power is more likely to havea blissfull visionary experience than is the self-satisfied pillarof society with his righteous indignations, his anxiety aboutpossessions and pretensions, his ingrained habits of blaming,despising and condemning… In The Doors of Perception Huxley reveals the secret inan even clearer way (at this stage, he recounts his experienceat the height of the mescaline's effect): 'If you started in the wrong way,' I said in answer to the investigator'squestions, 'everything that happened would be a proof of the conspiracyagainst you. It would all be self-validating. You couldn't drawa breath without knowing it was part of the plot.' 'So you think you know where madness lies ?' My answer was a convinced and heartfelt, 'Yes.' 'And you couldn't control it?' 'No, I couldn't control it. If one began with fear and hate asthe major premiss, one would have to go on to the conclusion.' Young people who have explored consciousness with the aid of psychedelicdrugs have usually done so in a spirit of love, love of adventure,love of exploration, love of freedom, love of community... Theolder, "wiser" folk of today more often explore forcompetitive or compulsive reasons, for fame, to achieve, to ascendthe ladder of success, to cement preconceptions into certainties...Such exploration is often mixed with a compulsive or chronic skepticism,constructed perhaps from previous entrapment in folly during youth.Arthur Koestler was deceived into supporting the Communist movementin Russia for a time, even after he had toured the country andseen, not the desolation that he should have, but instead believedthe empty promises of the doctrine he had espoused. The discoveryof his self-deception produced an exaggerated skepticism in hislater years, hence his rejection of the psychedelic experienceas "pop Zen" (in The Ghost in the Machine). PerhapsIt is not surprising that he also had a negative experience inan experiment with psychedelic drugs. And as for skepticism, Jean-PaulSartre was a chronic skeptic if ever there was one, and he, too,experienced only the negative aspects of psychedelics in his firstand only psychedelic experiment. The experiments of such as theseare essays in search of proof that nothing has been missed, theydo not start with a premise of openness and love of life for itsown sake, as Huxley has prescribed, but of exclusion and suspicion,precisely the formula for torment. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ From the viewpoint revealed by these several (not altogether congruent)paragraphs, it is not hard to see why the chronic skeptic, thehardened reporter, William Braden, might not be able to shed hisdefenses, and paradigm, to experience the age-old visionary reality.He sees a cartoon-world which he takes for hard, cold "reality,"the kind of world his underlying mythology has created, and yetthe visionary psychedelic wisdom unlocked by these chemicals doesnot permit him to believe in his own paradigm. He "knows"plenty about Eastern philosophy, about western science, aboutanything you can name, but it is all theoretical knowledge, noneof it bonded to ultimate experience, and so his world is, in thefinal analysis, artificial, not "reality-based" as heis bound by his metaphysic to believe. Suddenly he experiencesthat artificiality in full force, with all the implied consequencesand contradictions, and of course, it is too much to take. Whatis surprising about bad trips is not that they occur, but thatthey are not predominant. The power of these substances to forbidthe lie of an empty metaphysic, a hard, cold world of facts devoidof ultimate mystery and spirituality, would seem to me to requirebad trips almost every time for us moderns. It is the obviousnear-indestructibility of the human spirit, the almost unbelievablefact that man survives in this lunatic world still for the mostpart unscathed, that explains much about the results of psychedelicexperience and why it is not usually or even uniformly a negativeexperience. Thanks be to those such as Huxley for providing alight in our darkness, so that at least a few of us may find ourway through. Contents Page | Postscript | Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-30IA087-000632-B032-121http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065630 text/html 42997HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:56:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:26:55 GMTContent-length: 42778 The Man Who Turned on the World - Chapter 1 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library FOREWORDS by Alan Bold 'THE MIRACULOUS MAN' (For Michael Hollingshead) Date of birth unknown, and inconsistent In the presentation of his point of view, He may have got near Kapilavastu After some service in the orient. Certainly he settled for a while For something eerie happened at Bodh Gaya Where ho overcame an enemy named Mara And retained a smug, but somehow moving, smile. Later this became more pure and poignant Until some vile and murderous abuse Mocked his claim to be king of the jews And made him shrewd and militant. From Medina he took Mecca by force Saying man was made from wicked gouts of blood. It's different to assess just how much good He ever did. Or ever will, of course Edinburgh 1972 CHAPTER ONE A LOVIN' SPOONFUL In the beginning, more exactly . . . in 1943,Albert Hofmann, a Swiss bio-chemist working at the SandozPharmaceutical Laboratories in Basel, discovered — byaccident, of course; one does not deliberately create such asituation — a new drug which had some very remarkableeffects on the human consciousness. The name of this drug wasd-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide Tartrate-25, a semi-syntheticcompound, the Iysergic acid portion of which is a natural productof the ergot fungus Claviceps purpurea, which grows on ryeand other grains. Its most striking pharmacologicalcharacteristic is its extreme potency — it is effective atdoses of as little as ten-millionths of a gram, which makes it5000 times more potent than mescaline. It was during the synthesis of d-LSD-25 that chanceintervened when Dr. Hofmann inhaled some of the whitish-brownpowder and discovered that it produced some strange effects onhis mind. . . . 'Objects, as well as the shape of my associatesin the laboratory, appeared to undergo optical change . . .fantastic pictures of extraordinary plasticity and intensivecolour seemed to surge towards me.' 1960 New York City, seventeen years later . . . a small packagefrom Switzerland arrived in my mail one morning containing onegram of Dr. Hofmann's acid, which I had arranged to be sent tome. There was also a bill for $285. I had first heard of LSD fromAldous Huxley, when I had telephoned him at his home in LosAngeles to inquire about obtaining some mescaline, which he hadrecently been using. His information also included the name ofDr. Albert Hofmann and a caution, subsequently unheeded, to takegreat care if ever I should take any of the stuff: 'It is muchmore potent than mescaline, though Gerald (Heard) and I have usedit with some quite astonishing results really.' There had been no difficulty obtaining even onegram of LSD — I simply asked an English doctor friend ofmine to write the order on a sheet of New York hospitalletterhead saying that I needed this ergot-derivative as a'control' drug for a series of bone-marrow experiments. Eagerly I unwrapped the package. The acid was in asmall dark jar marked 'Lot Number H-00047', and in appearancelooked a bit like malted milk powder. My problem was how toconvert the loose powder into a more manageable form. One gramwould make 5000 individual doses and I was obviously going toneed to measure it out in some way. I decided to randomise it bymixing it into a stiff paste made from icing sugar. I cleared the kitchen table and set to work. FirstI poured some distilled water into a bowl, and then mixed in theLSD. When all the acid had dissolved I added confectioner's sugaruntil the mixture was a thick paste. I then transferred my'divine confection', spoon by laborious spoon, into asixteen-ounce mayonnaise jar, and, by what magical alchemicprocess, the stuff measured exactly 5000 spoonfuls ! In otherwords, one teaspoon of the stuff ought to contain 200 gamma(millionths of a gram), which would be sufficient for an eight-to ten-hour session, and a pretty intense one at that. I should add at this point that I had, like allgood chefs, been tasting the preparation during its making withmy finger, and must have absorbed about the equivalent of fiveheavy doses before I finally screwed the lid on the mayonnaisejar, which left me somewhat unprepared for what was to follow. I rented at that time the floor-through apartmentabove Jim Paul Eiler's 'Showplace' on West Fourth Street near thecorner of Macdougal and Washington Square. It was a largerambling place -with a roof garden over the back from which toobserve the life of the Village and the concrete towers ofManhattan. I moved on to the roof and sat up there and beganto observe . . . I beheld a city of 10,000 angry streets, andgiant buildings fingered the sky; from a thousand throats thegiant screams. A hundred trash-cans tumble lids and littersacross the sidewalks, a siren goes hooting past, and all isCHAOS. My mind was in a state of confusion, of whirlingdistractions and distortions and intensely vivid non sequiturs.'I have broken the shell!' I laughed. 'Now I step forth easilyfrom my body's prison-cell and live in the realm of theprimordial. I shall sing of heroes, wild men of the mountains,guardians of the door, and ancient legends.... I shall transformmyself into a god who could walk across the tops of mountains . .. thousand-headed was Purusa, thousand-eyed, thousand-footed hereached beyond the earth! . . . Cuhulain rides his five fierychariots across the firmament! Arthur and Lancelot in battle! Theground shakes! In the beginning was blood and fire.... I shallsing that you might listen and would know the glory that mall is,now, in his first dawning.... In the beginning, then ... proudlythe purple cock-man proclaims the arrival of the Dawn. The Wardenof Robes enters to attend our abracadabra about Acid and Allaccompanied by large assembly of Acid Age Adams, Artists,Anarchists, Actors, Angels, Alchemists, Athletes, Aristocrats andassorted Acrobats. The 'gates of heaven' swing open on the courtwithin; worshipping priests from 10,000 countries kneel beforethe royal insignia. The first rays of the sun gild the 'fairypalms'; smoke of incense swirls round dragons writhing on eachroyal robe—they seem to float among the clouds. It was a very strange first trip indeed, and it was of manyhours' duration, perhaps fifteen. What I had experienced was theequivalent of death's abolition of the body. I had literally'stepped forth' out of the shell of my body, into some otherstrange land of unlikeliness, which can only be grasped in termsof astonishment and mystery, as an �tat de l'absurde,ecstatic nirvana. I could now 'understand' why death couldproduce the sort of confusionIwas experiencing. In life we areanchored through the body to such inescapable cosmic facts asspace, gravity, electromagnetic vibrations and so forth. But whenthe body is lost, the psychic factor which survives is free tobehave with uninhibited extravagance. It was only after many, many acid sessions that Ilearned how to cope satisfactorily with the incessant barrage ofsense-eclipsing distractions, pleasant and unpleasant, delightfuland horrible, which acid induces. I discovered, for instance,that I could, by concentrating my attention on some object, put astop to the whirling distractions. The object on which Iconcentrated became a radiance of pure light, very wonderful— so wonderful that one could be wholly absorbed in it. Itwould be possible to stop at this point, to convince oneself thatthis was the Real Thing, the ultimate illumination, Nirvana! Orthe 'Divine White Light'! But — let's face it — LSD isnot the key to a new metaphysics of being or a politics ofecstasy. The 'pure light' of an acid session is not this —it may even be the apotheosis of distractions, the ultimate andmost dangerous temptation. But it does allow one to live at leastfor a time in the light of the knowledge that every moment oftime is a window into eternity, that the absolute is manifest inevery appearance and relationship, and that Love is Wisdom indaily practice. And though hard, it is possible to live this way.It is the development of another state of consciousness within'one's' own self, one that leads to a vision of existence inwhich only the sense of wonder remains and all fear is gone. Itis also the impetus that makes a few travellers in eachgeneration set off in search of the grail, the genii in thebottle, the magic ring.... Once back in the present, when the 'mountains were again themountains, and the lakes again the lakes' I felt a degree ofapprehension about the acid I had by now stashed away in mystudy. It was pretty volatile stuff. How on earth could theenergy of this strange atom be utilised; how could man adapt itto his needs? LSD was a bundle of solutions looking for aproblem, the problem being how to undertake a work of integrationon a massive scale. Modern man had fallen victim to the mercilessvision of his own sceptical intelligence. Caught up in awilderness of externals, he was a stranger to himself. Accordingly, I telephoned Aldous Huxley at hishome; he might at least advise me about what was happening withregard to LSD. Huxley had used both mescaline and LSD and hadfound in them, perhaps, the visions he had so long sought. On thephone, he was very sympathetic. No, there was still no one in aposition to say what was happening in relation to visionaryexperience via LSD, though it seemed to excite a great curiosityin the minds of many he had discussed it with. Of course, therewas a lot of work to be done; unconsciously, if not alwaysconsciously, everyone knows that this Other World is there,inside the skull — and any news about it, any discussion ofits significance, its relevance to other aspects of life, is amatter of universal concern. Perhaps 'mindchangers' should beused in the context of some kind of yoga of total awareness,leading to enlightenment within the world of everyday experience— which of course under acid becomes the world of miracleand beauty and sublime mystery when the experience is what italways ought to be. This could not be achieved by acid alone butis achieved, essentially, through constant awareness —conscious even of the unconscious, by means of the ordinaryprocesses of living. Perhaps acid is above all a therapy for thewide spread sickness of insensitiveness and ignorance whichpsychologists call Normality' or 'mental health'. Huxley called me back a few days later, havingthought over my problem, and suggested that I go to Harvard tomeet a Dr. Timothy Leary, a professor there, whom he'd metearlier that year in Copenhagen, when he had presented a paper oninduced visionary experience before the Fourteenth InternationalCongress of Applied Psychology. Leary had also read a paper on'How to Change Behaviour' describing the induction of visionarymental states by psilocybin, the synthetic of the sacred mushroomof Mexico. He spoke very warmly of Leary as a scientist but alsoas a man, whom he described as 'a splendid fellow'. Leary hadalso written three classic monographs on personality andpsychotherapy. 'If there is any one single investigator in Americaworth seeing,' Huxley assured me, 'it is Dr. Leary.' 1961 There had been quite a bit of free-floating acid aroundGreenwich Village that winter, but mostly restricted to the'beats' of the East Village and a few wealthy Manhattan cats towhom they sold it. It was legal, of course, in those days, andthis considerably reduced the paranoia level. 'Taking acid' hadnot yet become the popular pastime of a turned-on youth, for suchdidn't exist. The world of the late fifties and early sixties wasunimaginably drab and dreary. It was still a tight littleconformist world of roles and rules and rituals. Our culture haddrowned itself in a sea of contradictory and conflicting voices.And, politically, Dulles & Co. had tied the coldwar noosearound all our throats. We had finally conned ourselves intosubmission to some nameless fear. Western civilisation livedunder the paranoia of the mushroom cloud. Liberal and religiousvalues had eroded to the point of insignificance.Twentieth-century mass-society showed the political inhumanityinherent in technological life-worlds. And it was perhapsinevitable that some of us took to acid (and later to myths andancient stories) to seek a formula that would turn thesurrounding world to dust and reveal the portals of paradise. But I think that for perhaps the majority of theavant-garde. in this very early period, LSD was still somethingof an 'exotic' whose effects could not be taken for granted. LSDinvolved risk. It was anarchistic; it upset our apple-carts,torpedoed our cherished illusions, sabotaged our beliefs. It wassomething you had to guard against, or you might explode. It wasa difficult experience to assimilate. It was impossible tointegrate with the ordinary world. And so on and so forth. 'Turning on' had not yet become a natural part ofour existence, or a symbol of certain life-styles, or philosophy,or religion, or personal liberation. Yet there were some, of mycircle, who, with Rimbaud, could say, 'I dreamed of crusades,senseless voyages of discovery, republics without a history,moral revolution, displacement of races and continents: Ibelieved in all the magics.' And our Crusade was to launch LSD on the world!Whilst other artists/visionaries/seers had been content toobserve the world, the New Message was simple: if things are notright, then change them! We would make the dynamic life-givingadventure of exploring Inner Space the New Romance! We would setoff an explosion that would sweep through our culture and givebirth to a New Radicalism! We would even found a drug-based religion, whosemessage would be 'Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out'! We would proclaimthe Reign of the Happily Integrated Modern Soul ! We would becomethe first signatories of a new 'Declaration of Evolution' aspublished in Timothy Leary's The Polities of Ecstasy. After my first few acid sessions, I began toundergo some kind of metamorphosis. None of the successive issuesin my life were plain, nothing was concrete; I was now thathelpless drifting man, cut off from his roots, with nodestination told. The reality on which I had consciously tried tobuild my personality had dissolved into Maya, the hallucinatoryfacade. Stripped of one kind of reality, and unwilling or unableto benefit from the possibilities of another one, I was acutelyaware of my helplessness, my utter transience between two worlds,one inside and the other wholly within. It set up a dichotomy,and I was at the mercy of two contradictory yet seeminglyinseparable attitudes. There was, on the one hand, still thefamiliar world of ordinary appearances, which I could cope withwithout ever needing to find any meaning for, and then there wasthis 'Other World' whose existence alone seemed to disclose thenature of reality as it concerned me personally. In the former Iwas a stranger to myself, a puppet of rote-consciousness, acipher on the face of existence, an object furnished with a labeland a price-tag, numbed and numbered by a neutral time that isneither duration nor eternity. In the latterIwas not a dot but aspecies in the great evolutionary experiment, a conscious agentin the cosmic processes called life; it provided me with some'meaning' for solitary existence, beyond the falsifications ofthe mind, where I hoped I could achieve a simple awareness andeven affirmation of the world. I was faced with the necessity to prepare a set of'spiritual coordinates'; a set of natural harmonious rules tofollow as I spun off into neurological space, and more effectiveinstruments of symbolisation in order to leave this swampland inwhich I moved. I was lost and exhausted, ambushed by stagnationand depression. Yet it was the energy created out of thistension, verging on strain, that kept me going in New York for afew more months. I was working in New York at that time as theexecutive secretary of the Institute for British AmericanCultural Exchange. This grandiose title meant that I was in theservice of a semi-official British propaganda agency in the fieldof international cultural relations. There was an impressiveboard of directors, which included Lord and Lady NatalieDouglas-Hamilton, Huntington Hartford (the megamillionaire whomTom Wolfe has described as someone who had come amongst us in therole of a 'Martin Luther for modern culture'), Lionel Trilling,W. H. Auden, Congressman Seymour Halpern, General Frank Howley,the Vice-President of New York University, Buell Gallagher,President of City College, New York. WESTERN UNION TELEGRAM SSA 165 PE 259 1961 Jan 25PM 4.25 W SNB044 GOVT PD SN WASHINGTON DC 25 318P EST MR MICHAEL HOLLINGSHEAD INSTITUTE FOR BRITISH AMERICAN CULTURAL EXCHANGE CC: HUNTINGTON HARTFORD 1 BEEKMAN PLACE NYK DELIVER: 5PM CONGRATULATIONS UPON WORK IN A FIELD OFINDISPENSABLE IMPORTANCE TO THE SUCCESS OF OUR FOREIGN POLICY.DELIGHTED TO SEE MY GOOD FRIEND HUNTINGTON HARTFORD SO USEFULLYENGAGED AND SO MANY OTHER FRIENDS ON YOUR BOARD. BE ASSURED OF MYFULL COOPERATION AS ALWAYS. REGRET CANNOT BE WITH YOU DUE TOCONFLICTING ENGAGEMENTS WHICH PREVENT IT. JACOB K JAVITS My offices were in the Huntington Hartford buildingin the East Fifties, which cost a million dollars to convert intoNassau Paladian and housed, in addition to the InstituteSpeedparks Inc., The American Handwriting Institute, Showmagazine, and downstairs, a private art gallery. It was a neatlittle set-up, and I felt rather pleased that we had got it. Some of my time was spent selecting scholarshipcandidates for a Junior Year programme at St. Andrews University(Lord Douglas-Hamilton's brother, The Duke of Hamilton, wasChancellor); and for short-term credit courses at Oxford andCambridge; some of my time was spent meeting and talking withexecutives of the large Foundations like the Carnegie and theRockefeller Institute, to try to get more money for ourprogrammes. But most of the time I spent smoking grass; and,towards the end, getting stoned on acid. And, as the summer of1961 approached, it became increasingly clear that I should haveto resign. The programmes had got all their dates mixed up, andnothing about accommodation had been firmed up; the files were ina mess, and piles of unanswered correspondence littered my desk;bills accumulated and income was reduced to almost nil. My hoursbecame erratic. I very seldom bothered to answer the phone. Whenpeople came to see meIwould always be stoned and doubtlessaltogether incoherent. I attacked the Queen. I spokedisparagingly of British culture. I spoke of 'kingdoms yet tocome' with a sort of women's magazine glibness. And I kept havingvisions of this 'Golden Dawning' of consciousness in man whichwould enable us to get things whole, to see life's magicmiracles, to know that indeed all is in everything from blade ofgrass to man and woman. It was a vision of some ideal existencein which there was only the sense of wonder, and all fear gone;of a certain state of being that was there not to be judged, butsimply to be. September 1961 Cambridge, Massachusetts . . . The New England Fall wasjust beginning, and the leaves on the trees were changing colour;the air was fresh and clear, like Vichy water, and Cambridgeseemed an altogether nice place to be. I didn't know anybody, soI rented a couple of rooms in a house on Brattle Street, andmoved in. My object in coming to Cambridge was to meet Dr.Leary to discuss LSD, or more exactly, to seek his advice aboutwhat I should do with the some 4975 trips I had left in themayonnaise jar. The next day I telephoned him at his office onDivinity Avenue and arranged to meet him over lunch at theFaculty Club. On the telephone Leary was very much the cautiousprofessional and I was a bit apprehensive.... Leary, the authorof Interpersonal Diagnostic of Personality; Leary, theno-nonsense behaviourist; Leary, the number one American expertin personality testing. And yet, according to Huxley, this wasthe man who was doing important new research in the non-clinicaluses of the Sacred Mexican Mushroom. At twelve o'clockIwalked along Mount Auburn Street,flanked on one side by white colonial houses with pretty gardens,and on the other by the river Charles. A university boat crewlazed by the boathouse. On the banks tidy groups of students satrapping or reading. Across the river, sharply outlined in thebright sunlight, I saw the Georgian features of the HarvardBusiness School, and the busy Boston Freeway reminded me ofRobert Lowell's lines: Everywhere giant finned cars nose forward like fish; a savage servility slides by on grease. Soon I was in Harvard Square, and it was not longbefore I reached the Faculty Club, an impressive building justacross from the Library. I had arranged to meet Leary inside the main lobby,near the cloakroom. But the place was jammed with intense,garrulous, smooth-suited, young men, and, since I had no ideawhat Leary looked like, I asked a porter at the reception deskwhether the professor had arrived. He pointed to a handsome,clean-cut man in his late thirties wearing a Harris-tweed jacketand grey flannels. He also had on a pair of torn sneakers and onered-socked toe peeped out from one largish hole. He had theconventional Harvard short-back-and-sides and a hearing-aidvisible on one exposed ear. He was reading the sports section ofthe Boston Globe. 'Dr. Leary? How nice to meet you. I'm MichaelHollingshead.' We shook hands, and he smiled broadly and beckonedme to the dining-room door, seating us at a small table by thewall, where we could talk without being disturbed. I asked him toorder for both of us. We small-talked during the meal. Learyseemed a bit distracted with other thoughts, and sometimes wouldfiddle with his hearing-aid, as though blaming the instrument forhis inability to catch what I was saying. So I said nothing, andencouraged him to talk. He was a very funny raconteur and toldstories about his life in Berkeley and his family and hissabbatical in Florence. It wasn't until the coffee came that hegot on to the subject of psychedelics. He began telling me abouthis work with psilocybin, the mushroom drug. It seemed that the University had let him set upsomething he called the Harvard Psychedelic Research Project forthe study of these drugs and to test their potential as aids tofacilitate behaviour change. He felt they had great potential usein such areas as alcoholism, recidivism, even in juveniledelinquency. He then elaborated his theory of the game-structureof Western society; how we all play games, for which there aredefinite roles, rules, and rituals. Sick or mentally derangedpersons were 'game-losers'. If the game was, say, football, thena neurotic person would turn up wearing cricket gear and insistthat everyone play his game. Efficient game players were thosewho could make definitions and from them decisions whichcorresponded to the consensus reality. He told me that thepsilocybin experience helped people get out of all games, moveinto a space he called 'non-game', from which Olympian height thesubject could see his own hang-ups. And it was this insight, hefelt, that would provide them with the necessary impetus tochange. I said that I'd never taken psilocybin, but itinterested me and I'd like to try it, if that could be arranged.I then told him a bit about my first acid experience, and how Ihad been taking it on average about once a week since then, andwas now more baffled than when I started using it. I felt LSD wasprobably more confusing than illuminating. Leary said there was still a lot of work to be donein the field. He had not himself yet taken LSD, but he imaginedits effects on the mind to be similar to those he had experiencedunder psilocybin. The main problem was one of communication: howto verbalise an essentially non-verbal experience in such a wayas to make sense to people living in the ordinary game-realitywho anyway thought of these drugs as mysterious rather thanmystical. Here we were talking of temporary alterations of thehuman consciousness brought about by these extraordinarysubstances — which cause a by-passing of automaticprogramming in human speech and action, making possible directawareness at higher-than-normal levels of intensity and inother-than-utilitarian worlds of experience. These drugs, ifproperly used, could be the source of energy that is to transformthe human mind. But for the majority of his behaviouristcolleagues, these drugs were a threat to their game. They tend tohide their mediocrity behind 'scientific' models and mechanicaldesigns of the human organism which are by definition mediocre,generating triviality and error. As a consequence, they veereasily into paranoid fantasies about the subjective nature of thepsychedelic experience, probably thinking anyone using thesedrugs is pretty crazy anyhow. Nevertheless, the situation at Harvard was pro theBehaviourists — B. F. Skinner, the American Pavlov, wasgetting massive appropriations from the Federal Government forprogrammed teaching machines and research into conditioned andre-conditioned human behaviour, and for whom the term 'mind' wasabout as meaningless as the word 'snow' to someone living in themiddle of Africa. Mind, if it existed, was an aberration of thecomputer's 'mind'; man was a conditioned animal, imprinted frombirth for life in ordered, concrete society. His brain was aproblem-solving mechanism, either efficient or inefficient.Skinner and his boys were engaged in nothing less than a massiveprogramme of human conditioning, starting at primary schoollevel. Skinner's philosophy stood in direct contrast toLeary's. Rather than thinking of mind in man as some kind ofspanner in the works, the psychedelic-user is more likely to seeit as a truly miraculous instrument for new perceptions andinsights about those aspects of reality which concern himpersonally. He may feel awed by the sudden power it releasesduring a session and realise that his mind is his greatestendowment. Leary had little time for those scientists whoextended the machine paradigm to living organisms. 'Qualitative change is needed in the pattern of mind-research if we are to discern an enlarged meaning of nature and of man extending beyond mathematical and experimental analysis of sensory phenomena and human behaviour. The new direction of research has been to hasten the technicalisation of human nature and ignore as a superstition all work on those aspects of human nature which do not conform with the orthodoxy of the body-machine concept. We must move beyond this sort of scientific tyranny of behaviouristic and mechanistic procedures, where man is understood in terms of controls or biological-drive mechanisms. This is carrying Descartes too far. A psychedelic user cannot reduce the mind-brain problem to a materialistic monism. He is more likely to see how the current over-emphasis on mechanism has produced a corresponding dislocation of vision, one that is resulting in a de-humanisation of man. He is more likely to turn into a revolutionary than a college professor.' It was getting late. Leary had a class at threeo'clock. I wondered how best to approach the fact that I had someLSD with me. I decided to leave the matter for another day. Weshook hands and I said I'd call him again in a few days' time,for another meeting. Fine. Perfect. We parted feeling it had beena good lunch. A couple of days passed, one of them trippingaround the museums and the banks of the Charles. The studentsseemed strangely distant, and, in an odd sort of way,English-looking, probably as a result of wearing tweedy clothesand baggy grey trousers. Perhaps these are the robots Skinner hasconditioned, I thought, their minds sanctioned by scientificobjective reality as information-storing, predicting andcomputing mechanisms, a 'tool' with which to shape a betterlife-style in the great American dream. They seemed unaware thatthere exists a range of energies and awarenesses beyondrote-consciousness or the imprinted symbols of rational thoughtwhich can work with a rapidity and efficiency beyond the workadayconceptual processes. For every moment of human life is affectedby the way man's mind works. Everything we see, touch, think andfeel is linked with it, so that when the mind is extended forbrief moments, as it is under acid, these elements can be usedmore freely and creatively, and can therefore be a tremendouslyimportant influence in a person's life.... My need to communicate this was very great indeed.But the few people I did talk to about LSD seemed blithelyindifferent, or even a little shocked. I felt like some sleazydrug operator in Marseilles, trying to hook young kids on heroin.I began to get depressed, feeling that I'd got life cocked orsomehow incomplete after fooling about with all this acid. By theend of my third day in Cambridge, I was feeling suicidal. Acommunication problem, Leary had said. Okay, then, I'd try tocommunicate with him, perhaps he would be able to emphathise withmy plight. I got him at the office the next day. I had alreadymailed him a short note the night before alerting him to myinability to cope with my life-situation due to the disruptiveinfluence of acid. And when he got on the phone he spoke calmlyand authoritatively about how we must all share our knowledgeabout these drugs, and how I had a lot to contribute, and that aGeorge Litwin would drive round to pick me up at my digs andbring me back to the office. George turned up some ten minutes after putting thereceiver down. He was a genial and open Leo with lots of energyforever rising. On the way to the office, he told me that he wasa graduate student in psychology, and Leary was his thesisadviser. He'd taken psilocybin a few times, and had even takenmescaline at the University of Chicago where he went to school.Now he was a behaviourist who believed in psychedelic drugs,which he felt was a bit heretical of him to say the least. Soon we pulled up outside a pretty colonial stylehouse marked 'Social Relations Department: Center for Research inPersonality', which I later discovered was the same building inwhich William James had done his researches with nitrous oxide(laughing gas) until he was told to stop. George lead me along a corridor to Leary's office.Leary was seated behind a desk dictating something to his Chinesesecretary, who kept giggling every time someone came through thedoor. A few young men sat on a sofa quietly reading from piles ofmimeographed papers. One wall was entirely covered with a hugeblackboard on which the day's timetable was noted. Leary waved me to a chair next to the desk,finished whatever he was dictating, and screwed in the ear-aid inan obvious attempt to let me know he was listening with all ears. I repeated some of my thoughts explaining how mypersonal philosophy had changed since LSD. I needed a place whereI could simply be, without always having to justify what I wasinto. I also explained that I was broke and needed a place tocrash. He invited me to move in to his house in the NewtonCenter suburb of Boston. He said that I could use the attic,which was large and spacious, where I would not be disturbed. Hegave me a $20 bill and asked George to take me over there. Once Iwas more settled, I could join his team working with psilocybin.Would I like to teach a course one hour a week to a class ofgraduate students — a course in existential philosophy,concentrating on the phenomenological aspects of heightenedstates of consciousness ? Would I like to borrow his Volkswagento drive to New York and pick up the rest of my things? Woulddinner at eight suit me? He could not have been more helpful. I began torealise what Huxley had meant when he called Leary 'a splendidfellow'. Apart from Tim and myself, the only other peopleliving in the house were his two children, Jackie and Susan.There were the occasional girl-friends, and visitors up for theweekend from New York. But usually the house was quiet and itslife simple. It was a big house with a beautiful garden andsited next to the Little League Baseball ground, where Tim,Jackie and myself would often join one of the evening games withthe local kids. The rest of the evening might be spent in tellingeach other amusing stories, discussing the implications ofpsychedelics, baseball or travel. Tim was also a great fan of D.H. Lawrence, and we would chat about Lawrence's life and his'message'. Every now and then I'd bring up the matter of themayonnaise jar, but Tim didn't seem particularly interested intrying LSD, probably because he didn't want to get other issuesin the way of his on-going (and officially sanctioned) 'mushroomresearch', as it was referred to in those days. His view might besummarised as saying: When you've had one psychedelic, you've hadthem all. But he did give me some psilocybin to try, which camein the form of tiny red pills from Sandoz. I dropped three of these pills, which wasconsidered about optimal dosage, for my first trip. I was alonein the house. And I felt good about taking a session, especiallyas I was very curious to see how the experience would comparewith acid. The effect was excellent, though not as powerful asLSD. It contained lots of magic and induced all kinds of verypleasant visual changes, with colours deepening, turning thehouse and garden into a Persian miniature of exquisite beauty andprettiness. I was a little disappointed when, after four hours,the landscape changed back into twentieth-century Americanreality. But I enjoyed it and used to take it pretty regularlyafter that. Perhaps after all, LSD was too powerful for ourfragile nervous systems to bear? Besides, the effects ofpsilocybin were of only four hours' duration, compared toanything up to twelve hours on high-dosage acid. I had been living at Tim's for about a couple of weeks whenMaynard Fergusson, the Canadian trumpet player, arrived with hiswife, Flo. They were old close friends of Tim, and to us seemedthe ultimate manifestations of the current New York 'in' crowdthey were witty, urbane, hip, and cool in all areas. They alsoenjoyed smoking pot. There was in those days no popular voice speakingfor marijuana, although it was considered by the 'in' crowd to bethe last word in status symbols. It was also illegal, a fact thatmade Tim feel a bit paranoid about people smoking it in hishouse. He did not use it himself. He took nothing stronger than afew micrograms of psilocybin. And of course wine and whisky,which he believed were 'indispensable luxuries'. One evening the subject turned to LSD. Theydiscussed acid in terms of a fluent flow of neologisms, jazzslang, and weird verbal formulations. They treated the subjectlightly, as they also would marijuana and getting stoned ingeneral. And it became apparent to me that they had neveractually tried it. Later, when they heard that I had some, theysuggested that we all have an acid session together, includingTim. Tim excused himself, saying he had some papers to mark. Butsaid we were welcome to take it if we wished. I brought down the mayonnaise jar and gave Maynardand Flo a teaspoonful of the confection. I also took one myself.We then settled comfortably around the blazing log fire, lit somecandles and incense, and prepared for take-off. Tim had beenfussing about in the room while all this had been going on,trying not to let his curiosity take him away from whatever otherbusiness he was engaged in. After about thirty minutes, Flo, who until thatmoment had been lying fully reclined on the sofa, sat up,suddenly, her face one huge smile, and started waving her arms atTim. 'You gotta try this, Tim, baby. It's f-a-n-t-a-s-t-i-c!' 'Yeah, really, Tim,' confirmed Maynard, his faceglowing like an electric toaster. 'It really gets you there— wow — it's really happening, man.... ' Perhaps Tim was impressed by the evidence of histwo friends, who were after all pretty hip and experienced inusing drugs. Perhaps he saw that we were all having a great time,and he wanted in. Whatever it was, something finally decided himand he took a spoon of the acid. What happened to him next was the subject of achapter in his book, High Priest, which he publishedseveral years later. As Tim described it in his book: 'It has been five years since that first LSD trip with Michael Hollingshead. I have never forgotten it. Nor has it been possible for me to return to the life I had been leading before the session. I have never recovered from the shattering ontological confrontation. I have never been able to take myself, my mind, and the social world around me seriously. Since that time five years ago I have been acutely aware of the fact that I perceive everything within the around me as a creation of my own consciousness. From that day . . . I have never lost the realisation that I am an actor and that everything around me is a stage prop and setting for the comic drama I am creating . . . LSD can be a profoundly asocial experience. Since that first trip with Michael I was never able to commit myself to the game of proselytising for LSD itself. Nothing that doesn't ring true to my ancient cell wisdom and to that central vibrating beam within can hold my attention for very long. From the date of this session it was inevitable that we would leave Harvard, that we would leave American society and that we would spend the rest of our lives as mutants, faithfully following the instructions of our internal blueprints and tenderly, gently disregarding the parochial social inanities.' [ T. Leary, High Priest, The New American Library, New York: 1968.] Chapter 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-31IA087-000632-B032-149http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065644 text/html 58489HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:56:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:28:53 GMTContent-length: 58270 The Man Who Turned on the World - Chapter 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER TWO THE HARVARD HAPPENINGS 1961 At Harvard University in the early sixties,students had not yet discovered pot; the great majority were intobooze, and there was considerable emphasis on physical prowessand middle-class, American WASP values. They had not escaped fromthe prison of their conditioning and the grand diagonal of crisisin student sensibilities was between those who went to footballgames and those who didn't. There was also a snob element, theIvy League ethos, which pervaded the campus. Harvard was a sortof club designated by the imprimatur of the establishment.Yet 1961 was to herald a change of consciousness that was to havea seismic effect not only on the sensibilities of many Harvardstudents but on all sections of American culture. I refer ofcourse to the advent of psychedelic drugs. Leary had returned from a holiday in Mexico wherehe had first taken the Sacred Mushroom called teonancatl or'flesh of the gods' which had been used as a kind of sacrament inAztec religious rites, with a history going back more than 2000years. The botanical name for this narcotic mushroom is Psilocybemexicana, which has autonomic side-effects similar to thoseof LSD, though milder. According to the Harvard ethnobotanist,Dr. Richard Schultes, ' . . . psychedelic plants act on the central nervous system to bring about a dream-like state marked by extreme alterations in consciousness of self, in the understanding of reality, in the sphere of experience, and usually marked changes in perception of time and space; they almost invariably induce a series of visual hallucinations, often in kaleidoscopic movement, usually in rather indescribably brilliant and rich and unearthly colour, frequently accompanied by auditory and other hallucinations and varieties of synesthesias.' The Psilocybe mexicana mushroom wassynthesised by Dr. Albert Hofmann in 1958 at the SandozLaboratories and given the trade name Psilocybin. It wasone of a range of psychedelic (mind-manifesting, mind-opening)plants which dramatically alter psychological functions such asmood, sensation, perception, consciousness, and cognitivefunction, which are described as 'mystico-revelatory' by variousinvestigators, but statements about the subjective effects andclinical differences among these substances are, at this stage ofour knowledge, in the realm of folklore. There is considerable disagreement in theliterature as to the interpretation of the effects ofpsychedelics, but there is substantial, one might say unanimous,accord on one major point: they do drastically alter humanconsciousness. They apparently knock out inhibitory processes inthe nervous system (which select, discriminate, censor, evaluate)and they thus release an enormous flow of previously screened-outawareness. The words which one uses to describe thepsychedelic experience depend upon the investigator's culturalbackground, his language repertoire, his literary breadth. If youusually label 'psychotic' anything which lies outside themiddle-class cultural ego of your tribe, you will call thesepsychedelic experiences pathological. If you define 'maturity' interms of those modes of perception popular in urban America of1961, then you may call any experience outside these limits as'regressive'. It was Leary's thesis that the psychedelic effectis a transcendental experience, accompanied by intensepositive or negative psychological reactions. There istranscendence of space-time categories, of the ego, ofsubject-object worlds of experience, of words. There is usually asense of unity or 'oneness' with internal and external processwhich can be ecstatic and exalting, but which can also befrightening to the unprepared person in a strange ornon-supportive physical setting. Whilst most psychologists tendto emphasise the pathological reactions; most subjects, who donot think in pathological categories, stress the positive aspectsof the drug experience. This would suggest that specificity of reaction toa psychedelic drug is primarily a function of set and setting. Ifthe mental set of the subject and the physical setting orenvironment are positive, supportive, anxiety-free, then thereaction of the subject will be ecstatic, insightful, andeducational. If the set and setting are clinical, experimental,non-supportive, and impersonal, then the reactions will befrightening and confusing. Take the case of the American Indianswho still use peyote in connection with their religion. Thepeyote rite is one of prayer and quiet contemplation. Theirdoctrine consists of belief in God, brotherly love, care offamily and other worthy beliefs. Peyote is conceived of as asacrament, a holy god-given food and an available means ofcommunion with the Spirit of the Almighty. When ingested, itcauses the worshipper to experience a vivid revelation in whichhe 'sees' or 'hears' the spirit of a departed loved one, orexperiences other religious phenomena; or he may be shown the wayto solve some daily problem, and experience a deep reverentialattitude to the divine; sometimes he may be reproved for someevil thought or deed. For the Indian, there is nothing debasingor morally reprehensible about using a psychedelic substance toestablish contact with the gods, for he believes the peyotecactus to be of divine origin. For the modern-day Westerner, the psychedelicexperience can be very unexpected, seeing how personality is theproduct of conscious and unconscious imprinting as it may also beseen as the subjective expression of the society in which wehappen to be brought up. We like to believe in the generalregularity of our mental life, in the constancy of our views oropinions, and like to think how much we are alike, our so-callednormality. But in the psychedelic state, our mind seems to obeyno rules and, except in trivial ways, seems to exist outside thescope of ordinary rational consciousness. It was not surprising, therefore, that psychedelicdrugs like LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, and peyote were consideredby the American psychological establishment as psychotomimeticagents, and in the literature we note that researchers use thelanguage of psychopathology to describe mystical and ecstaticexperiences, in what Leary calls 'catalogues of anguish andconflict'. The psychiatric researcher is trained to see theworld through negative, pathological lenses. He is myopic andcannot see the wood for the trees. When he observes mystical ortranscendental or ecstatic reactions the psychiatrist falls backon the concepts to which he is committed. He uses the language ofpathology. Psychedelic drugs produce reactions which are notconventional. Somebody else's ecstasy always looks rather bizarreor foolish or insane to such an observer. Since ecstaticbehaviours are not conventional and 'normal' it follows that theymust be abnormal. Psychotic. Crazy. A typical psychiatric interpretation reads likethis: 'This paper describes our initial pilot study of clinical effects of psilocybin. The volunteers selected were told only that they might receive a substance which would produce temporary changes in perception and bodily feelings or an inert substances A baseline EEG, mental status and checklist of symptoms was completed before the drug was administered. (Notice the suggestive use of a 'list of symptoms';a researcher not oriented towards pathology could have checkedthe subject out on a list of ecstasies and illuminatingexperiences.) 'The experiment was conducted in a dark room. A nurse or doctor or both were constantly in attendance. Every fifteen minutes the psychiatrist rated the subject's responses on the checklist and conducted a mental status examination. Volunteers were told that they might be required to remain in the hospital for twenty-four hours, but only in two instances (out of fourteen) was this necessary. Results visual hallucinations, illusions, a form of hyperacusis, body image distortions, euphoria, anxiety, depression, blocking, disorganised thinking, distractibility, flight of ideas, clang associations, inability to abstract. A subject in response to the proverb "People in glass houses shouldn't throw stones'' said before the drug, "You shouldn't point out faults in others that might exist in yourself". After the drug he said, 'At who? That depends on a lot of things." Autonomic responses, pupillary dilation, nausea, dizziness, flushing, abdominal complaints, blood pressure and pulse.... Usage of these drugs especially in an out-patient setting is fraught with the danger and should be undertaken only with the greatest caution. Psilocybin, LSD and mescaline are extremely potent agents capable of producing acute psychotic behaviour in many individuals. Depression with the ever-present risk of suicide may develop during or after their administration. Additional post-drug effects also occur. Once a patient has been entrusted with a hallucinogen even when instructed to take the drug in small doses, below the hallucinogenic threshold, we have no control over the number of pills he may take. The use of hallucinogens should be restricted to research in a hospital setting.' The genius of Leary was that he avoided thebehaviourist approach to the study and use of psychedelics. Avoidlabelling, depersonalising the subject. Don't impose your ownscientific jargon or your own experimental game models. Do notset out to validate the redundant implications of your ownpremises. Do not limit yourself to the pathological hypotheses.Do not interpret ecstasy as mania; calm serenity as catatonia; wemust not diagnose Buddha as a detached schizoid; nor Christ as anexhibitionist and/or masochist; nor the mystic experience as asymptom; nor the visionary state as a model psychosis. Right from the start the Harvard PsychedelicProject was surrounded by a charged field of excitement, glamour,adventure, enthusiasm, mystery, hyperbole, passion, controversy.Those who were running the show were charismatic, distinguished,articulate and colourful. Whilst the majority of the Harvardfaculty was content to observe the world, our message wasrevolutionary: if things are not right, then let's change them.LSD et as was the New Heresy that gave birth to momentous socialchange in the form of a New Radicalism, which had as its core theexperience of transcendence. Man could take a 'third eye' view ofhimself. He could escape from the prison of his conditioning, hisrobot-self, and move towards wholeness, completeness,place-in-the-world. We could all be conscious agents in theevolutionary process. This was to be our brave Golden Age ofAnarchy when man would free himself from the dehumanisation ofself-perpetuating, oligarchical bureaucracies and build a new,socialised, humanized super-society. We wanted to make'turning-on' a natural part of modern man's existence, for theexperience of liberation from the tyranny of the ego is anexperience so extraordinary, so unique, that it is neverforgotten by the individual—indeed, the vision is theimpetus to behaviour change. Our offices at that time were located in an old,remodelled Cambridge house—Five Divinity Avenue. About ninefaculty members and seventy graduate students in psychology usedthe building as their place of research and study, and it was adivision of the Social Relations Department. As fate or chance would have it, the building wascalled Morton Prince House after one of the first Americanpsychologists to recognise alterations in consciousness as acritical area for research. Morton Prince would still beconsidered 'far out' today with his curious and bold interests inmultiple personality, hypnosis, trance states and visionaryexperience. It seemed somehow most natural and proper that weshould be initiating a research into altered states ofconsciousness in this building. Although Morton Prince was the founder of theCenter he was not the first Harvard scholar to adventure boldlyinto the uncharted realms of inner space. The lineage of thisresearch can be traced to the turn of the century, to that mostvenerable and greatest of American psychologists, William James,who saw that if the riddle of consciousness was to be solved thenthe researcher must use psychophysical means on himself. Jamestried the peyotl cactus, the sacramental food of theIndians—only to be daunted by the stumbling block of nausea.He also tried nitrous oxide (laughing gas) as an available meansof enlarging consciousness, and refers to his experiences in hisclassic work, The Varieties of Religious Experience: 'Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of nitrous oxide intoxication, and reported them in print. One conclusion was forced upon my mind at that time, and my impression of its truth has ever since remained unshaken. It is that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We may go through life without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite stimulus, and at a touch they are there in all their completeness, definite types of mentality which probably somewhere have their field of application and adaptation. No account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded. How to regard them is the question—for they are so discontinuous with ordinary consciousness. Yet they may determine attitudes though they fail to give a map. At any rate, they forbid a premature closing of our accounts with reality. Looking back on my own experiences, they all converge towards a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance. The keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation. It is as if the opposites of the world whose contradictoriness and conflict make all our difficulties and troubles, were melted into unity. Not only do they as contrasted species, belong to one and the same genus, but one of the species the nobler and better one, is itself the genus and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself. This is a dark saying, I know, when thus expressed in terms of common logic, but I cannot wholly escape from its authority. I feel as if it must mean something, something like what the Hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more clearly. Those who have ears to hear, let them hear; to me the living sense of its reality only comes in the artificial mystic state of mind.' So the genealogical line of research in alteredconsciousness at Harvard starts with William James and from himto Morton Prince. And after Prince came another giant ofpsychology: Henry A. Murray, who was the director of the Center. Professor Murray used fantasy, dream legend,folklore, mystic vision, poetry and esoteric writings as the rawmaterial of his work on human personality. It was perhapsinevitable that he would request a psychedelic session, and inthe spring of 1961 he took the drug for the first time. As hesaid of his decision afterwards, 'Curiosity and the envisagedpossibility that I might revel in a little efficacious lunacyspurred me on to it. Why not?' It was a bold decision for amodern behavioural scientist at a time when the behaviouristswere the tough-minded guys who wanted to apply impeccablescientific methodology to the study of the human organism, hidingtheir mediocrity and lack of imagination behind 'scientific'models, techniques, and mechanical 'designs' of the mind whichare by definition mediocre and unimaginative, generatingtriviality and error. Professor Murray realised that modern man issitting on top of a simmering volcano. The psychedelic experienceis one possible solution to avoid the deepening chaos; butthinkers, philosophers, psychologists and scholars have beensingularly reticent about the possibility of expanding man'sawareness and as a group are disinclined to face up to theexistence of this new range of mind-changing chemicals by modernsynthetic chemistry. If the minds of men are blind, then surelywe should utilise whatever available means we have to restoretrue vision. The psychedelic experience and the insights itprovides entail the obligation to communicate and to listen.Revelation and response are not a man's private affair; for therevelation comes to one man for all men, and in his response heis representative of mankind. And since the response isrepresentative it endows the recipient of revelation, in relationto his fellow men, with the authority of the prophet. But here we come to the central problem. Spiritualfervour is not necessarily accompanied by tact; and men at largedo not willingly recognise a new voice of authority when theyhear it. ( Vide Leary, Aldous Huxley, Herald Hear, AlanWatts, Robert Graves, Henry Murray). The difficulties areinfinitely aggravated in our present-day world of easy masscommunication which encourages a multiplicity of successive andoften parallel authorities whose rival claims extend all over theplace by virtue of the large followership which they have found.I think if a Jesus or a Buddha were to appear in our midst todayhe would be hard pressed to convince anyone of the relevance tomankind of his teachings. We find ourselves in a situation thatAldous Huxley, the patron saint of the psychedelic movement,touches on in his essay 'Art and the Obvious', where he talks ofthe incompetence and vulgarity with which the great obvioustruths have been trivialised by hacks, and goes on to say that'on some of the most sensitive and self-conscious artists of ourage, this state of affairs has had a curious and unprecedentedeffect. They have become afraid of the obviousness of things, thegreat as well as the little.' But perhaps the communication of an old obvioustruth—that the fullest kind of maturity has its core in theexperience of personal transcendence—consists not so much inlooking for new things to do as in finding new and relevant waysof doing the obvious things. It is evident that every scientific, ethical,aesthetic and spiritual advance has been made by individuals who,to some extent, broke out of the prison of their linguistic andsocial conditioning. And when we consider the present situationof the world, we see that advancing technology has rendered ourprevailing nationalistic and militaristic culture completelyobsolete, inappropriate and appallingly dangerous. Populations,civilisations and their rulers are everywhere the prisoners ofthis obsolete culture. They can't escape. Indeed, they have beenso thoroughly conditioned that, although on the intellectuallevel they are aware of their danger, they do not, on thesubconscious levels really want to escape. What can be done to help individuals to become thebeneficiaries of language and culture without, at the same time,becoming their prisoners and passive victims, or running amokunder the intoxicating influence of misused words? There areseveral 'obvious' things that might be done.- We can give youngpeople (and adults) instruction in the nature, limitations andcapabilities for evil as well as for good, of language. We candrum into their heads (as every wise man from Buddha and SaintPaul down to those of the present has always done) that words arenot the same as things, that concepts are not experiences, thatpigeon-holes do not exist in nature, that it is both stupid andunjust to hang a dog because somebody has given him a bad name(Hitler massacred six million Jews who were regarded not as humanbeings, but as the embodiment of a bad name). We must teach ouryouth to take their ease with words, naively, by reflex. These thoughts are pretty 'obvious' to those whouse psychedelics. (Huxley: Private correspondence.) 'The accelerating rate of technological advance, of preparation for war, and of population increase leaves the human race very little time in which to get out of the prevailing mess. Perhaps within a decade the difficulties created by increasing pressure of numbers upon resources and by the disruptive impact of technology upon established behaviour patterns, may easily involve the whole world in a deepening chaos, to which the only antidote will be the iron dictatorship of generals or commissars. Those of us who worked with psychedelic drugs believed that within this short period we must try to train up a sufficient and effective minority of individuals, capable of profiting by language and culture without being stultified or made mad by them, capable of changing obsolete behaviour patterns in such a way that mankind may find it possible to live in conformity, not with disastrous slogans and dogmas inherited from the past, but with the life process, the essential Suchness of the world.' My own view is that LSD may be nothing more thanthe extreme lengths to which a handful of individuals wereprepared to go in order to ensure the continuity of theirnecessary freedoms. This slight digression over, let us return to theactivities at Five Divinity Avenue, to that tiny group led byLeary and sustained by Murray, who were to fiddle withirrelevancies while the giant powers multiplied their infernalweapons, threats, and provocations. As soon as it became knownthat a research project involving the use of these newpsychedelic drugs was to be organised, large numbers of graduatestudents came round to join the project. There were many planningsessions, and an air of excitement pervaded Morton Prince House.We also examined the available literature on the subject,including the works of Aldous Huxley—Heaven and Helland The Doors of Perception which detailed his experienceswith mescaline, as well as his novel Island about a'positive Utopia' in which psychedelic drugs are used by acommunity to help expand awareness and bring its members closerto God. It was Huxley's solution to the problems and horrors hedescribed so dramatically in Brave New World and Apeand Essence. There were also Leary's papers on the subject aswell as monographs by Frank Barron, a leading American authorityof creativity, Richard Alpert, a member of the Harvard Faculty,and William Burroughs. It was not much, but it was enough tostart planning sessions based on non-clinical methodologies. My job at this time was as an assistant to Leary. Iwas living in his house and we would drive to the office eachmorning from Boston, just across the river from Cambridge. I wasalso given a course to teach, two hours a week, when I would meetwith perhaps a dozen graduate students in psychology to plan anddiscuss LSD sessions. We would sit around discussing how best torun group sessions, the function of the 'guide' or administrator,and the ethical and interpersonal principles involved. Theatmosphere of the Center hadn't been this stirred since HarryMurray was trying to solve the Lindberg kidnapping, since MortonPrince tried to get in touch with the co-conscious 'spiritworld', since William James started a rage of nitrous oxideparties in Boston's Back Bay. What we wanted to achieve was an 'open',collaborative and humanistic response to our research in order toproduce optimally positive reactions to the drug experience. Andby 'positive reaction' we meant a pleasant, ecstatic, non-anxiousexperience leading to a broadening of awareness and an increasein individual insight. The following principles were laid down bythe team: 1. Participants whenever possible will alternateroles of observer and subject. 2. Participants will be given all availableinformation about the drug and its effects before the experiment.We will attempt to avoid an atmosphere of mystery and secretexperimentation. 3. The participants will be given control of theirown dosage. A maximum dosage will be determined by the principalinvestigators. This maximum number of tablets will be given thesubject and he will be told to dose himself at the rate andamount he desires. 4. The sessions will take place in pleasant,spacious aesthetic surroundings. Music, art reproductions,sympathetic observers will be available. 5. The subject will be allowed to bring a relativeor friend to be his observer. 6. No subject should take the drug in a group wherehe is a stranger. 7. An attempt will be made to have one observer foreach two subjects. The subjects will be given complete freedom ofthe house but cannot leave the premises. Observers will beavailable at all times for discussion. 8. Observers will be present at the end of thesession for follow-up discussions. It is interesting to look back at some of the originalmembers of the Harvard Psychedelic Project, who were firstintroduced to LSD via the contents of the magic mayonnaise jar,and to note their successive and deepening involvement in thepsychedelic movement, which was to spread from Harvard to allsections of our Western culture as well as introduce a newvocabulary for a turned-on youth movement ('psychedelic', 'acid','trip', 'stoned'); new slogans ('turn on, tune in, drop out');new artistic forms (psychedelic art, acid rock, psychedelicdiscotheques, a Beatle album openly celebrating the psychedelicexperience); new drug-associated organizations (The InternationalFederation for Internal Freedom [IFIF] in Cambridge, The AgoraScientific Trust in New York, The World Psychedelic Centre inLondon, The Castalia Foundation at Millbrook); new religions (TheNeo-American Church, The League for Spiritual Discovery, The FreeHigh Church of Cumbrae [Scotland], The Church of the Awakening,San Francisco); new life-styles (head shops, ashrams, communes,The Brotherhood of Eternal Love); an underground newspaperservice; new literary forms and themes (High Priest, TimePsychedelic Review, The Ecstatic Adventure, The PsychedelicExperience, Psychedelic Prayers, The Varieties of PsychedelicExperience) and so on and so forth. Along the crowded corridors of the Center walkedAldous and Laura Huxley, Arthur Koestler, William Burroughs,Charles Olson, Allen Ginsberg and Peter Orlovsky, famousmusicians and painters, ministers, cured dope addicts, New Yorkhipsters, oriental religious leaders, rabbis and even a couple ofJesuits. 'There is some possibility that my friends and I haveilluminated more people than anyone else in history.' It was not long before the Harvard Research Projecthad grown to include some forty professors and graduate students,who had sensed in the psychedelic experience a new tool withwhich to shape and extend their awareness of the world and theother people in it. And their claims on behalf of LSD et al werehighly articulate, and perhaps tinged with a fervour usuallyassociated with religious belief. Naturally, this had adisturbing effect on their colleagues, who were doing realpsychology—Delay of Gratification Experiments; Need forAchievement; Personality Studies of Lower-Class Irish in SouthBoston; The Rorschach Test; Need for Approval; Perception andMotivation Studies. Psychology was the science of rats and testsand statistics. Exploring and mapping new realms of internalexperience didn't belong here. Or did it ? Who could now reallysay ? The hermetic vase had been opened, and the avis Hermetishad flown the nest. The dynamic life-giving adventure ofexploring inner space was to become the new romance. It was inevitable that, as our drug programmeexpanded, criticism and rumour began to flourish about ouractivities. One of the most vocal of the critics was ProfessorDavid McClelland, a professor of psychology, a protestant-ethicman, highly intelligent, an expert in the psychological basis of'fantasy', a prominent Quaker, dedicated to external achievement. McClelland had decided to bring matters to a headby calling a meeting of the staff of the Center in which herevealed in no uncertain terms his growing concern over thePsychedelic Project. To judge by the behaviour of Mexican curanderasand Indian mystics, he said, one would expect the chief effectsof psychedelic substances to be to encourage withdrawal fromcontact with social reality and to increase satisfaction withone's own inner thought life. Research reports from the currentHarvard project, he said, 'are not inconsistent with theseexpectations'. And went on to note that 'initiates begin to showa certain blandness, or superiority, or feeling of being aboveand beyond the normal worlds of social reality'. He was concernedabout a developing interpersonal insensitivity, about the'inability to predict in advance what the social reaction of a"psilocybin party" would be'. And religious andphilosophical naivet�: 'Many reports are given of deep mysticalexperiences, but their chief characteristic is the wonder atone's own profundity rather than a genuine concern to probedeeper into the experience of the human race in these matters',and impulsivity: 'One of the most difficult parts of the researchhas been to introduce any order into who takes the drug underwhat conditions. Any controls have either been rejected asinterfering with the warmth necessary to have a valuableexperience or accepted as desirable but then not applied becausesomehow an occasion arises when it seems "right" tohave a psychedelic session'. He concluded his statements withthis warning: 'It is probably no accident that the society whichmost consistently encouraged the use of these substances India,produced one of the sickest social orders ever created by mankindin which thinking men spent their time lost in the Buddhaposition under the influence of drugs exploring consciousness,while poverty, disease, social discrimination, and superstitionreached their highest and most organised form in all history.' Another critic, Dr. Herbert Kelman, lecturer inSocial Psychology, said at a later meeting that he had observedthat graduate students in the project had formed clannish'insider groups'. 'I also question whether this project iscarried out primarily as an intellectual endeavour or whether itis being pursued as a new kind of experience to offer an answerto man's ills,' he said. The problem was one of communication, or rather thelack of any, for we had let the rumours go unchecked. From thepoint of view of those of us working on the project, psychedelicdrugs had an amazing potential, not only as aids to psychotherapybut in such areas as prisoner rehabilitation, personal growth andindividual freedom, interpersonal community structures, improvedhuman relations, creativity, art and entertainment, education,religion and philosophy, politics and sociology, experimentalbehavioural science, to mention just a few of the practicalapplications we had pursued. We came to believe, as a result ofour own experiences and those reported to us by others usingpsychedelics, that they had the potential to facilitate for theindividual the experience of major insights and problem solutionsof an intellectual-emotional nature. The realm of these insightsor problem solutions is in any area which is meaningful to thatindividual be it social or personal, intellectual, religious,philosophical, things like that. It was also our conviction that these insights,enlightenment or solutions provided a firm educational foundationfor (a) change in the social or intellectual behaviour of theindividual, (b) the development of new models regarding thenature of man along with suitable research designs to test suchmodels, (c) the development of more subtle methods ofcommunication between individuals and (d) the conceptualizationand formulation of modified social systems. We tried to counter the criticisms by gatheringtogether some of the students who had used psychedelics, at whichtime phenomenological reports were made. We also had two graduatestudents in the Harvard Divinity School and one student fromM.I.T. Philosophy Department attending who were considering Ph.D.dissertations in this area. We also brought out a Newsletter in which we triedto illustrate the impact of the psychedelic experience by quotesfrom subjects' reports: 'The atmosphere could hardly have been made more pleasant and congenial. The freedom, spontaneity, and personal warmth within the group and between members of the group became very meaningful. In these moments the psychology vs. theology business dropped off, the faculty-student barrier just did not matter, even the friend-stranger game was minimised. For these few moments we interacted not as role players or status seekers but as human beings—men who share common sorrows and common joys, some of which we discussed. 'Things going on inside me took all my attention. Early in my session I fastened upon the question of the distinction between knower and known, recalling Allport's and Hall and Lindzey's discussion of whether the self should be conceptualized in terms of the processes of knowing (self-as-subject, James' pure Ego) or in terms of the structures, patterns, abstractions by which one defines himself (self-as-object, proprium). It seemed to me that these were being dissociated in me, and I as knower was unable to confirm my knowing or to sustain my sense of identity by referring to any stable elements of myself. I recall looking at a Buddhist symbol, a circle divided into two S-shaped parts, one black and one white, with a centre in each of the semi-circles which formed the S. I struggled to bring the two centres together, as if "the 1" had to do so to survive. I can remember twisting and straining with all my might, saying I-I-I-I-I and somehow being aware that the batter of my universe was to maintain the "I" while all else was stripped away. 'Two related feelings were present. One was a tremendous freedom to experience, to be I. It became very important to distinguish between I and Me, the latter being an object defined by patterns and structures and responsibilities—all of which had vanished—and the former being the subject experiencing and feeling. 'What it all means: First, for psychological theory. One striking aspect of the experience was the lack of sexual feelings or thoughts. We all commented upon this. Another was the lack of aggression—moments of irritability produced only a desire to move away from the irritating one. Moreover, I experienced no developmental regression. While this does not in any way disprove Freudian theory, it makes it utterly irrelevant to this experience.... 'To begin with, the usual: the experience is so fantastic in both its novelty and its power as to beggar all possibility of adequate depiction through words. The most that can be hoped for by way of description is an approximation, and only those who have had the drug can know how far removed from actuality the approximation must be. 'The things that can be said easily and unequivocally are: (I) My physical symptoms were a pronounced quaking which centred in my lower limbs, climaxing (I would judge) about one and a half hours after taking the drug but continuing off and on for about five hours; a slight stomach cramp for about ten hours; the feeling of physical depletion—having been wrung through a wringer—on coming out of the spell; and inability to sleep (bright flashes of light) until 3.00 a.m. (2) No disorientation—at no point did I lose awareness of who I was, where I was, or the group experience that was underway. (3) Considerable apprehension, but no real terror or paranoia. 'Now to the difficult part. The best way I can describe the experience as a whole is to liken it to an emotional-reflective-visual kaleidoscope, with the words listed in order of decreasing importance—mood and emotion most important, thought next, visual (internal, of the sort you can get with your eyes closed) least. Experience involving these three components kept dissolving continuously from one pattern into another. 'Emotionally the patterns ranged from serene contentment and mild euphoria to apprehension which bordered on, but never slipped into, alarm, but overwhelmingly they involved (a) astonishment at the absolutely incredible immensity, complexity, intensity and extravagance of being, existence, the cosmos, call it what you will. Ontological shock, I suppose. (b) The most acute sense of the poignancy, fragility, preciousness, and significance of all life and history. The latter was accompanied by a powerful sense of the responsibility of all for all—all this, it must be pointed out, while lying comfortably and privately flat on one's back. 'Intellectually, the dominant impression was that of entering into the very marrow of existence. Instead of looking at a painting, I was climbing into it, almost through it, as if to view it from behind. So too with being in general. It was as if each of the billion atoms of experience which under normal circumstances are summarised and averaged into crude, indiscriminate wholesale impressions was now being seen and savoured for itself. The other clear sense was that of cosmic relativity. Perhaps all experience never gets summarised in any inclusive over-view. Perhaps all there is is this everlasting congerie of an infinite number of discrete points of view, each summarising the whole from its perspective with the sum of all perspectives running the entire gamut from terror to absolute assurance and ecstasy. 'During the supper, after the two groups had gathered together I found myself disinclined to speak much. And the reason seemed clear—and still does. Several times a thought began to take shape. But immediately one saw three or four feasible (and very different) ways any overt expression of it could be taken: straightforward, platitudinous, farcical, too personally revelatory to be publicly broadcast, etc. As language seemed too gross and clumsy to screen out the senses 1 did not intend, it seemed, not so much more prudent as more truthful in the sense of not-multiplying-misunderstanding, to remain for the most part quiet. 'Felt clean—cleansed, actually—clear and happy the next day; the reverse to about equal degree the day following: normal, thereafter.' We also tried to scotch the rumours by 'coming outfront' and including mention of them in the Newsletter: 'During the fall of 1961 reports circulated in Manhattan literary, artistic and intellectual circles about the availability of black market hallucinogenic drugs, allegedly psilocybin. These substances were sold in liquid form. Because of our interest in the anthropology of consciousness-altering substances we investigated these reports. Conversations with a physician who analysed this liquid revealed it to be a form of LSD mixed with another substance, probably amphetamine. 'In December we were informed about the case of a well-known model who had been wandering for several weeks in lower Manhattan in a delirious state which was attributed to liquid "mushrooms". A New York businessman who is producing a movie on the Mexican mushroom heard of this case—his wife being a former friend of the model. The girl was located and a physician called. The girl made an apparent recovery. After a week, at the suggestion of the physician, and at our invitation the girl came to Boston for a rest. We had anticipated that we could assist her in integrating her experience into her life. However, she was immediately seen to be suffering from a severer psychosis. A psychiatrist was called and hospitalization arranged in a local hospital. Subsequent investigations have determined that the girl had probably been functionally psychotic for several months. 'On Saturday, morning 7 October, we were asked for help by an undergraduate who knew of our work and was concerned about his girl. It seemed that he had obtained (from New York) and taken a hallucinogen the previous evening and had spent this evening with his girl, who was, apparently, already quite emotionally disturbed as the result of a series of recent traumatic experiences. During the night, although the girl did not take any drugs herself, she was affected by the situation, so much so that she lost contact with reality a number of times during the course of the evening. After a review of the situation, we arranged for the girl to see a Cambridge psychiatrist whom she reported having visited previously. We have continued to see the boy up to the present time in order to help him integrate and make use of his experience. 'A recent rumour suggested that the punch at a University function had been "spiked" with hallucinogens by a student who obtained the material from us. In fact, our materials are carefully safeguarded and are signed out only to the members of our staff (who sign a requisition for all material) for specified research purposes. We were unable to ascertain the source of the rumour. 'In the fall of 1961 members of our research group were approached by and met twice with several young men who have been informally experimenting with conscious-altering substances. All of these young men were or had been Harvard undergraduates. They wanted to talk with us about their experiences, and particularly about their plans for a model free community in Mexico. Two of these young men did go to Mexico to look for a location, but they returned to Cambridge. To our knowledge no community has been established. In our discussions with these men we found them to be imaginative, decent, and full of youthful exuberance. We did nothing to encourage their use of conscious-altering substances. Rather, we expressed concern about the clandestine atmosphere in which they used these substances and talked very frankly with them about the frightening experiences that stem from secretiveness, suspicion, and fear.' The Newsletter ended with a paragraph about 'Groupleaders': 'There is, at present, a group of psychologists who, during the past year have become very familiar with psilocybin and its effects. They have each participated in a number of sessions both as member and leader. We start with this group as a nucleus of administrators. The group includes: Timothy Leary, Richard Alpert, Michael Kahn, George Litwin, Ralph Metzner, Gunther Weil, Ralph Schwitzgebel, Michael Hollingshead. But the paranoia was not restricted to Harvard. ThePress were having a field-day, and reports of our activitiesbegan to appear in such mass-circulation magazines as TheReporter ('The Hallucinogenic Drug Cult'); Look('Weird Story of Harvard's Drug Scandal'), and even an articleentitled 'Psycho Chemicals as Weapons' which appeared in TheBulletin of the Atomic Scientists, which prompted us to replyin an article duly published in their next issue; our article washeaded 'The Politics of the Nervous System'. THE POLITICS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (Published in The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Pub: Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, Inc., 935 E. 60 St. Chicago 37, III.) 'The article by Dr. E. James Lieberman entitled "Psycho Chemicals as Weapons" (January, 1962) could lead to serious confusion in the minds of a credulous public and of a credulous military. The author seems to be moved by admirable democratic sentiments, but he has mixed together an astonishing combination of psychiatric folklore and chemical warfare fantasy. The results are misleading. 'The so-called "psychotropic weapons" emphasised in this article are Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD), Mescaline (the synthetic of the "divine peyote cactus"), and Psilocybin (the synthetic of the Sacred Mushroom of Mexico). The author, a psychiatrist, warns that "catastrophic damage that would be neither reversible nor humane" might follow the ingestion of these drugs. 'Dr. Lieberman has presented one of the many sharply divergent viewpoints about the interpretation and application of these drugs. Many psychiatrists believe that LSD, Mescaline and Psilocybin produce psychiatric symptoms—anxiety, depression, detachment, confusion, suspicion, psychosis. Many other investigators have come to the conclusion that these symptoms exist mainly in the mind and eye of the psychiatrist, and that consciousness-expanding chemicals, far from being dangerous weapons, may produce dramatic changes in personality leading to unprecedented peace, sanity and happiness. 'Perhaps it depends on what you are trained to look for. Most psychiatrists who have experimented with such consciousness-affecting drugs report danger. Most non-psychiatrists see these drugs as great benefactors of mankind. Included in the latter group are Albert Hofmann, the brilliant bio-chemist, who first synthesised LSD and Psilocybin; Alan Watts, author and philosopher; Robert S. de Ropp, bio-chemist; Aldous Huxley, novelist and philosopher; and the great American psychologist and philosopher, William James. Also included among those who hail the humanistic promise of consciousness-expanding drugs are a few psychiatrists who have seen beyond psychopathology to the adaptive potentials of the human brain. 'So much for the controversial. Research and not words will resolve these issues. But let us look next at the secure knowledge which exists concerning Mescaline, LSD, and Psilocybin. What are these substances? Sacramental foods? Devilish weapons? Wonder medicines? 'It is easier to say what they are not. They are not addictive, nor sedative, nor intoxicating. There is no evidence for any lasting and very few transient physical effects. Everyone agrees on one factor—they dramatically alter consciousness and expand awareness. 'There is a second generally shared conclusion. Set and suggestibility, expectation and emotional atmosphere account for almost all of the specificity of reaction. If the drug-giver is supportive, open, relaxed, then the results will usually be positive, educational, dramatically insightful. If, on the other hand, the drug-giver is secretive, depersonalised, himself fearful of the drug, then the reactions will probably be anxious and unpleasant. 'As members of a research project studying the effects and application of consciousness-expanding drugs, we have had the opportunity during the last eighteen months of observing the behavioural and phenomenological reactions of over 300 subjects. A glance at some of our results suggests that the military applications of consciousness-expanding drugs may be limited. Ninety-one per cent of the Americans who have participated in our research report pleasant, inspirational experiences. Even with no attempt to be therapeutic, and with only one ingestion, over sixty per cent of our subjects report subsequent life changes for the better. 'During the past twelve months we have used these drugs for rehabilitation purposes in a maximum security prison. During more than 100 individual ingestions with-hardened criminals we have witnessed dramatic insight and behaviour change reactions. 'Like any product of our advanced technology, the consciousness-expanding drugs can be used to manipulate; to dominate, to frighten or to benefit mankind. A hypodermic syringe of LSD or Salk vaccine in the hands of an enemy can become a frightening weapon. However, the greatest enemies of mankind are ignorance and fear. In the hands of the unfriendly, these weapons—ignorance and fear—can paralyse and destroy. 'What are the protections? Accurate information, openly shared, calm, courageous response to the evidence. Psychiatrists and physicians (on whom Dr. Lieberman calls for rescue from danger, perhaps imaginary) can help to the extent they are collaborative, open, fearless with their fellow men. If the American people are frightened by psychopathological obsessions and psychiatric superstitions and ill-kept chemical warfare secrets, they can be hurt. We are least vulnerable and strongest when we are well-informed. Facts are the defence against any weapon, and particularly the psychological weapons of fear and helplessness. 'The facts about consciousness-expanding substances are not all in yet, but some things are clear. Physiologically these substances act mainly on the brain stem, disinhibiting certain regulating, selecting, screening and controlling mechanisms that constantly guide our perception and thinking. The higher, conscious centres are free temporarily from these artificial restrictions. Behaviourally the main effect of these substances is relaxation. Most of our subjects are very happy just to sit and enjoy the world. There is much less talking, much less superficial movement or conversation. Let us be clear, almost all of our subjects could function very adequately if called on. They choose to relax. Psychologically these amazing substances expand your awareness, they open your mind. The kaleidoscopic and complex world that has always been there, the powerful sensations from every part of your body and the unusual connections of thoughts and feelings that are normally ignored come dramatically into consciousness. 'Of course these experiences can be frightening. If you are not prepared, if you do not know what is happening to you and your brain, if you are struggling to maintain complete verbal control over your senses and your awareness, you will certainly be frightened and angry. But if you are prepared, if you know what kind of a chemical you have taken and what to expect (which most subjects participating in psychiatric research with these substances do not), if you do relax, then the experience can be wonderful, enlightening, and life-changing. If an enemy does drop LSD in the water supply and if you are accurately informed and prepared, then you have two choices. If you have the time and inclination you should sit back and enjoy the most exciting education experience of your life (you might be forever grateful to the saboteur). If you don't have the time or the inclination for this pleasant and insightful experience, then swallow a tranquilliser (which is a good antidote) and you'll be back to the prosaic reality. Tomorrow the drugs and the counter-drugs may be different, but the prescription is the same. 'If an enemy introduced a consciousness-expanding drug into a military command centre, our leaders (if they are accurately informed and experienced about the potentials of expanded awareness) might find that men in certain key positions could function better. In fact, we must assume that these substances are now being used by our space agency for the preparation of cosmonauts, who will certainly undergo altered states of consciousness in space exploration. 'Your brain is your own. Intelligent, open collaboration can expand your mind—with words and with drugs. Only ignorance and misinformation can allow someone else to control it—with their own words or with their drugs or with their imaginary fears.' Signed: Timothy Leary George Litwin Michael Hollingshead Gunther Weil Richard Alpert Harvard University Chapter 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-32IA087-000632-B032-194http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065710 text/html 80334HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:56:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:28:41 GMTContent-length: 80115 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER THREE LEARY FLIES HIS JOLLY ROGER FROM THE IVY TOWER 1962 As the Harvard Psychedelic Project grew in bothnumbers of people and sessions, and as we become more aware ofthe effects of these drugs, it seemed that the hinterland of the'psychedelic mind' is not the obscure forest in whichBlake saw his tiger, nor the dream-world from which Coleridgeconjured the mysteries of Christabel and Kubla Kahn. It was aplace altogether different, and much more mysterious. We studied the reports from students using LSD orpsilocybin, and began to chart maps of their interior space(which we also compared with our own experiences). We werehopeful that some of the mystery would thereby be revealed to us,for the 'psychedelic experience' looks intelligible enough. Buthere we came to certain other realisations. That this Other Worldis vibrant with strange energy transformations and exists—ifit exists at all—in another dimension of mind or self; likethe inside of an atom, it is a space forever recreating itselfand its own mystery. The more we began to peer into it, the lesswe could actually 'see'. It seemed to proceed, under pretence ofshowing you how it works, to display a series of much moresurprising worlds. It might be called a more or less 'magicalpreparation'. All we could say at this time was that this OtherWorld could be experienced as the moment when one emerges fromthe prison of 'limited mind' and becomes identified—by thesimplest but most intense of the acts of mental life—withthe 'limitless mind', whatever it may be, however slight. And wefelt this form of identification or sense of 'oneness', far frombeing an acquired or learned state of mental discipline, was anatural state, the only true natural state for man to be. It was then but a short step from this realisationto individual members of the project linking their secret'psychedelic life' to the Beyond. And all sorts of claims onbehalf of LSD et al. were made on the campus. Someadvocates of the psychedelic experience suggested that God mayhimself be at work in these biochemical compounds, and wouldquote the work of W. T. Stace, William James even Henri Bergson,in support of their growing mystical beliefs. Professor HustonSmith of M.I.T. said that the subjective drug experiences aresometimes 'strikingly like those reported by mystics, seers, andvisionaries of the past'. And in an extensive questionnaire studyof eighty-two subjects who took psychedelics at Harvard, thefollowing 'mystical' characteristics were cited by well over halfthe subjects as occurring 'quite a lot' or 'among the mostimportant aspects of my experience': loss of time sense;objects snore significant and beautiful; being able to operateout several levels at once; extreme pleasure, ecstasy, cosmicjoy, paradise; feeling of being very wise, knowing everything;feeling that nothing need be said. According to Freud, at the basis of the humanpersonality lies sex and aggression, the twin poles of deepconsciousness around which we revolve. But we found that when theego-personality was ripped away completely, which can happenduring an intensive LSD experience, what was left was 'purestlove' and a sense of oneness with all living creatures. No sex;no aggression. Subjects felt free of anger, pity, and disgust. Itwas as though the supremely ordinary human aspiration to be freecould be reached, albeit only briefly, by means of these drugs,which is perhaps what Freud meant when he also spoke of 'theNirvana instinct' in man, this yearning for peace which lies atthe very core of our being. It has always seemed to me a pitythat Freud did not write more about the mystical or spiritualdimensions of knowing, for he was obviously aware of theexistence within realms which do not easily fall into thecategories of psychoanalysis. But in New England in 1962 the subject of mysticismwas one that, for most people, was synonymous with religiousfaith. And so it was rather natural for project members to turnto spiritual masters in order to help them identify the nature oftheir new experiences, which were not like anything they had everimagined before. It was the start of their search for an answerto the riddle of consciousness or for the Grail, as for somethingfrom the sky. They felt certain in their own minds that what theyhad undergone was something which they had personally experienceddeeply, and not really something which they had done forthemselves. It was a gift from God, a gratuitous grace, aided andabetted by modern synthetic chemistry. God was not only in hisheaven all right; he was also here with each single one of us,but wholly within. Naturally, the 'good news' quickly spread acrossthe Harvard campus, and the sort of feedback we got suggestedthat the rest of the faculty thought Dr. Leary was starting a newreligion, with psychedelics as the new sacraments. And to therest of the psychology faculty, this was absolute heresy. Accordingly, we began to experiment closer to home,as it were, trying to find other areas in which these substancescould be used, particularly those with distressed or helplesspeople, for whom life had become one long unrelieved struggle.Such was the case with prisoners at the maximum security prisonat Concord, just north of Boston. Tim Leary had had the good vision to see that if alarge-dose acid session could help end-of-the-line alcoholics, itmight also work with 'hard-core' criminal recidivists. And he hadspelled out a research project, using psychedelics, to theofficials at the Massachusetts Department of Correction, theDepartment of Legal Medicine, and to the head of the HarvardSocial Relations Department. After a lot of hassle and red-tapecutting, the proposal was accepted; and thus began a unique andvery successful experiment. We started slowly, with small groups of three orfour prisoners and two members of the Harvard group (who at thistime included, in addition to Leary and myself, Dr. Allan Cohen,Dr. Alfred Alschuder, Dr. George Litwin, Dr. Ralph Metzner, Dr.Gunther Weil, and Dr. Ralph Schwitzgebel, with Dr. MadisonPresnell as the medical and psychiatric adviser). We wouldusually work in pairs, and go to the prison twice a week, withone of the days given over to running the prisoners' psychedelicsessions, which were held in a locked room in the prisonhospital, and one of the days devoted to planning future sessionsor in follow-up discussions. I am not a psychologist and it would be ridiculousif I were to attempt to give a scientific appraisal of theHarvard-Concord prison project. But one thing is certain, thesessions 'worked' in the sense that very few of the inmates whounderwent the intensive LSD or psilocybin sessions ever came back(which was the whole point of the exercise). Statistically, fiftyto seventy per cent of inmates paroled or released return withina five-year period, with a nationwide average of sixty-seven percent. We found that one and a half years after the termination ofour project the return rate had been reduced to seven per cent,which is a completely objective index of success. How did weachieve these results ? After an initial discussion meeting with an inmate,when he would be told about the drugs and the kind of effectsthey produced, we would then meet three or four more times toplan his session. We explained to him how he would 'lose his ego'and soar off into 'non-game' worlds of experience, and how thiswould enable him to see himself and his criminal games withgreater clarity. We also encouraged the prisoners to propose thekind of changes they would like to see happen within themselves,which might take the form of a hefty South Boston AmericanIrishman saying 'I want to understand what drinking means to me'or a coloured inmate from Georgia 'I want to get over myparanoia'. We would also draw 'internal maps', huge circles inwhich we could fill in the expected positive changes and noteareas of the personality best avoided in a session. On the day of the session, we would get to theprison early, and after chatting to the guards as we movedthrough the different locked doors to the prison hospital, wewould assemble the group of perhaps six inmates; and then alltake the psychedelic—which included, of course, ourselves,since only by taking the drug with them could their fear andsuspicion and paranoia be averted. The physical setting was the best we could do underthe circumstances—we spread mattresses all over the floor,played taped pop and Indian music, made sure that the sessionwould not be interrupted by visitors or guards and thus that theatmosphere would be relaxed and open and permissive. We found that it was best not to really doanything during the session, except be there and give reassuranceto anyone who started getting paranoid or fearful; everyone wasbest left free to explore whatever material came up, whether itbe entirely personal or involve personal issues with any of theothers present. We found that in a benign, supportive, friendlysession and with a favourable mental set on the part of eachsubject, the drug produced a detachment from everyday thoughtsand actions which was correlative with an increase in degrees ofreflectiveness and insights into normal behaviour patterns and inturn opened up the way for the construction of alternatives. For those of us responsible for conducting thesessions, our orientation was, to quote Gerald Heard, the Britishphilosopher who first introduced Aldous Huxley to mescaline, ' .. . concerned but not anxious, interested but not engrossed,diagnostic but not critical, aware of the seriousness of what isbeing conveyed and all the more incapable of coldness or shock,aloofness or dismay'. But what about the inmate, for whom the psychedelicexperience came as something not far removed from, if notactually akin to revelation ? I think for the majority theexperience was intense and highly emotional, with hallucinationsof colours, of positive and frightening scenes; yet it apparentlystimulated them to do some thinking about their lives and whatthey were doing with them. One inmate, who initially presentedthe classic picture of a 'hardened criminal' of the well-knownAmerican variety, emerged from his heavy shell as a sensitive,lonely, child-like human being. At the time when I was feelinghighest I had a terrific feeling of sadness and loneliness, and afeeling of great remorse at all these wasted years . . . and ofthe harsh and brutal things I have done in order to survive atall.... ' Or another, a twenty-eight-year-old coloured brotherwho was serving a five-year sentence for robbery and had attendeda school for retarded children till the age of seventeen: 'I keptsaying to myself in thought—where do you belong ? Where doyou belong?' And yet another inmate, a forty-eight-year-old manserving time on charges of theft, forgery, larceny and escapewith a prior history of thirty arrests, the first one being atthe age of twelve: ' . . . before taking this drug my thinking always seemed to travel in the same circles—drinking, gambling, money and sex, I guess what you'd call a fast life. Now my thoughts are troubled and at times quite confusing, but they are all of an honest nature, and of wondering. I feel somehow detached now from prison life, uninterested in gambling or even talking to the other cons, except those in the group. I think I now know what I want to be and I am sincere in my mind when I say that I want to make it so. Because the drug opened my mind and I got a better understanding of myself and also of the other people in the group, I now feel free to say and discuss things, which you generally do not do.' (He was discharged a few months after his firstsession and obtained a job with a construction company; he workedten to thirteen hours a day and one month later he was promotedto assistant foreman. A few months later he became assistant cookin a large restaurant. Ten years later he was still out andrunning his own auto body paint shop.) But perhaps the most interesting of all theprisoners who took part in the project is Jimmy Kerrigan, one ofthe 'notorious' Kerrigan Brothers, a safe-cracker and part of theIrish mafia, who is still serving out his sentence, even as Iwrite these lines, some twelve years after the events I have beendescribing. When the project terminated, which it did withLeary's dismissal from Harvard, Kerrigan continued the programmebut without using drugs, and started a group within the prisoncalled The Concord Self-Development Group to assist its membersto sort out their lives' priorities and to give guidance onjob-getting and how to 'go straight'. He got together this groupcomposed of inmates, starting with the ones who had been in thedrug programmer who then voluntarily pledged themselves to helpeach other find a new direction in life that would notautomatically lead straight back to prison. I recently received abrochure from Jim in which the aims of SDG are spelled out. Itends with a list of questions that each member has to askhimself, first alone and then with the rest; and 'a hypotheticalcase history': THE PERSONAL ANALYSIS l. AM I WILLING TO GET HONEST WITH MYSELF FOR THE PURPOSE OF GETTING TO KNOW MYSELF AND OTHERS BETTER? 2. DO I SINCERELY WANT TO HELP MYSELF? 3. DO I NEED HELP TO DO SO? 4. WHAT KIND OF HELP DO I REALLY WANT? 5. CAN I GAIN IT THROUGH THIS PROGRAMME? 6. WHAT DO I REALLY THINK OF MYSELF AS I AM NOW ? 7. WHAT ARE MY REAL MOTIVES FOR JOINING THIS GROUP? 8. WHAT CAN I HONESTLY DO TO IMPROVE MYSELF, AND AM I WILLING TOTRY? 9. CAN I VISUALISE WHAT LIFE PROBABLY HOLDS FOR ME IN THE FUTUREAS THINGS NOW STAND? 10. WHO BESIDES MYSELF CAN AID ME IN RE-ESTABLISHING A GOOD LIFEIN THE FUTURE? 11. WHAT DO I HONESTLY THINK CAUSED THE TROUBLE I AM PRESENTLYIN? 12. AM I WILLING TO EXAMINE THE CAUSES AND TRY TO UNDERSTAND THEMAS THEY REALLY ARE? 13. HOW MUCH OF MY LIFE HAS BEEN WASTED THROUGH MY OWNMISMANAGEMENT'? 14. DO I THINK AT THIS TIME MY LIFE NEEDS TO CONTINUE IN ADOWNWARD MANNER? 15. IS A VALID APPROACH TO SELF-HONESTY REALLY NECESSARY? 16. DO I WANT TO THINK POSITIVELY TOWARDS DEVELOPING MYSELF? THE HYPOTHETICAL CASE HISTORY NAME: John Doe AGE: Any years OCCUPATION: None PROSPECTS: None RELIGION: All religions EXPERIENCE: Lyman, Shirley, County Jail, Y.S.D.(Youth Service Board) JOB EXPERIENCE: Restaurant worker, stock boy,dishwasher, labourer SCHOOLING: 6th to 10th Grade ASPIRATIONS: No work, rich widow or drift and seethe States, steal when necessary FAMILY TIES: Mother, father, brothers, sisters,loose relationship. Rather travel or 'cut out' on one's own RESULTANT SITUATION In Concord, five years, indefinite sentence,feeding off fantasy and delusion for the most part; identifiedwith the 'boys'; satisfied with sense of belonging to rebelliousfragments of society; 'real' people are people in trouble, injail. The rest are 'way out'. No communication via legitimatechannels nor respect for norms of community. THERAPY SUGGESTED Reduction of fear, fantasy, and hang-ups, via opendiscussions in small group, with trained inmates (A A's; HarvardExperimental Group; Legal Medicine) who wish to pass it on. Crashprogramme (classes two hours; once, twice, or more often perweek) towards self-development, consideration of proper goals andattainable achievements tailored to variable individualpotential. Readiness for follow-up outside programme. Finally,acceptance of social norms with respect for self and others inall areas worthy of same. It seemed to me then, as indeed it still does, that LSD canbe useful if it helps a person free himself of his habitualpatterns of thought or some kind of 'absolute' sense of identityin order to see aspects of his life and reality as it concernshim personally. It is useful for what it can yield in terms ofself-understanding, and is fruitful if it causes someone in a badlife situation to exert himself to overcome it and learn how toadapt the new insights to his needs. I think that perhaps for themajority of the thirty or so prisoners with whom [ had sessionsat Concord, something happened during their experience that tookthem beyond the falsifications of rote-consciousness and, intime, led them individually to achieve a simple awareness andeven affirmation of the world. There is a little light burning ineach one of us which is something we are all too inclined toforget, though with sometimes quite terrible consequences. And ifa psychedelic-associated programme is shown to help 'hard-core'cons regain the lost light of that which makes them truly human,then it is sad when politics and unconscious attitudes workagainst those who would like to share something of theirexperience and knowledge in precisely these human areas. If wecall a man an animal and then put him behind bars, we should not,after all, be too surprised if later he reacts against us withferocity; it is perhaps significant that Charles Manson spentover fifteen years inside various jails before he let thesociety of plain and ordinary people know precisely what kind ofanimal they had turned him into, though our admiration can begiven to such men as George Jackson, Eldridge Cleaver, HueyNewton, Jimmy Kerrigan who, despite absolutely dehumanisingconditions over long periods of time, were nonetheless able todetach themselves sufficiently from the 'prison system' and keepsome kind of light of humanity burning within themselves,sufficient at any rate to preserve their sanity. Perhaps mankindneeds to discover a new culture of humanity before it is all toolate in a world that finally submerges into deepening chaos,which will only happen if we find alarm-clocks sufficientlypowerful to wake us from the sort of sleepwalking existence whichnowadays passes for 'normality'. Enough, enough; let us pass on or rather back to the Harvardof 1962 and try to understand how LSD helped spawn a 'generationof visionary maniac white mother country dope fiend rock and rollfreaks'. I had got to know Leary quite well by now; not onlywas I installed as a member of his household in the Boston suburbof Newton Centers but I would accompany him each day to theHarvard office, which we now ran as a sort of commandheadquarters for planning sessions. There had been a rapidacceleration of interest in the drug programme, and it was notlong before we had a constant stream of visitors asking about LSDand psilocybin, and their availability. But perhaps one of our most curious visitors was ayoung man called Walter Pahnke, who was, incidentally, both anM.D. and a Bachelor of Divinity. He was also a candidate for thePh.D. in the Philosophy of Religion at Harvard, had studiedChristian mystical literature and had established nine categorieswhich he felt described a genuine mystical experience. It nowoccurred to him that if a group of extremely religiousindividuals were to take a psychedelic drug, then they too mightalso have a genuine mystical experience. He wanted to knowwhether Leary would help him run a drug experiment for twentydivinity school students from the Andover-Newton TheologicalSeminary, ten of whom would be given a psychedelic, and the otherten an amphetamine. The plan was to run the session on GoodFriday in Marsh Chapel at Boston University, a long-establishedMethodist-affiliated institution. It was a breathtaking proposal,though it only took Tim thirty seconds to agree wholeheartedlyand commit himself to planning the session. We had by this time run or arranged over onethousand psychedelic sessions for persons from all walks of life,including fifty scientists, quite a number of artists andmusicians and writers, sixty-nine full-time religiousprofessionals. We also had a religious advisory committee thatincluded two college deans, a divinity school president, threeuniversity chaplains, an executive of a religious foundation, aprominent religious editor, and several distinguished religiousphilosophers. We felt that with all this experience we could copewith any drug-associated contingencies, including this one. Thisparticular session was to be later sensationalised in theAmerican press as 'The Miracle of Marsh Chapel, though perhapsthe only real miracle surrounding it was the one of actuallygetting Walter Pahnke's Ph.D. dissertation accepted. As I was to be one of the 'guides', I was naturallyvery curious to meet the twenty students who had volunteered totake part in this experiment. Our first meeting took place at theTheological Seminary, and Tim began to explain a little about thephysical and subjective effects of psychedelics, though none ofthe students, I believe, had ever taken anything stronger than anaspirin in their lives. There were one or two questions, but onthe whole the group seemed relaxed if not actually lookingforward eagerly to what was to become for them a most memorableGood Friday. One of their professors, Dr. Walter Clark, who hadhimself used psychedelics, was careful to point out that itshould not be believed that psychedelic drugs are in themselvesreligious. He said it was a bit like organ music, which may bethe means to a religious experience for some people. He also saidthat drugs had been used in esoteric religious rituals, from thedays of antiquity right up to Boston in 1962, 'presumably as astimulus to religious experience'. During any profound emotionalexperience, he pointed out, religious or otherwise, chemical orhormonal bodily changes occur. 'Furthermore, we know that thenatural chemistry of the body includes biochemical substances,known as indoles, which are similar in structure to theconsciousness-expanding chemicals and seem to be associated withsome of the same psychological states as those produced by LSDand psilocybin. The question then immediately arises whether anaturally-occurring excess of the indoles might not predisposesome people to certain kinds of mystical experience or whether amystical state of mind might not, on the other hand, stimulatechemical changes in the body.' All the students again agreed to take partvoluntarily in a systematic demonstration of the religiousaspects of a psychedelic revelatory experience along the lines wehad suggested. It was a double-blind experiment. The students weredivided into five groups of four persons, each group with its ownguide, who met with them before the session for orientation andpreparation. Finally, on the day, we all arrived at 10.00 a.m.at the Chapel. Everyone seemed serious, almost reverential, andDr. Pahnke busied himself with the preparation of the drugs,which he was to administer. There had been a last-minute flapwhen Harvard University Officials, an ad hoc faculty group'to advise and oversee' future drug studies, headed by Dr. RobertBales, refused to release to the experimenters the supply ofdrugs held by Dr. Dana Farnsworth, head of the Harvard HealthService and one of the protagonists of the Pahnke experiment.Nevertheless, after representatives had been despatched to roundup a sufficient quantity of 'non-Harvard' acid, there was enoughto go round, mostly from my mayonnaise jar. The session took place in a small, private chapelsited underneath the main building, one hour before noon on GoodFriday, with the reverent sound of the story of Christ piped inby loudspeakers. The service would last for three hours and wouldconsist of prayers, spoken meditations and readings from theBible, periods of silent meditation, and religious music. We wereasked by the minister to maintain a reverent silence during theservice. My little group of four were amongst those who receivedthe psychedelic (neither the students, guides, nor experimenterknew beforehand who received the psychedelic); but it was prettyobvious after about thirty minutes, when one of my studentsnormally a shy, sensitive person, given to reading aloud largepassages of Donne's poetry, suddenly began to tear the buttonsoff his jacket and declared that he was a fish. Another studenthad meanwhile slipped silently off the pew on to the Chapelfloor, where he began to slowly gyrate like a huge snake. Theother two seemed quite okay; one was sitting bolt upright, hiseyes staring fixatedly at the huge crucifix on the high altar, aninsane grin on his face, and with his hands clasped tightlytogether, as though clutching his last remaining $5 note; whilstthe fourth member lay stretched out and as stiff as a board on anempty pew, a position he somehow managed to retain during theentire service, and then only coming to again after a hugeinjection of Thorazine had been administered. I finally managed to subdue the student tearing offhis buttons, but not before he had removed all of them off bothhis coat and his trousers and thrown his dental plate at thealtar, much to the surprise of the students who had been giventhe amphetamine, who sat huddled together in the front pews,nervous and not very sure about where their own heads were at. There was of course quite a lot of activity goingon with the other groups who had been given the drug, almosttotal confusion, in fact with some of the students climbingacross the pews, and one actually standing facing the crucifix,arms stretched out as if somehow able to identify physically withChrist and his suffering on the cross. One student even managedto get outside the Chapel and was almost killed when he walkedinto the traffic on Boston's Commonwealth Avenue, 'believing hewas Christ and nothing could touch him'. Finally, at two o'clock, when the story of Christhad reached its conclusion, we all retired to an adjoining roomfor discussions; since many of the students were still completelyunder the influence of the drug, however, we decided instead thatwe should all drive back to Tim's house, where our girl-friendshad arranged a wine-and-cheese lunch, which we could have whilsttaking turns to stay with those who were still out of it. (While most religious leaders would probably beunenthusiastic over the idea of the drugged approach to religion,Archives of General Psychiatry reported that earlier thatyear one lawsuit brought attention to a pastor who told hiscongregation that LSD could bring them closer to God.) For Leary, the Good Friday session was something ofa personal triumph, and he began increasingly to study literaryaccounts of religious ecstasies from such pens as those ofWordsworth, Tennyson, Virginia Woolf, and even C. P. Snow, aswell as personal experiences from classical mystics like Teresaof Avila, van Ruysbroeck, Plotinus, and Saint Augustine; he wasalso at this time getting into Eastern mystical thought and readextensively from the Tao Te Ching, I Ching,Vedanta, the Bhagavad Gita, Christ's Sermon on the Mount,Zen, Buddhism, Sufism, Hinduism and so forth. He believed at thistime that in LSD he had found a truly religious 'sacrament', andone not too different from the Vedic Soma, the Dionysian nectar,the Greek ambrosia, the Mexican mushroom, the Red Indian'speyote, or the Chama Indian's ayahuasca. 'When the daycomes—as it surely will—that sacramental biochemicalslike LSD will be as routinely and tamely used as organ music andincense to assist in attainment of religious experience, it maywell be that the ego-shattering effect of the drug will bediminished,' he later wrote, and added 'Such may be one aspect ofthe paradoxical nature of religious experience.' This call for acceptance of LSD as an aid togenuine spiritual revivification was not only picked up by manypeople seeking answers to their own spiritual problems, but alsoby some of his professional colleagues who were in all otherrespects highly cautious scientists. Indeed, one of them, Dr.Frank Barron, a distinguished member of The Centre for Researchin Personality at Berkeley, wrote the following: 'There is a newtime coming, and we shall know it when it happens, when LSD isinterpreted by those who use it as the source for the energy thatis to transform human consciousness.' But it must also be appreciated that part of theproblem Leary faced at this time was in finding a 'model'acceptable to society at large in which LSD could be legitimatelyused. And religion certainly seemed more promising as a prospectthan psychology, despite the drug's promise as an 'adjunct' topsychotherapy, prisoner rehabilitation, and the treatment ofalcoholics; besides which, he was coming in for considerablecriticism from many sectors of the American academic community,where it was widely believed that the drug sessions at Harvardwere being run nonchalantly and irresponsibly. Dr. Herbert C.Kelman, a lecturer in Social Psychology at Harvard, reported hehad observed that graduate students who had had LSD experienceshad formed a clannish 'insider group', and wrote: 'I doubtwhether this project is carried out primarily as an intellectualendeavour or whether it is being pursued as a new kind ofexperience to offer an answer to man's ills.' John U. Monro, deanof Harvard College, wrote a letter to the editor of TheHarvard Crimson newspaper, warning of 'the effects of LSD,psilocybin, mescaline and other mind-distorting drugs,' which ' .. . have been known to intensify seriously a tendency towarddepression and to produce other dangerous psychotic effects.' Yet religion was still very much a new area forLeary. I think his scientific training was the source of histhoroughness and even of his originality as a talker, for on thewhole he did not always write very well. There was always a hintof journalism in what he wrote, a too-easy tendency to slackenoff for long passages at a time, into just something not farremoved from the jargon of the hipster, and the related facilitythat suggests, if not exactly knowingness, at least a feelingthat he is never at a loss, an essentially 'olympian'preparation. He was a follower of Mao and Dionysus, Freud andEpicurus, and this was never more apparent then when he tried todefine the religious situation. It was difficult to take himseriously as a 'prophet' or a 'holy man' or a 'high priest'; itwas easier to see him as an inspired impresario, an Appolinaire,or a Cocteau. Yet he sought to find a common ground on which bothscience and religion could meet. 'Science is a social system which evolves roles, rules, values, language, space-time locations to further the quest for these goals—these answers. Religion is a social system which has evolved its roles, rules, rituals, values, language, space-time locations to further the pursuit of the same goals—the revelatory experience. A science which fails to address itself to these spiritual goals, which accepts other purposes (however popular), becomes secular, political, and tends to oppose new data. A religion which fails to provide direct experiential answers to these spiritual questions becomes secular, political and tends to oppose the individual revelatory confrontation.' He found it hard to see how his results—whichread: seventy-five per cent 'spiritual revelation'—could bedisregarded by those who were professionally concerned withspiritual matters and individual religious development. Butdisregard them they did. Thus, far from convincing everybody that the NewReligion is really dedicated to the idea that we should onlythink of ways in which to bring-each other up, not down, he onlysucceeded in putting up people's backs. The problem was to find asufficient number of people left who would listen to what he hadto say. And part of this difficulty was due to a lack ofausterity in the presentation, which alone guaranteed- publicdiscussion though not necessarily of a kind calculated to produceeither consensus or rational inquiry. Yet despite Leary's variousresources of honesty and intelligence, his quest forunderstanding must in some sense be a frustrating one. Whateverhis ideas or ideals, no two authorities seemed to agree with oneanother and each would be the first to declare that he alonespoke with authority. 'Lots of blacksmiths whose monopoly isthreatened.' Leary felt that LSD's significance lay beyond allsocial analysis and all psychological categories and, since thedrug experience was completely unique, a new model was needed, anew structure. It presupposed a readiness on the part of thosewho used it to undertake a series of new departures, perpetualreadiness to expose oneself to new mental dimensions, even to newforms of 'reality'. In that sense, no two sessions are ever thesame; each one provides an entirely personal, and at times,highly idiosyncratic encounter with the self, with each personbecoming his own explorer. So that each session acts as a bridgebetween one reality and another, and to the internal voyagerrepresents perhaps an attempt to penetrate into the deeperreality below the externals of egocentric consciousness. And thusthe voyager returns, bringing back an inventive fertility anddiversity of experiences to talk about, to illustrate, throughart, through words, through music, through being. As a serious writer, Leary had to throw away thechance of seducing readers or listeners with too ready-made aview of human categories. Again and again he demanded that thereader, too, open himself to the new and unfamiliar, as indeed hehad done himself. He began to speak of 'Man's FifthFreedom—the freedom to use your own head and on your ownterms', and of 'The Politics of Consciousness Expansion'. And themore he used words, the less the clarity of expression. 'We mustentertain nonverbal methods of communication if we are to freeour nervous system from the tyranny of the stifling simplicity ofwords,' he wrote in an article published in The Harvard Review.He wanted the freedom to live close to the hermetic and theincommunicable and even to the refusal of all language.Certainly, within those of us using LSD, it was developing a newsensibility, a new awareness, there was something wholesome aboutit, something healthy and vital. It had laid claim to new areasof its own, and we wanted to share our knowledge with the world.Verbal tricks were out. We had to make of our language anentirely new instrument of communication, something to beundertaken in the spirit of renewal, with a kind of reverencewhich you find in acts of faith. The freedom we sought was notthe freedom to say or do what we liked, but freedom as a value(internal freedom), something intangible yet also somehow morereal. We saw that the traditional means for expanding orcontracting consciousness such as the printing press, thetelevision screen, the radio transmitter, the movies, wererestricted by law and remained under government control. How thenwere we to change this situation? For the purposes of describingthe psychedelic experience in 1962, he had no language, notrained operators, just a vision that a new language wouldinevitably develop to transfigure every one of our social forms. 'It is possible that in twenty years our psychological and experiential language (pitifully small in English) will have multiplied to cover realms of experience and forms of thinking now unknown. In twenty years, every social institution will have been transformed by the new insights provided by consciousness-expanding experiences. Many new social institutions will have developed to handle the expressions of the potentiated nervous system.' (Leary). Perhaps because poetry is most responsive to thechange of human sensibility or awareness, and is the only trueadvance guard of language today, much of the new 'visionary'poetry is written in lines of simple word associations, that is,with the poet taking his ease among words; he prefers a limpidimage which floats rather than runs, an image more natural thanprecise, and in general strives for a direct, less intellectualexpression or emotion. He sees the manipulative verbal machineryfor what it is, an ego-oriented, aggressive, goal-oriented,fear-ridden, guilty, unconscious use of language. According tothe American poet, Gerde Stern, 'In a world of simultaneousoperations you don't have to be first to be on top. We aredealing with word as it exists in our own world as an object insight and sound. This is a unique role for the word, which beforeour time has been a thing of thought and breath or written andprinted on paper, more of a private experience than in publicmedia like billboards, signs, radio and television. Most peoplestill long for a world of one-thing-at-a-timeness.' But it was not only true for poets. Artists, too,were having to readjust their work to match their new insights,find new forms of expression, use novel techniques to describethis brave new world of sensory experience. They needed an artthat would reflect a deeper layer of consciousness; colour andespecially shape or form became in themselves more meaningfulthan any object they might represent. 'Photographic' imitationsof appearances were less interesting than patterns of colourwhich have a power to move us and in ways which we littleunderstand. The psychedelic artist was 'aware' of sensorypatterns in the intense way that the Tantric artist is; that is,he created his art out of whatever it was that he had discoveredwithin himself, which in turn was commensurate with an increasein degrees of reflectiveness. The artist who 'turned on' to hisown psychosomatic body wanted to recreate this experienceimmediately in visual terms which electricity made possible. Hewas no longer surface-bound to a piece of canvas or to imitationsof the world of external appearances for he had become moreuniversal—now he could soar off into these new sensoryrealms of human experience. He understood the meaning of suchwords as 'liberation' and 'freedom', not only with reference tohis own life but in the life of his art. And he knew that thevisible form would have to be a direct expression of the'electric' 'pulsating' centre of which he had become aware. Thusit might seem to those who saw art as simply 'images' or aspectsof nature, that the psychedelic artist—who flooded the roomwith colour, movement, sound, and light—was unconcerned withouter form, and of course they were right. For psychedelic art isexpressive of an inner rhythm, like that of music. And thespectator who is not possessed of a self-conscious similar to theartist's, will never understand what response is expected of him.For the psychedelic artist is learning how to make himself partof the mystery of his own being by 'seeing' it, living in it;here can be no sense of separatedness, no difference between 'Me'and 'Thee'—'We are all one,' he says; 'the art, thespectator, and the artist are one. Threefold Always.' This may go some way to explaining the widespreaduse of psychedelics at pop concerts, for truly great pop musicmust present a frame to enable the spectator to merge with thesound and the colour, and the musician achieves authenticity bymeans of the language of 'visual music' expressed in the beautiesof his world of electronic simultaneities (Jimi Hendrix). It would be a mistake simply to dismiss this NewHigh Art as an art of naivet�, mental or logical deficiency, orgeneral benightedness since it presupposes that the spectator hasalso been able to move beyond his ordinary relative vision and isthus able to get into the invisible forces within his own deepestself in order to 'see more seeingly'. And it is the psychedelicexperience that frees one, albeit temporarily, of any 'absolute'sense of identity in order that one may soar off into the flux. The psychedelic artist would rather see his art assomething that arose out of the alembic of self, as a piece ofreality salvaged out of the flux, which manifested itself in hisconsciousness from the hidden depths of his being, somewhatsimilar to the cave paintings of primitive man, which also aroseout of the experience of living. He is trying to expresssomething in a non-conceptual, highly-figurative and oftenemotive way, through symbols which may themselves be magical,i.e. that have the power to turn us on. The psychedelic artists had found a means ofcommunicating directly what they had experienced internally. Butwhat of the rest of us ? As Leary put it— 'We are, in a real sense, prisoners of our cognitive concepts and strategies. Passed on from generation to generation. The cognitive continuity of history. Our current reliance upon substantive and "closing-off" concepts will be the amused wonder of coming generations. 'The danger is not physical or psychological, but social political. Make no mistake: the effect of consciousness-expanding drugs will be to transform our concepts of human nature, of human potentialities, of existence. The game is about to be changed, ladies and gentlemen. Man is about to make use of that fabulous electrical network he carries around in his skull. Present social establishments had better be prepared for the change. Our favourite concepts are standing in the way of a floodtide, two billion years building up. 'Let's try a metaphor. The social situation in respect to consciousness-expanding drugs is very similar to that faced sixty years ago by those crackpot visionaries who were playing around with the horseless carriage. Of course, the automobile is external child's play compared to the unleashing of cortical energy, but the social dilemma is similar.' (It was this particular passage which finallyconvinced the Harvard hierarchy that Professor Leary was nowobviously suffering from real hallucinations and that hehad to go!) 'The claim was made in 1900 that the motor carriage, accelerated to speeds several times that of the horse-drawn vehicle, would revolutionise society. Impossible to conceptualise because in 1900 we possessed no concepts for these possibilities. But we always have the standard objections to the non-conceptual. First of all, we object to the dangers: high speeds will snap nervous minds, gas fumes are fatal, the noise will prevent cows from giving milk, horses will run away, criminals will exploit the automobile. 'Then the puritanical objection: people will use cars for pleasure, for kicks. 'Then we question the utility: what can we do with speedy carriages ? There are no men to repair them. There are no roads, few bridges. There are no skilled operators. The supply of fuel is small. Who will sell you gas ? 'Then we raise the problem of control: who should be allowed to own and operate these powerful and dangerous instruments ? Perhaps they should be restricted to the government elite, to the military, to the medical profession. 'But why do we want cars anyway ? What is wrong with the good old buggy ? What will happen to coachmen, blacksmiths, carriage-makers? 'The automotive visionary of l900 could have pointed out that his sceptical opponent had no concepts, no social structures to implement these possibilities. Remember, if one talks about experiences and prospects for which the listener has no concepts, then he is defined (at best) as a mystic. Our automotive mystic sixty years ago would have asserted the need for a new language, new social forms, and would have predicted that our largest national industry would inevitably develop out of this vision. 'Can you imagine a language without such words as convertible, tudor sedan, General Motors, U.A.W., Standard Oil, superhighway, parking ticket, traffic court? These most commonplace terms in our present culture were mystical images three generations ago. 'The political issue involves control: automobile means that the free citizen moves his own car in external space. Internal automobile. Auto-administration The freedom and control of one's experiential machinery. Licensing will be necessary. You must be trained to operate. You must demonstrate your proficiency to handle consciousness-expanding drugs without danger to yourself or the public. 'A final hint to those who have ears to hear. The open cortex produces an ecstatic state. The nervous system operating free of learned abstraction is a completely adequate, completely efficient, ecstatic organ. To deny this is to rank man's learned tribal concepts above two billion years' endowment. An irreverent act. Trust your inherent machinery. Be entertained by the social game you play. Remember, man's natural state is ecstatic wonder, ecstatic intuition, ecstatic accurate movement. Don't settle for less.' (The Politics of Conscience Expansion', Harvard Review, Vol. I No. 4, Pages 33-37.) I think Leary was most prophetic when he noted oneof the occupational hazards of the LSD game—'You are morelikely to find the evolutionary agents closer to jail than theprofessor's chair.' It is true, of course, that unlike moretraditional occupations, the LSD one is not one in which younormally get smoother and smoother with experience, like adoctor's: it is (to use Leary's metaphor of the automobile)nearer to motor-racing, in that the changes are so rapid, thecurves so sudden, and demands an immediacy of response, a qualityof sheer nerve—attributes not often maintained indefinitelyat top pitch. Perhaps it is all part of the pilgrim's progresswhich, though undoubtedly preferable in many respects to thepoverty endured by Renoir and Pissaro, Blake and Artaud, islikely to destroy more talents, in the end, than it nurtures. And here again, we began to get echoes back fromdifferent parts of the world, from people who seemed able toidentify with the message we were sending out. I still keep aletter we received from Alfred Schmielewski Yogi, the Siddha Gurufrom Canada, who had no doubts about the efficacy ofpsychedelics: 'Psychedelic drugs,' he wrote, 'are thebreakthrough of the ages and represent an all-importantcontribution to racial history. Here seems to exist after abillion years of unconscious evolution an instrument that man canuse to establish control of racial unconsciousness. Man can nowsay that the race can control itself, its unconscious processes.This discovery will be the birth hour of the cosmic history ofthe human species. With this instrument, man can conquer thestars.' Another related area, though not necessarily alwaysdrug-related, was being developed brilliantly by Ronnie Laing,M.D., in London, and Joseph Berke, M.D., in New York, namely, theexploration of the experience of 'going-into-madness', withmadness being seen as 'a fundamental human experience rooted inan untenable intrapsychic and interpersonal situation.' Thepossibilities for madness as enlightenment could now bediscussed. Joe wrote to me about some of this, and said he wastrying to get a course together at FUNY (Free University of NewYork) in which 'madness will be seen as a key to understandingthe entire panorama of "psychopathology".' Whilst it was possible for us to observe that thedrug research area was one composed of a wide range of subrosa activity, utopian dreams, mystical aspirations, andordinary vague enthusiasm, interpenetrated by a certainatmosphere of personal life-renewal, we also believed that youngpeople, particularly intellectuals and artists, were lookingincreasingly inward and back into their archetypical past,turning, as it were, towards the inner life via the use ofmind-altering substances, just as in the thirties many youngintellectuals turned to the inner life via the church. But what sort of church? And what sort of areligion could contain the 'LSD sacrament' ? Increasingly, itseemed, the answers to these questions were coming from the East,most particularly from Tibet, through the esoteric teachings ofthe Great Mantra and spinning-top sound of the universe: OM MANIPADME HUM. We found that many of the visionary statesexpressed in the Tibetan doctrines described states ofconsciousness which compared favourably with induced visionarystates recorded by many of our religious-minded subjects. And inthe Mahayana Buddhist text Bardo Thodol, we found a mostaccurate description of the 'going-out-of-the-body' experiencesas well as an entire symbology of 'ego-death' and 'rebirth'; itwas, after all, a Tibetan instruction manual for the preparationof one's own death, the offices of afterlife, and instructionsfor rebirth. We found these Tibetan images and thought patternsconducive to flexible thought, and we began to discuss suchmatters as incarnation, 'white light', death, withoutembarrassment. Of this apparent unself-conscious use ofhighly-charged, emotive, tabu words and worlds, Richard Alpertonce told a magazine reporter: 'Two years ago, if a guy came tome, like they do now, talking funny, I would have thought he wasnuts. But what is a nut ? They're all on the same journey to theEast that we are. They may come as a guy with a beard and amotorcycle or a Tibetan Lama. But we're in communication witheveryone asking questions: What does it mean to truly be ? Whatis man's potential ?' And of the Bardo Thodol (The Tibetan Book of theDead), Gerald Heard wrote that it provided a method: 'which can give us essential aid and guidance in and for the most vital and most neglected phase of our lives.... But however necessary it is that our American and, indeed, all our "modernised" societies be taught how to get over our death phobia and so to be freed from the ridiculous tabu-dishonesties whereby we attempt to disguise our rightful exit, we shall not try this method and undergo this training unless we can be reassured on two points, unless two quite sensible questions can be answered, two rational objections be met. The first is: "How can a Westerner accept the Buddhist, oriental, pessimistic, pre-modern, pre-scientific view of life: namely, that the best thing to do with it is to get rid of it?" The second question runs: "Granted, that out of the psychological methods developed by Buddhism a valid terminal therapy could be extracted, what use could that therapy be to any but the old ?"' In 1962, the youngest and most typical Westerner,the American, was the most sincere of human beings. Hispotentialities were unlimited, and in a world of growth they hada right to existence. He was moving into a new age, a new cultureof sincerity; the harmony based on heteronomy of the adultsociety was to become transformed into one based on autonomy,when everyone could do his own thing and not be thought of aseither dangerous or crazy, and that all truth which was acceptedpreviously on the strength of authority would in future becomepersonal recognition through the development of personalself-consciousness. If man is to stand on his own two feet,autonomous, completely responsible for everything that he wills,thinks and does, then he must be completely conscious of hiscauses and reasons. He would have to develop a system of thoughtthat deals with true bondage in a true world, whilst at the sametime aim for the spiritual state of no-game, no-ego, the ultimateliberation and the very highest forms of maturity. Only alongsuch a path can a new order develop, the OM-HUM of presence andloving process. After 150 years of fanatical exactitude in hisconquest of the world of appearances, Western man was starting todiscover that he could explore inwardness; though of significancehe knew little as yet. But having once perceived it as apossibility at all, then he would use his ingenuity to findperfect expression for it, and establish the perfect harmonybetween essential being and the world of external phenomena. Theaffective spiritual state was not to be found in the greatinstitutions of theology, which in fact no one inhabits, butthere, inside the self. He found in his confrontation with the'Void', things which alone disclosed the nature of reality tohim. He was no longer a stranger to himself, a cipher lost on theface of an inhuman universe, a puppet furnished with a name. (Excerpt from a post-session Report): 'This was the deepest drug state. Things became confused as to time and sequence. I have almost no recall of what I was seeing at this time, and only feeling was important. I was seeing something. It seemed that when I cried a whole new world unfolded and the fascination with the figure was lost. I became part of a vast universe, drawing my energy from the earth. The order of things and in things became very clear. Love and hate were very important as I entered this state and seemed to be clawing at my back in order to gain control of the very core of me, a brilliant spinning core of energy. From here, probably as a result of being able to cry. I began contemplating the infinite sorrow of being alone. I felt, however, that infinite sorrow was the key to open the door of understanding, like washing the eyes so you could see. I felt if you could suffer an infinite amount of sorrow and be patient enough to wait an eternity, you could understand the meaning of things. However, for me in this state, finding the real meaning of the world no longer seemed important, but only being part of it myself, a dot in the cosmos, and feeling the complete harmony of everything, both inside and outside, and knowing that because there was such complete order I did not have to worry about myself. There was a sense of a lack of gravity and I was spinning, or rather spinning and floating at the same time around the earth, something like a satellite. I felt comfortable here in spite of the knowledge that from here I could not communicate with others because all people were One and a part of the vast energy of the world, as I was. Energy simply is; it exists but has no capacity or wish of communication; it has no way of communicating. Death of the body was not important here. It was a very wonderful feeling to be able to give my energy back to the earth where it had originally come from.' Clearly, after such an experience there could be noreturn to a culture based on authority and blind surrender to aregime where personal opinion is largely erroneous. Courage andtruthfulness, and they alone, accelerate the processes ofevolution. It is in the nature of things that even our mistakesmust turn into blessings, which presupposes a morality in theuniverse somewhere. And any crudeness is largely due to oursincerity. We do not know, as they do in Bengal, how to uniteexternally metaphysical truth and telling lies, or, like theChinese, how to maintain outer face without breach of faith,without even questioning to what extent it corresponds to innerpersonal truths. Accordingly, loyalty to one's own privatebeliefs and empirical truthfulness are among our highest ideals. We had a lot of convincing testimony by people,impressively intelligent where academic and worldly achievementsare concerned, which encouraged us to believe that in LSD we hada new chemical tool for human expression and development. Although the comments and reflections are quitediverse, we felt on the basis of our evidence that, in theaggregate, the appeal is one in which humanistic values prevail.So far from the LSD experience necessarily being the withdrawalof the mind from reality, it brought it, for certain people, onceagain into an enriched everyday life. And for some of us workingwith LSD at Harvard during this time, we believed we had found ameans, on a manageable scale, with which our Western kind ofcivilisation could be renewed by the discovery of new mysteries,by the undemocratic but sovereign power of the human imagination,by the undemocratic power which makes poets the unacknowledgedlegislators of mankind, the power which makes all things new. Wecould feel somehow that we were involved in nothing less than'The Great Work of Magical Self-Liberation' of the Tibetandoctrine when the eyes of the spirit would become one with theeyes of the body, and God would be in us, not outside. Entheos:enthusiasm: that was the essence of our 'unholy madness'. Andhow far Harvard was from that ideal was the measure of the defeatof the American Dream. It seemed the more we studied the reports, the morewe realised that no quick rational explanation would suffice tocover the range of the emotional power of LSD on the humanpsyche. Everything suggested LSD had a different meaning fordifferent people, a different meaning for different professions,and even a different meaning for different social classes; peopleseemed to take it to fill their own particular needs. The only intellectual danger, it seemed to me, wasa tendency on the part of many subjects afterwards to convert the'inner world' they saw into a cosy fiction. Yet the moment ofillumination, the creative vision, the ecstatic encounter, theexperience of true insight, is essentially brief; once achievedand expressed, one is again back on square one, a victim, likeeveryone else, to the merciless vision of our scepticalintelligence, or ambushed by stagnation (stasis) anddepression. I also had personal reservations about the claimsmade on behalf of LSD that it was the key to the religiousor mystical state or could lead to a truer metaphysics of being.In 1962, despite perhaps a hundred LSD sessions, I could stillsay with Flaubert, that 'I am a mystic and I believe in nothing',or echo the modern French existentialist, Coiran, who said that'Once we have ceased linking our secret life to God, we canascend to ecstasies as affective as those of the mystics andconquer this world without recourse to the beyond.' For there isno evidence that LSD ever made nor marred a saint. Certainly,'turning on' was interesting for its usefulness, for what itcould reveal in terms of a creative understanding to those whoused the psychedelic experience for their own purposes, and couldbenefit from such knowledge. But real courage and a tremendoussensitivity of mind is needed if one is going to hurl oneselfinto a madness that is not sacred, since the realtemptation, it seemed to me, is to link the psychedelicexperience to God and prepare to return to that Garden of which,through no fault of our own, we have lost even the memory. But ifreality still counts for something, then the psychedelic voyagerhad to become a practical dualist, whatever be thenon-dual philosophical doctrines to which he intellectuallysubscribes. It is true that at certain peak moments during anintensive LSD session, it is only the Clear Light of the Voidthat alone Is. One transcends at such moments thedichotomy set up in one's mind between 'inner' and 'outer' worldsof experience, and sees reality only from the standpoint of themystical vision, of the Brahman; and may experience lifebeyond all dualism. But after such a trip, when the mountains areagain the mountains, and the lakes are again the lakes, there isstill the empirical world to be dealt with; it doesn't disappearlike the Cheshire Cat, leaving only an insane grin on your face. The very nature of the psychedelic experience makesit capable of producing apparently impossibleeffects—hallucinations are things which are impossible,which can yet somehow be felt as real. LSD exerts an influenceover consciousness by virtue of its proximity in the bloodstream, but there is nothing whatsoever about LSD; itcannot exert volition on its own; indeed, there is a case forsaying it is itself unconcerned. Consciousness responds to its influence. This isanalogous to what is called in chemistry catalytic action. Thecatalytic substance influences another by its presence butremains unaffected itself. LSD is in this sense an efficient butnot instrumental cause of heightened self-consciousness; but thereal powers of consciousness are will, knowledge, action:these are the great triangle of energy, which is something knownto every Tantric yogin. There was an attempt by Leary, Alpert and Metznerto start a new religion based on the psychedelic experience,which found its theoretical expression in their authorship of ThePsychedelic Experience, a manual based on The Tibetan Bookof the Dead. They had adapted the classic work of Evans-Wentzon the Bardo plane, according to Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup'sEnglish rendering; but in such a way as to turn it into aguidebook for psychedelic sessions. It contained technicalcomments about: The Period of Ego loss (First Bardo): The Periodof Hallucinations (Second Bardo): The Period of Re-entry(Third Bardo), following the Tibetan model. 'The first period (Chikhai Bardo) is that of complete transcendence—beyond words, beyond space-time, beyond self. There are no visions, no sense of self, no thoughts. There are only pure awareness and ecstatic freedom from all game (and biological) involvements ('games' here are behavioural sequences defined by roles, rules, rituals, goals, strategies, values, language, characteristic space-time locations and characteristic patterns of movement. Any behaviour not having these nine features is non-game: this includes physiological reflexes, spontaneous play, and transcendent awareness). The second (lengthy) period involves self, or external game reality (Chonyid Bardo)—in sharp, exquisite clarity or in the form of hallucinations (karmic apparitions). The final period (Sidpa Bardo) involves the return to routine game reality and the self.... For the unprepared, the heavy game players, those who anxiously cling to their egos, and for those who take the drug in a nonsupportive setting, the struggle to regain reality begins early and usually lasts to the end of their session.' In other words, its authors suggested that we die,creatively speaking, when we cling too fast to the definite. Butif you cling too long to any idea, even to the idea of LSD as ameans of human transcendence, it can become a chain like anyother. There were times when I felt we had forged an 'LSD chain'around all our necks; our problem was were we ever going toremove it? The Tibetan idea of 'ego death' leading to 'conscious'experiences in the after-world, with the possibilities inherentin that situation of selective re-lives, was a very appealingone, though it reminded me a little of the Irishman of 102, who,on being asked the secret of his longevity, said that we should'choose our parents very, very carefully'. It seemed that thespirit generated in the generation of the early sixties was of acertain hopefulness in the possibilities of consciouslymaking of their future something beautiful rather than brave. Theorigins of the Movement are thus in the loving direction ofconcord, better human understanding, and brotherly love. Brotherhood: each person owns nothing but the whole. might stand for our motto at that time. Sublime optimism orsublime nonsense ? Who can really say for sure ? And for the rest. . . let me just add the only man who managed to live withoutmoney was Robinson Crusoe. Therefore, Practical Dualism Always!ought to be the slogan of our new psychedelinquent youthmovement, I believe. Soon enough, the summer came, the conjunction of my planetssuggested change. For a little rest and recuperation I went toJamaica, accompanied by my girl-friend, Karen, with whom I hadbeen living for most of my time in Massachusetts. Tim, RichardAlpert, Ralph Metzner, George Litwin, and indeed the majority ofthe other members of the Harvard Psychedelic Project, took offfor Mexico, more precisely, to coastal Zihuatanejo, there tostart an LSD colony along the lines outlined in Aldous Huxley'sbook Island. It was history's first organised LSD youthcolony. And a report from George Dusheck appeared in the SanFrancisco News-Call Bulletin, part of which I reproducenow: 'Dr. J. J. (Jack) Downing, a top San Mateo County psychiatrist and LSD experimenter, was among twenty Americans expelled from Zihautanejo by Mexican authorities June 16. 'Dr. Downing himself has treated about forty alcoholics with the mindboggling drug at San Mateo County General Hospital, with "hopeful" results, as the News-Call Bulletin reported last January. 'He was not, however, a member of the International Federation for Internal Freedom, sponsors of the Zihuatanejo LSD colony. Dr. Downing was there, in his own words, "as an observer and investigator of the group treatment situation.... " 'The colonists were sedate, professional people, he reported. "There were no beatniks among them," he said. "The majority of them were successful people, who seemed to have a religious or self-improvement motivation in being there." ' "Zihuatanejo is a middle-class Acapulco," said Dr. Downing. "The very rich go to Acapulco, those moderately well off go up the coast . . . about 120 miles north . . . to Zihuatanejo." 'There Dr. Timothy Leary and Dr. Richard Alpert, both former Harvard psychologists, set up a Mexican branch of IFIF, headquartered in Boston. 'The colonists, screened from thousands of applicants, paid $200 a month for food and lodging, lived in one of several bungalows above a beautiful white beach, dotted with palm trees and cabanas. ' "There was an open-air dining room," Dr. Downing observed. "The funicular, a little railroad going down to the beach, didn't run, so we had to walk. There was lots of fresh fish, caught in the bay by Zihuatanejo fishermen. The staff was friendly and casual. The setting is lovely." 'There are four rooms to a bungalow, he said. One of these was set aside for group LSD sessions. Every morning two to five persons would gather in this room, with Hindu prints on the wall, and Hindu woven prints on two double mattresses and boxsprings on the floor. The LSD companions, including one member of the IFIF staff, would swallow liquid LSD and plunge into the dream world of visions, mind-expansion, self-awareness and mystical ecstasy. 'The staff consisted of Dr. Leary, who was busy most of the time screening applications—more than 5000 were received from all over North America—and fending off the curious officials of the Mexican immigration service; Ralph Metzner, a pharmacologist, and his wife, Susan, twenty-two. 'One of these sat with the LSD group, taking the drug also, so as to be simpatico. Those who take LSD and "sail", as the saying goes, believe that only users can understand those who are taking it. 'The dosage was heavy: 100 to 500 micrograms. More than 300 micrograms is considered an overwhelming dose by most experienced pharmacologists and psychiatrists. There are twenty-two grams to an ounce, and a million micrograms to a gram. Thus, enough LSD to cover the head of a pin can send one off like an Atlas rocket. 'As the hours wore on, the group . . . possibly consisting of an actress, a magazine writer, an alcoholic businessman, and Mrs. Metzner . . . would exchange visions, cry out at sudden insights of omnipotence and glory, listen to a motley collection of records. Gradually, towards four or five o'clock in the afternoon, the effect of the drug would wear off, and the drug therapees would emerge one by one into the bright Mexican evening. 'For those not taking LSD, the day was relaxed and endless: Breakfast at 11.00 a.m., lunch at 3.00 p.m., dinner at 9.00 p.m. ' "The atmosphere was highly unusual," Dr. Downing reports. "People accepted one another without suspicion or anxiety. They seemed very open, very relaxed." 'Even when immigration officials, embarrassed by stories of the LSD Paradise in the Mexican press, moved in to close the IFIF colony on June 12, nobody was upset. ' "Dr. Leary was very calm. He went to Mexico City to seek a modification of the order, but when he failed, took defeat without bitterness," said Dr. Downing. 'They all left for Mexico City on Sunday, June 16, on a special DC-3 chartered by immigration officers. The Zihuatanejo experiment had begun on May 1. ' "Six weeks is too short a period to measure any results," said Dr. Downing. "It must be regarded as a ruined experiment. My own view is that Leary and Alpert have developed techniques of potential value. But I do not agree with them that LSD should be available to all who want it. It is a potent, potentially dangerous drug, and should be used on an experimental basis only, by qualified professional researchers."' Meanwhile, back in Jamaica, life had become quite idyllic forKaren and myself; we had rented a beach house at Seven Miles, inthe grounds of the Copacabana Club, a popular hang-out anddancing place for people from Kingston. There was a garden ablazewith flowers, and hanging-plants around a veranda, from which wehad a view over the ocean and of the Blue Mountains behind thehouse. There was also a small pool for a swim after coming backfrom surfing. Karen and I swam, and dug our limbs in the sand,made pilgrimages into the bush and to the tops of mountains,lived very close to nature, with the sun continually warming bothbody and mind. Already we began to yawn for the future ofmankind. But is it possible to get bored with a panoramathat is the same virtually every day ? It seemed to me after onlya couple of months of Jamaican weather, that the sky remained anunvaried bright-clear blue and the sun a bright orange furnaceevery day; and I began to yearn for the varieties of nature youfind in Europe. The pull of home was too great. I had to find ameans of returning, somehow. Accordingly, I wrote a letter to Eileen Garrett, afriend, the President of the New York Parapsychology Foundationand a celebrated medium, who was extremely wealthy. I suppose myletter was in some sense a call for assistance, which sheresponded to immediately by sending me a first-class air ticketto Nice, and a cable to say that her chauffeur would pick me upand take me to 'Le Piol', the headquarters of the ParapsychologyFoundation in France. When I arrived at Nice airport a few days later Iwas indeed met by a chauffeur and taken to what seemed to be afour-star restaurant, just outside St. Paul-de-Vence. But I wasquickly reassured by seeing Mrs. Garrett, who welcomed me andexplained that she had built the restaurant herself, 'to pay thebills', and there were a number of chalets in the grounds forguests of her Foundation. After several days there, during which I met anumber of very interesting people, including the Professor ofPsychiatry at Edinburgh University, George Carstairs, who hadwritten a monograph earlier on Daru (a potent distilledalcohol derived from the flowers of the mahwa tree) and Bhang(the Indian name for Cannabis indica) as a 'choice ofintoxicant' in a village in Rajasthan. We also discussed othernames in both India and elsewhere by which Cannabis isknown—bhang, charas, ganja, kif, takrouri, kabak,hashish-el-k if, djoma , dagga, Samba, grifta, marijuana, pot,and even the American name—shit. But, alas, he wasnot holding at the time, which ever name you called it. Anyway, the outcome of my stay at 'Le-Piol' wasthat Mrs. Garrett gave me a foundation cheque in the amount of$3000 to write a report on the Harvard-Concord Prison Project,which interested her. I was thus able to return to London, cable a ticketfor Karen in Jamaica; as it also enabled us to spend a verypleasant autumn in a basement flat in Brompton Square. I didmanage to complete the prison paper and sent it off to New York;my only acknowledgement was from the secretary of theParapsychology Foundation, who replied saying that my monographread as 'if it had come out of an "atomiser"'; and wasa 'literary work' by which, as a scientist, the secretary was notmuch impressed. After a few months, with the grant money nearlyspent, Karen and I decided to return to America, this time to NewYork, with plans for setting up a 'foundation for mind research'called The Agora Scientific Trust Inc., where the 'Agora' inGreek times was a market-place, only in this case it was a'market-place' for ideas about the nature of human consciousness. Chapter 4 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-33IA087-000632-B032-227http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065725 text/html 66489HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:57:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:28:24 GMTContent-length: 66270 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 4 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER FOUR THE EXILE'S RE-RETURN 1963 Once more I wandered through the gigantic city ofNew York, and the busy arteries of Manhattan and its mightyCentral Park. It was January. And it felt good to be back. I had had quite a few new ideas since leavingHarvard about extending the availability of LSD to new groups,organisations, and selected individuals, which might lead tolocating space for the psychedelic experience in modern Americansociety. It was clear that if psychedelics were to enter intoproper competition for society's mandate, we would need some kindof structure to disseminate our new knowledge. The need for alegal framework into which psychedelics could be smoothly fittedwas very great indeed, for non-medical use of these drugs,including LSD, was not yet governed by the Food and DrugAct—and if we were to use our legal advantages in acollaborative way, and fast, we might be able to get a projectoff the ground and circulating through inner space before the lawfinally got round to outlawing their use or amended the Act toprevent their use for religious purposes. An American legal authority, Roy C. Bates, writingabout 'Psychedelics and the Law'—what he called 'A Preludein Question Marks'—comments on the situation of about thistime, as follows: 'It may seem far-fetched but would be altogether in accord with the (Federal) Constitution to organise a group as a church, with the prospect of privilege.' And he based this observation on a decision by theHonourable Yale McFate in 1960 in favour of a member of theNavajo Indian Tribe appealing a charge of illegal possession ofpeyote, a sacramental food of the Native American Church. Therewas also another Navajo-peyote case on the books: it was decidedon July 26, 1962, by the United States District Court of Appeals,District of Columbia Circuit (Washington), to declare a sectionof the Code of Indian Tribal Offences—'Peyote Violations''null and void, invalidly authorised and unconstitutional'. As to such religious practices, William Blake (b.1757) has this to say: 'I then asked Ezekiel why he ate dung, andlay so long on his right side and left side. He answered, 'Thedesire of raising other men into a perception of the infinite;this the North American tribes' practice.' (The Marriage ofHeaven and Hell). Bates also noted that 'Inner space law today (1963) is in the stage of underdevelopment outer space law was in A.D. 1903 when the Brothers Wright launched their airplane at Kittyhawk or, perhaps, when the Brothers Montgolfier ascended in the first air balloon, a hundred years earlier. Until it has matured, scholars in search of external on behalf of internal freedom will feel frustrated. They may believe themselves to be fugitives from injustice but in truth are victims of legal confusion engendered by the reversal of scientific objects, from the universe without to the universe within. Until psychedelics have found their place in law, a good many concrete questions will not be answerable with confidence.' Tim Leary had also taken note of the legaluncertainty surrounding the use of psychedelic substances, andworking independently in Cambridge, Mass., started a uniqueorganization called 'IFIF' (International Federation for InternalFreedom) to preach the gospel that man's salvation lies in theexpansion of his own consciousness—that the fruits, whichhitherto have fallen only to the lot of him who renounces theworld, can now be shared by him who partakes of the LSDsacrament, and that, no matter how little happiness can beregarded as the goal of individual human aspiration, it is yetthe best means to its attainment. They sited the IF-IF offices onStorey Street—two blocks from Harvard Square. 'We welcomeanyone interested,' Alpert wrote in The Harvard Crimson. While Alpert continued to conduct his course inmotivation at Harvard for undergraduates and graduates, and Learytaught his graduate seminars in research methods, IF-IF stafftook care of enquiries, official correspondence, and mailingpackets of literature to Harvard undergraduates, graduatestudents, faculty and anyone interested anywhere in the country.There was an application blank for membership in IF-IF (dues $10per year), an 'Agreement to Indemnify and Hold Harmless'. AGREEMENT TO INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS For good and valuable consideration, includingaccess to the literature and other facilities of theINTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR INTERNAL FREEDOM, its agents,servants, associates and employees, I agree to indemnify the saidINTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR INTERNAL FREEDOM, its agents,servants, associates and employees, and save them harmless forany loss, damage or expenses arising from the claim and demand ofany person against the INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR INTERNALFREEDOM, its agents, servants, associates or employees, inconnection with the use of LSD, psilocybin and related drugs. I have read the information concerning these drugsand substances and understand that they are classified forinvestigational use. DATE: ........................ .............................. WITNESS: .................................... And messages from the Cambridge headquartersbegan to move along the system, telling the news, of oddhappenings in Mexico, how 'Internal Freedom' is going to be likeZen this year, and of 'several million thoughtful people who haveheard the joyous tidings and who are waiting patiently for theirpsychedelic moment to come', for whom LSD is becoming a majorreligious and civil rights controversy. It was a brilliantastonishing concept, even by eccentric New England standards, anddeserved all the support it could get; indeed, it seemed for someof its membership to offer the umbrella under which they couldenjoy their psychedelic experiences without much spiritual orfinancial outlay. But even in the hands of Tim, the eternal juggler,things began crashing about their heads as 'news' about IF-IFcirculated in the media and through casual gossip, which may ormay not have been true but was certainly extravagant,contradictory, scandalous, libelous, comic and inspirational. AnIF-IF-Los Angeles opened for the West Coast. Alpert and Learywent on radio in Boston to explain their mission. Televisionnetworks were becoming interested, and 'experimentalmultifamilial living' using psychedelics began to spring up indifferent parts of America, along the lines of Tim's model for'transpersonative, transcendental communities' where familymembers could 'maintain a level of experience which cuts beyondroutine ego and social games'. Alpert, Tim and his young daughter and son, amarried Harvard senior with wife and baby, and several friendshad themselves already started one such multi-familial dwelling,in a house they bought in the Newton suburb of Boston. In itthere was a specially constructed 'meditation room' accessiblefrom the cellar solely by a rope ladder. The only furnishingswere mattresses covered in Indian prints, with drapes billowingdown from the ceiling like Tibetan clouds, and huge Afghanicushions on the floor. A tiny oil-lamp gave just enoughillumination to see the Buddha statue in the corner. Thefragrance of incense completed the effect. But in the rich middle-class Boston dovecote ofNewton, the goings-on at the house had become a source ofirritation amongst neighbours, including one lady who had livedfor thirty-two years in a house near Dr. Alpert's greenten-bedroom home. 'Some weekends,' she complained to onereporter, 'their house is like a motel. They all wear a beatnikuniform—tight pants and jerseys, no shoes or stockings. Oneyoung man in his twenties is letting his blond hair grow down tohis shoulders and every time I look at him I want to vomit.' Finally the families got together for a petitionand invoked a Newton statute which allows only one-familydwellings in the neighbourhood. There was a hearing before theplanning board in which the colonists were represented byAlpert's father, George Alpert, former president of the New HavenRailroad and a distinguished member of the Massachusetts bar,with his own law firm in Boston. The elder Alpert pointed outthat the law does not specify that families must beconsanguiness. And with that he won the case; there was nofurther trouble from neighbours after that. Nonetheless, all this, and events back at the IF-IFoffices, used up a lot of psychic energy in those of us committedto keep the game going. It seemed that the best plan would be todissolve the corporate legal structure and announce that fromhenceforth IFIF members could make their own way in theworld—just their bodies and a willingness to stay 'on theway', very much as in Hermann Hesse's The Journey to the East.Accordingly, the organisation's board met to formulate theclosing-up operation and to send its members the terminatingStatement of Purposes. It was all played as another conscious move in thecosmic 'bead-game'—Remove the old 'set' and avoidsetting up a new structure, and you have a brand new movie:'IF-IF will have no members, no budget, no dues, no officers, nomeetings. It is now an anonymous system; not secret, not public,but private. The term "IF-IF" no longer stands forInternational Federation for Internal Freedom. It symbolises the"ecstatic process" as the endpoint of any game or as apoint of the no-game experience.' The basic notion was to aim at some looseassociation in being identified as 'wayfarers', but without anykind of specific structure anymore, a 'move' that guaranteed bothend and start in one. It was absolutely unique. Once understood, allmanner of varieties and variations could be introduced....Everybody has to find the way for himself, but can send messagesand cues from his own voyage, like internal cosmographerscharting new internal seas of experience and perhaps pointing outsensory landmarks yet no prescription, no rigid principles, foraction. Total Autonomy Always . . . Just a message here andthere, or a particular quotation or a description of anexperience or exposure of getting stuck in a particular game, allwith the general purpose of raising the general tenor of people'slives with the ultimate goal that of complete self-liberation. Inthe lines immortalised by Bobby Dylan on the 'Lay Lady Lay' trackof Nashville Skyline—'You can have your cake and eatit too.' Yeah ! The new IF-IF offered entry into a psychedelicparadise of delights with the price of admission only your ownhead. IF-IF was now free to develop its religious aspirations inthe direction of the most ideally minded—the great Americanyouth, by suggesting people who take psychedelics are destined togive that spiritual content to modern life. IF-IF was a churchyou associated with bringing you up, not down; the new religionwas something associated with getting high. One professor of psychology was very enthusiasticto propose new techniques and complex in-field play: 'Perhaps one could start with or on the IF-IF members as the natural audience and introduce the notion through the news letter, then encourage everybody to send in a return-addressed and stamped envelope. This would reduce the cost. Also send out all material in duplicate, with the instruction to give one copy to an interested friend. That would snowball the development. Also, initially perhaps the comic Zen koans ought to be relatively simple yet not too easy. Something in the nature of different languages, references to significant passages or books, or records, or anything. It is important to get people involved through action, they have to work to solve the koans. Then, gradually . . . one could make it more difficult, and more in "code"—you could circulate original "manifestos" analysing possible game hang-ups and traps in society; and you can build up a body of references one can allude to. Then make it gradually more difficult to obtain information, so that one would have to go through several persons and piece things together. 'To meditate on a type of koan is a great idea. Set up a master file to collate correspondence, but keep everything cosmically anonymous. A lot of disguising and metamorphosis, using code names, etc. The whole thing ought to lead to a spiritual revolution in which everybody works for his own enlightenment, which will come to him in his own way through his own effort, carried by the feeling of participation in a brotherhood, yet without legislation and direct advice or feeding, which necessarily leads to control. 'All this seems like a natural evolution from IF-IF that utilised accepted social games for its dialogue or "duel" with established social structures. But the previous effort is not the way to fight it. In doing so, we submit implicitly to their rules. We have to find new rules which transcend the old ones without direct conflict, but we have to play on our own terms and have the others adjust to finding out what we are up to. Not that we really have to know—as a matter of fact we can't know, because the idea is to keep everything in flux and go beyond the structures as soon as they are built and have been used once. Transcending is being elusive but in a marvelous sense. (Socratic irony.) If we state fixed goals—other than personal, unique enlightenment—we set ourselves up for being attached, shot at. The secret is that "the way itself" or "being on the way", is its own goal, which means you have to keep changing as you go along. Only the here-and-now counts—the here-and-now which is anyway pregnant with future and past (although it is wrong to worry about that). Complete responsive surrender to the challenge of the moment is equal to complete transcendence. Following the call and tuning in on the demands that present themselves; reading the signs of the way through the jungle; being in tune with nature and responding to it, rather than trying to redo everything in one's own image; trying to impose one's own game on to things, people, events: only this leads to liberation, I think. So every event, every manifestation of being, stands on its own terms and wants to be understood as such. One can only serve as the guardian of being, as the custodian of phenomena, to let oneself be swept up and carried away. There need be no questions asked: affirmation and acceptance ! 'But people are phobic about "drugs"—a strange phenomenon unto itself—and they rationalise about "artificial" and "short-cuts", etc. If we could use gimmicks and natural disciplines like sensory isolation, movie techniques, and explore other techniques, meditation, what have you, in order to effect some kind of loosening up and ecstatic sweep or upsurge—then it would be easy to convince people about the value of "shortcuts". This effort would allay their fear. Not that we need to worry about convincing people, but to point out to them various possibilities for them to consider. All arguing about pros and cons seems futile. One should report on events, give messages about where we are, what we see, what there is to behold. Persuasion is not needed, but affirmation and signposts, which manifest their own persuasive power on those who are interested. 'I also hope we can write and tape a few programmed Perhaps one could interest a record company in cutting a few discs and distributing them. The communications network could be a powerful influence on tastes. The meditation-room idea is gaining wide recognition here—everybody should build one. There will be tremendous need for meditation guides as well as manuals for trips. All this is very exciting and I hope we can talk about it soon. 'There is a "magic theatre" wherever you look, if you can only relax and forget about yourself as an actor caught in a net struggling to get out. Total involvement and total detachment at the same time, which sounds paradoxical but it seems a desirable and realisable ideal, the 100 per centness, here and now, which makes every moment (even of deadliest routine) seem like a totally new experience merely by letting yourself be addressed each time anew.' Doctor Strangelove, indeed . . . But it was left tothe Grand Master and High Priest Tim, to explain how, in future,messages (verbal and non-verbal) were to be found in the seedthat lies at the core of each one of us. He wrapped it up in hisown esoteric way—'IF-I F is conservative—it seeks toreturn to the wisdom of the tribe, to the wisdom of the body, tothe wisdom of the nervous system.' It was all perhaps just a problem of 'unicornity',for Hermann Hesse had written of the pilgrimage: 'Throughout the centuries it had been on the way, towards the light and wonder, and each member, each group, indeed our whole host and its great pilgrimage, was only a wave in the eternal stream of human beings, of the eternal strivings of the human spirit towards the East, towards Home. The knowledge passed through my mind like a ray of light and immediately reminded me of the phrase which I had learned during my novitiate year, which always pleased me immensely without my realising its full significance. It was a phrase by the poet Novalis, "Where are we really going? Always home!" ' (The Journey to the East). And in a practical way, IF-IF—if, IF!—hadanticipated Marshall McLuhan's theoretical basis for whatlysergised nervous systems believe about non-verbal, i.e.telepathic, communication: 'Tribal man is tightly sealed in an integral collective awareness that transcends conventional boundaries of time and space. As such, the new society will be one mythic integration, a resonating world akin to the old tribal echo chamber where magic will live again: a world of ESP.... Electricity makes possible—and not in the distant future, either—an amplification of human consciousness on a world scale, without any verbalisation at all.' (Playboy interview). Something similar happened to us in New York, wherea parallel development was simultaneously taking place at theoffices of The Agora Scientific Trust, Inc., on the corner ofEighty-First Street between Madison and Park Avenues. It was onlyin New York City the game possibilities were different, that'sall; it required a different scenario, new players, a freshresponse to the organisation possibilities inherent in our newsituation. Agora was to be a living metaphor for the kind ofidea-sharing an LSD session entails. In our 'Statement ofPurposes' a group of us introduced a theoretical model for Agoraas a Foundation for Mind Research, and wrote: 'In the seventeenth century Rene Descartes advanced the theory that the body is a machine and is subject to the same investigational techniques that we apply to the natural sciences. In contrast, he considered the human mind to be of immaterial and supernatural design, linked to the body by means of some unknown divine fiat. The ramifications of Cartesian dualism were to provide all areas of Western science with the result that today the body is accorded extensive study and scientific analysis whereas those aspects of human life which are identified with the mind have been greatly neglected by experimental scientists. The tremendous advances of modern biology and medicine are the direct products of the great progress made in the knowledge of the body-machine which have resulted from the mechanistic procedures initiated by Descartes. On the other hand, these same procedures have had a debilitating effect on the study of the phenomenon of consciousness thereby seriously curtailing the studies related to the problem of life. Since biologists tend to extend the machine paradigm to living organisms, they neglect the phenomena not found in machines. Qualitative change is needed in the pattern of our studies if we are to discern an enlarged meaning of nature and of man extending beyond mathematical and experimental analysis of sensory phenomena and human behaviour. We believe, finally, that man has reached a crisis in consciousness within which he has the choice to continue in the path of the growing technicisation of human nature or to enter upon an intensive and comprehensive investigation of mind and its creative process in the pursuit of a greater use of human potential and a deeper understanding of the nature of reality. 'In recent years, there have arisen groups of social scientists and psychologists who have striven to fill the existing vacuum in the study of consciousness. Guided by the successes of the natural scientists they have applied mechanistic attitudes to the study of mind and have sought to understand their subject in terms of behavioural controls and biological-drive modalities. In so doing, they have carried the theory of body-mind dualism to its logical and dangerous conclusion so that today we are faced with a growing tyranny of behaviouristic and mechanistic procedures applied to the exploration of human potentiality. 'We are a group of scientists and researchers who wish to move beyond our own scientific tyranny. We have ceased to be intoxicated with technological proficiency. We cannot endorse a mechanistic interpretation of human behaviour that reduces the mind-brain problem to a materialistic monism. We believe that the current over-emphasis on mechanism has produced a dislocation of vision, one that is resulting in a de-humanisation of knowledge and a de-humanisation of man. We believe that an investigation into the nature and potential of mind, a dynamic consideration of the range and chemistry of consciousness, the utilisation and evaluation of new and old techniques of intensifying and extending the mind's apprehension of its reality—this is the substance of the research programme that is the Foundation for Mind Research.' In addition to myself, there were two otherdirectors, John Beresford, M.D. (a long-term friend from the oldLondon days of the fifties, who now lived in New York), and JeanHouston, Ph.D., a young, beautiful woman with two Off-Broadwayacting awards and an impressive list of academic involvements andinterests (Instructor in Comparative Religion and Philosophy ofReligion, Columbia University; Instructor in Philosophy, HunterCollege; Associate Professor in Philosophy and Religion, The NewSchool for Social Research; author of The Varieties ofReligious Experience: A Re-evaluation of the James Work in theLight of Modern Psychological Theory, and Tragedy In anAge of Scepticism—and was later to co-author with BobMasters The Varieties of the Psychedelic Experience, awork based largely on her experiments at Agora, where she wasguide to many intensive LSD sessions). And to help and advise us,we gathered an impressive group of active 'research affiliates',including Victor Lownes as our 'Tantric' consultant, a positionhe filled—or fulfilled admirably. The set-up on Eighty-First Street was tasteful,cosy, well-equipped, and expensive; we rented the floor-throughgarden apartment in a private building with three rooms, toiletand bath, and a tiny tree-shaded garden at the back. By chance or by good fortune—or it may evenhave been by magic—we had discovered in Howard Teague, theNassau millionaire, that rarest of cultural beings, the patron.He had understood our needs and made the acquisition of theproperty and furnishings possible, in a very open and generousway. All we had to do in return was keep in touch and maybe visithim in Nassau now and again. The large centre room fronting the garden was our'session-room'. No interior decorator ever devised thispsychedelic paradise of Swedish six-inch pile rugs and huge,canvas 'mandalas' on ceiling and walls, but once inside youdissolved all normal barriers of consciousness and flowed offinto the well of infinity. We had been on a spending spree duringthe first few hectic days of getting the place ready—a hi-fisound system with tape-deck and two speakers; a stroboscope; amachine for emitting sub-audible (low-frequency) sound waves; anda 'synchrotron', a device which delivers sound to the right andleft ears alternately. This room was also my bedroom The front 'office' had a couple of desks,telephones, chairs, electric typewriters, small bar and cabinet,a miniature FBI-type wire recorder, things like that, but wasnonetheless decorated in the conventional Manhattan office style,without anyone ever actually using it, except possibly as a placeto smoke dope (very illegal in those days!) if there wereotherwise straight subjects undergoing a session in the otherrooms. At first, most of the planning and programming wasshared by Jean Houston and myself, each with our own little slotto fill or speciality to develop. Jean was curious about what shecalled 'Phylogenetic recall', the proposition by Jung thatin-built in the psychology of modern man there exist archetypesrelated to the early history of the human race. She wasinterested in setting up drug-related experimental designs and afoolproof methodology of administration of long-term andshort-term psychedelics, most particularly the administration ofLSD-25, psilocybin, Dimethyl- and Diethyl-tryptamine, which wehad at the office in large supply; and, for myself, the questionof my role in Agora is a bit academic since I was both artist andspectator at one with it and myself at the same time, though Iremember I used to write memoranda quite a lot and papers,doubtlessly altogether quite meaningless, with titles such as'Multicentricity and Incongruity; Epistemological Significance ofRecent Findings in Research Using LSD-25' and 'Experiments inThought Acceleration using Psilocybin' and 'The Nature of theSubjective LSD Experience', all of which was, admittedly, prettydidactic stuff compared to IF-IF, but nonetheless rather funnyand inspired for all that. In our psychedelic yellowstone we had found foodfor both the lion (science) and the unicorn (fantasy/myth/magic),even if in the end we could not persuade them, for all thecorrectness of our opinions, to lie down together. What we hadtried to do was to blend new concepts and theoreticalframeworks—utilising such diverse areas as the geometry andenergy dynamics of molecular 'flowing' structure to biochemistry,genetics, vision, memory, and accelerated learning: Yes, ethicaland moral practice, too—with all the magical arts, includingthe 'I Ching', 'Quabhalla', The Tarot pack, and Alchemy, in orderto shed new light on what webelieved was a crisis in the 'Order'and 'Symbolisation' in Western civilisation. I suppose you couldsay that our orientation was humanistic. Our 'humane science'aimed towards a simultaneous description of Man from multiplepoints of view, which itself is nothing more than themultidisciplinary understanding of the way mind and matter workin man. Sir Julian Huxley, from London, wrote, 'In the psychedelic drugs we have a remarkable opportunity for interesting research. Nobody else, so far as I know, has done any work on different types of psychologically healthy and normal people—people of high or low IQ, of different backgrounds, of different affective dispositions, on verbalisers and visualisers. This would be of extraordinary interest: we might find out not merely how to utilise our mind more energetically and more dynamically, but how to promote creativity by enhancing the creative imagination.' But as a research area, the psychedelic experiencewas baffling for most researchers, whose speciality was'compartmentalized' and who could not visualise the possibilityof a 'whole', when perhaps even a new branch of knowledge wouldhave to be developed to embrace new claims, concepts, as happenedin mathematics with the discoveries of quantum mechanics andrelativity theories, which revolutionized our understanding ofthe forces at work in the external world but which have yet to beintegrated into a unified field theory of modern conceptualknowledge. In modern America in 1963, the available literaturelooked more frightful than fruitful. Perhaps understandably, therevolutionary impact of psychedelics was not recognised duringthe early period of research. Occasional glimpses were found, butthe majority of reports suggest that the researchers describingtheir results were seriously biased by their existing frames ofreference. A carry-over of former conceptual systems into theradically new experience provided by these drugs inevitablycaused distortions in interpretation of the material covered.Thus, while the work of the British psychiatrist, Dr. HumphreyOsmond, concerning the biochemical nature of schizophrenia wasfurthered by the introduction of LSD et al. during themid-1950s, at the same time psychedelic theory itself was notadvanced. It was in fact restricted into a pre-existing mould bythe unconscious association that came to be made betweenpsychedelic drugs and mental illness, which subsequently provedto be as erroneous as it was misleading. However, even in restricted scientific research,sometimes something could happen to provide a valuablepsychedelic programme. In the field of treatment of alcoholism,for one, there were several studies showing a close to fifty percent (one in two) control rate following 'LSD therapy', a figurewhich cannot be matched by any other therapeutic approach to thisproblem, and successful beyond the wildest dreams of AlcoholicsAnonymous, to say nothing of conventional psychoanalysis, whichhas a success rate of curing alcoholics of about one in everyhundred, which is nobody. Or on another part of theinvestigational spectrum, Dr. R. A. Sandison, a Canadianpsychiatrist, has reported the emergence of archetypal materialduring psychedelic sessions, lending weight to the hypotheses ofC. G. Jung. Then there were a number of 'naturalistic' studiesfrom different schools of thought, artistic and otherwise, aswell as all the Harvard reports when subjects reported states ofconsciousness, variously described in terms of transcendentalexperience, i.e. visionary, mind-manifesting,consciousness-expanding. Yes, a lot of research had been done withpsychedelics, by comparison with perhaps every other importantarea of research, the total volume was minute. At the same time,it was also becoming increasingly evident that there weredeficiencies in the published work which existed, and, curiously,there had been little if any advance during the previous two tothree years over projects well under way before the 1960s. Forexample, a review of the position by the psychologists Terrill,Savage and Jackson, published in November, 1962, but dating froma round-table conference in January, 1960, is notessentially different from reports published in 1954 and 1956.There were grounds for believing that the main factor whichstimulated the widespread interest in psychedelics, whichcharacterized the period of the mid-1950s, was the belief that,through their use, long-standing problems in psychiatry wereabout to be settled; further, that with the abandoning of thishope a general decline of interest became noticeable inpsychiatric circles. There were even disagreements between some of thedeveloping 'psychedelic theoreticians'. John Beresford, for one,believed that what he called 'the Leary attitude' results from 'a static, unidirectional, relatively fixed set of preconceptualisations of entity caused by and arising from deep psychological disturbances, displaced on to and hence "derealising" a potentially dangerous drug. The error stems fundamentally from passive-receptive tendencies on part of erstwhile principal investigators, causing passive, permissive attitude during the highly suggestible LSD-state, criminally neglecting to acquaint the subject with the essential knowledge, that he can always control whatever his mind is involved with, rendering the subject helpless, and at times, extremely fearful.' Beresford was a proponent of the counter-theorythat the LSD experience is a bi-phasic phenomenon: You must act,as well as feel; decide, as well as submit; allow out, as well asin. He felt quite strongly that LSD provided the 'only curative hope for the "crisis of civilisation" type of malfunctioning', and that 'the cure can be summed up in the one word "integration"; and that integration requires activation of both self and image store. Leary fails miserably because total resistlessness in the end saps strength, leaving character no room in which to grow or form. Partly out of diabolical "Gnosticism", and partly no doubt due also to ignorance, some of Leary's group have flipped out, and sometimes for months at a time, in sessions conducted according to the Leary precepts.' Beresford believed sincerely in the vast potentialof psychedelic drugs. 'With safe and intelligent handling (ofLSD),' he wrote, 'the following facts can be substantiated: 1) There is no possibility of "psychic accidents". 2) Standard psychotherapy can be reduced in duration from a matter of years to a matter of months, with long-lasting, if not permanent results. 3) The degree of "internal decision-making" possible is very impressive. A new pattern of Gestalt formation, on a level never before thought possible outside of classical conversion reactions, is coming to light and should be explored. 4) Knowledge is waiting for the asking concerning alterations of the human mind which were thought non-existent or merely freakish before new psychedelic drug techniques were elaborated. An extensive new area of knowledge of mind is waiting to be opened. It is folly to ignore this. 5) It has been beyond all doubt, though perhaps beyond credibility, that thirty-five per cent decibel increases in hearing are obtained on minute doses of LSD; that intellectual procedure beyond the normal capacity are commonplace; that new potentials are brought into existence; the probability of a high incidence of thought transference between two individuals should be brought out into the open. Other equally important researches are waiting. 6) The sensation-minded public press, and the providers of scandal, and the prevalent public fear of "losing control" through drugs combined to drive the most valuable chemical discovery of the century almost out of existence. 7) No more essential publishing service could be rendered than to place before the public the unadorned scientific, historical and psychological analysis of the "extraordinary history of LSD".' Beresford wanted to keep the drug and the researchin proper perspective as tools of the scientifically trained asspecialist. But any tool can only be as good—or asbad—as the competence of those who use it. Certainly, onemust not assign to LSD intellectual problems which defy ourpresent intellectual capacities. Jean Houston, on the other hand was interested in advancingthe intellectual capabilities of the modern American—tomeet and solve the problems not of today or tomorrow—but theday after tomorrow. And by means of a process that you mightcall travelling in the 'ANTECEDENT FUTURE'—that isinducing the ego to scan the cognitive parts of the cortex inorder to develop the ability to bring into the present what isalready in the memory and retrieve 'forgotten' information whichis then integrated into the normal intellectual processes ofordinary consciousness. Jean was an intellectually brilliant thinker in herown right, and, if such things still mean anything, it had beendiscovered in a nationwide survey of the I.Q.s of American Ph.Ds,that Jean's was the highest—a little over the 200 mark', sheonce told me, though there was never any question in my mindabout her obvious intellectual gifts, which were always adequateto meet her function as an Agora director, our third and mostjunior member. As with Beresford and myself, she saw modernculture strangled by a crisis of value correlative with abreakdown of its traditional ontological structures. The'eleventh hour condition' of humanity is that of 'the darkwoods'. We are lost in the woods… 'Alone, alone, about a dreadful wood Of conscious evil runs a lost mankind, Dreading to find its father lest it find The good it has dreaded is not good; Alone, alone about a dreadful wood…' —W. H. Auden The poignant theme of the dark wood emerges in thelife of the mind as a symbol of the chaos that must precede therestoration of Order and the revitalisation of the humancondition. How then is it possible for modern man to extricatehimself from the 'dark woods' of his mind? Jean believed that inpsychedelic drugs we had a means to dispel the clouds of despair,and spoke of the promise they held 'of Homecoming'; and of thepossibility 'of guiding man past the dark woods of non-being, past deep shadows of aloneness to a world where no longer does man view himself as a creature separated and estranged from all other creatures but rather as a participant in a rich and fertile reality, a reality so interrelated and so full that it could only best be described as a dynamic continuum; the new reality that unfolds in the "psychedelic experience". 'The universe is not a collection of separate bits and pieces, divided in time and space, but is in reality the metaphysical "One", wherein everything is tied up with everything else in a pattern which is absolute for the entire universe. The social hierarchy reflects the psychological hierarchy, the cosmology hierarchy, and the celestial hierarchy; only this reality is not displayed within a single action, but instead, in an abundance of actions in which the most diverse tonalities follow one another in quick succession. 'It is thus with the psychedelic experience. When the threshold of consciousness is crossed we are flooded with the kaleidoscopic vision of cultures, peoples, symbols, remnants of historical and pre-historical memory—the veritable infinity of humanity which seeks to constitute our being. Like Dante in the dark forest we can easily get lost in the labyrinth of strange byways and unknown paths. (This is an all too frequent episode in the unguided psychedelic session.) It should be one of the chief duties of the session guide to lead the subject through the newly exposed terrain of cultures, histories, eras, and symbols to evoke these contents to lead finally to their interrelationship in the mind of the subject, much the same way as Virgil led Dante through the medieval hierarchical cosmogony so that its many parts became inherent in Dante the man. It should be one of the chief tasks of the guide to assume the role of Virgil in this psychedelically induced Divine Comedy and to indicate and select out of the dynamic continuum in which the subject is immersed some of the historical incident, cultural awareness and racial memory that seems to lie buried in the cortex.' Jean believed that the reality of the existence ofarchetypes had been confirmed and demonstrated in the LSDsession, which seemed to bring mythological and archetypalstructures into conscious awareness. Thus, the role of thesession guide is crucial if the subject is not to lose his way inthe woods. 'The guide must steer a course of gradual intensification and enhancement of consciousness. The first suggestions must be simple and familiar, geared to focus the subject's attention on the heightening of colour and form perception of well-known objects. Pictures and flowers, music and natural objects—these are the data of initial discovery and consciousness enhancement in the experiencing subject. It is only after several hours of helping the subject build up a familiarity with his extended reality that the guide may begin to prepare the subject for an exploration of transpersonal and phylogenic material.' Simple, in theory, perhaps, but what in praxis ?Jean ran many LSD sessions at Agora, which she conducted alongthe lines just adumbrated with some quite astonishing results.She makes some observations on these sessions, as follows: 'In the course of my experimentation I have discovered that a most conducive mode of preparation for phylogenetic investigation is to be had by taking the subject through a "Cook's Tour" of world history. A variety of historical situations and occurrences are suggested in a sketchy manner. The subject, whose eyes are closed, is asked to describe the pictorial display of historic scenery and activity which now he "sees". This he often does with a detail and amplification and frequently an accuracy which far exceeds his normal historical awareness. Whether or not this is owing to the activation of previously learned but long forgotten historical information or to a utilisation of as yet unknown processes of historical evocation cannot be answered at this time. Suffice it to say that the probability rests with the former theory and that the subject's heightened imagination adds to the vividness with which he responds to these suggestions. 'The subject may be invited to walk along the Piraeus with Socrates, to witness a battle in the Thirty Years War, to participate in the bull-leaping at Knossos or to help in building the pyramid of Khufu. He may be asked to gaze over the shoulder of that Cro-Magnon man who painted the great bison in the cave at Altamira. He may join in the violent thrust westward of the troops of Gengis Khan. He may have a front row seat at the battle of Hastings or mingle among the courtiers at the court of Louis XIV. History is his prerogative and it may be explored as fact or fantasy. 'In addition to the historical panorama, the guide may invite the subject to participate in a recapturing of the evolutionary sequences of life. In many cases the subject discards the spectator role which he had assumed for the historical tour and finds himself taken up into a seeming identification with the stages of the evolutionary process. Thus the guide can suggest that the subject become that primordial piece of protoplasm floating in an early ocean. (This is described as a very restful state.) Then, either through the promptings of the guide but more frequently through the subject's own initiative there may unfold a reliving of the evolutionary process from gill stage to man. This re-experience of phylogeny is possible because of our germ plasm. Our body contains (however small the bit) a part of that physically real primeval mud from which we grew, through orders, classes, phyla—to what we are. Thus the physical reality of the evolutionary sequence of life may become available to our consciousness and we may select for it in the psychedelic state. The psychic system has an anatomical pre-history of millions of years as does the body. And just as the body today represents in each of its parts the phylogenetic process, and everywhere still shows traces of its earlier stages—so can the same be said of the psyche. It is for this reason that the activated psyche can be called upon to remember states which to us seem to be unconscious. 'I would suggest then that ages and attitudes of man that are long gone by still survive in the deeper unconscious layers of our mind. The spiritual heritage of archaic man (the ritual and mythology that once visibly guided his conscious life) has vanished to a large extent from the surface of the tangible and conscious realm, yet survives and remains ever present in the subterranean layers of the unconscious. It is part of our being that links us to a remote ancestry and constitutes our involuntary kinship with archaic man and with ancient civilisations and traditions. Depth psychologists have pointed to the universality of psychic processes and the continuity of psyche within the race. We may add to this the theory that the psyche contains all the contents of time—extending backwards, across and through time; history being latently contained in each individual. It is my contention that the psychic depths and the time depths can be tested and explored through the medium of the guide in the psychedelic experiences. The theoretical foundation of such a statement is that the ingestion of psychedelic substances evokes an activation of deeply buried psychic contents and a bringing of them to the surface of consciousness through the selective use of phylogenetic suggestion. As electrodes applied to memory or sensory areas of the brain can stimulate vivid and realistic recall at the moment of contact, so can suggestion activate phylogenetic memory in the subject undergoing the psychedelic experience. 'In the course of human history man has come to the discovery that he is a foreconsciousness that sees only a manifold, incoherent world. Gradually he has been able to order the incoherence of pre-history by perceiving natural laws, by making hypotheses, and by his technological advances beginning to apprehend basic common factors and linkages in what at first appeared as sheer chaos. Through mythological structures he was able to gain some measure of surety in an incoherent world. One step further and he was able to perceive himself as being largely lawmaker and inventor. And now through the agency of the new physics man has attained to a knowledge of the mathematical structure of all matter as being in reality not inert but an instrument of infinite potentialities from which one may draw what forces one will. The pursuit of truth is now in fact akin to the creation of beauty. Yet all this new extension of potentiality bears with it the threat of unparalleleddestruction. I maintain that the new physics can be nothing but a deadly danger unless to that knowledge is added that of a new history a parallel and balanced knowledge of ourselves brought back from the subterranean regions of our psyche—our phylogenetic awareness.... Then and only then may we use the new knowledge of outer nature for life and not for death. Our new vision in physics whereby we see ourselves actually devising new natural laws and even creating life must be equated with a deeper insight of ourselves given by a new knowledge of the past. This may be done by restoring man to a dynamic communion with his own sundered psyche, with his old sense of community, and with the whole of life and the universe.' Of course, Agora was not entirely free from thecrackpot element, in whom the doors of perception seemed, if notpermanently unhinged then certainly wide open. One correspondentwriting from Flamingo Marina, Miami Beach, told of his work with'a magnetic machine which will hypnotise you and a second machinewhich goes inside the brain by rays and removes that part of themoral degeneracy involved'. And added 'The patient may beslightly ill for a few days, but his tendencies to sin will begone.' I simply replied that we already had one to deal with thelibertine tendencies of our staff, and hoped that his fine workin ' "prophylactic phrenology" would have widerapplication, perhaps as an instrument of the church'. Then there was a complicated correspondence with anAmerican Air Force Major from Sheppard Air Force Base, Texas, whowanted Agora to build a 'life-size' Moebius Strip for people toclimb in and walk around 'accompanied by the entire spectrum ofcolour and music'. The object of the envisaged 'Strip' is 'to evoke in the participant any synergic, intuitive or emotive process/product of which he may be capable. This is for the purpose of unlocking his particular iron curtain by working directly on his subconscious through symbols (including language), the energy spectrum (light and colour), form, and even motion and odours if feasible. The super-computer qualities of the mind, including an ageless universal memory core, above-time-space programme actions, and conscious read-outs makes the mind our greatest resource, yet our greatest enigma. It is easy for this mysterious "black box" to be fed with sensual inputs that turn out a disordered state of consciousness.' In both these examples, it is impossible to ignorethe high moral tone of the two inventors. On the other hand,which of us would not settle, at whatever cost to our reason, fora febrile and creative, rather than static way of life ? And thefact that the light these two ideas throws is a murky one,doesn't, after all, seem inappropriate to our present situation.Indeed, you could say that they illuminate the stresses placed onthe modern psyche in its relationship with modern society. And yet—I was sensitive to the fact that muchof the stuff going on at The Agora Scientific Trust must soundevery bit as 'crackpot' as the two examples just noted. Theintellectualization of what we had and were doing was aformidable task. We had to find a way to describe certain changedor altered states of consciousness, which lie beyond allrationalization and even beyond all power of words, in acompletely new way which would also be intelligible for otherpeople, whether they'd taken LSD or not. Thus, no area ofpossible fruitful research was ever turned down which could beorganised on the basis of rational belief, and we decided tostructure into an existence an idea or a series of ideas whichwere derived from peoples' experience with LSD. During the firstfew months of activity our own 'internal' viewpoints wereprojected on to the outer world with a content that was found tobe full of meaning for other people. There is an intuitive basis which precedes theintellectual which provides us with something like a magic armourwith which during LSD sessions nothing ever goes wrong.Objectively my initial intuitive behaviour during a session whenI have given a person LSD can be codified into a set of preceptsand illuminations which may collectively serve as starting-offpoint for others who may want to consider the principles of whatit means to be an 'LSD guide'. The following are some facts andideas from our 1963 Agora days I have assembled—they involvethe means by which the 'internal logic' of the LSD situation maybe realised in ordinary consciousness, with what assumptions oneproceeds, with what goals, and what are the determinants of thegoals, and what is the relationship of the knowledge gainedthrough the LSD experience to daily life and ordinary affairs. I had by this time given LSD to some 300 people andtaken it myself about 100 times, and learned by making mistakes,as was inevitable, that no prior frame of reference can doanything but hinder. I 'knew' certain things I had no way oftelling before. The intuitive leap had become standardised. Forthis reason perhaps it was inevitable that I would sooner orlater leave Agora, terminating one phase and starting another. But what sort of people did we give LSD to ? We hadhundreds of requests from people all over America who wanted totake it, but the facilities on Eighty-First Street were lackingfor such a large-scale operation. Perhaps I could note foursessions which can be accurately dated and leave it to the readerto decide how far they are relevant. (1) An abstract painter, (2)a Captain in the U.S. Navy Office of Naval Research, (3) a Yogi,(4) a hedonist sceptic, a wealthy resident of Manhattan'sfashionable Beekman Place and of Gstaad, Switzerland. (It should be understood that axiomatic to mybelief-fabric is that with LSD each person discovers, or gets,what they want.) The abstract painter, in the course of the mostextraordinary visual experiences, in concrete and specificdetail, of a mythological residue of a pre-Hindu Indian religiousfantasy, discovered the identity of the image which had beeneluding him from his paintings. The Captain achieved extraordinary insight into aproblem of mathematical 'transformations' with which he had beenunsuccessfully grappling for the past five years. His work was inartificial intelligence via computer design. During the LSDsession, he wrote to us afterwards. 'I suddenly realised that whenever I concentrated on a single form and brought it into focus, the situation was analogous to setting up a random set of sensor inputs and connecting these inputs via a fixed but randomly designed network to a series of nodes. I realised that recognition of any given pattern is dependent upon calling a halt in the normal flow of transformations; and, most importantly for my own work, the achievement of really useful automata would appear to depend on mechanism that can effectively monitor the products of a large number of transformations, select from them the important one for study, and the halting of the process long enough to classify the signal from the one transformation for purposes of pattern recognition.' (Translated into ordinary English, the Captain wastrying to invent a 'seeing' machine as effective as the humaneye, for use in atomic submarines.) The Yogi, a man who spent seven years before hisarrival in America (where he had become a successful Wall Streetstockbroker) studying yoga in a dhoti on the banks of theGanges, jumped from the eighth of the twelve yoga stages—thename eludes me, but that is as far as he had got—to thetwelfth, called Samadhi, and the very highest form ofBliss, wherein he achieved the state of total identification withall of reality that made him—momentarily—God. The manfrom Beekman Place for the first time in his life was appraisedof a higher, that is more embracing and inclusive, logic than theone he had known hitherto. In each of these four instances—people widelydifferent in background, education, character, nationality andphysique—it was nonetheless possible to abstract a basic,simple set of philosophical understandings, which are validenough to permit anyone to integrate on a higher-than-usual levelof awareness without any danger of paranoia (the common defenceagainst chaos, and one which mitigates against anything of valuederiving from the LSD experience) or of anxiety. The talked-about'hellish experience' is actually completely unnecessary,avoidable and non-contributory, reflecting inadequate mental'set' or physical 'setting' or technical knowledge on the part ofthe guide or a mixture of all three. There was of course no scientific follow-up onthese four individuals, but it was possible to deduce certainthings when we saw them again a few months later. The painter hadentirely reoriented his method of painting and when I last sawhim, was working fast and productively (and his paintings dostill sell in New York). From the Naval Captain have come someengineering hardware—'resistor networks to accomplish typesof transformation to be included in patent disclosures beingprocessed by the Office of Naval Research, Washington under NavyCase 29093'. The Yogi was found to be, I fear, bewailing theordinariness of not being God, but was—and stillis—making money nicely on the Exchange, while themillionaire believed that he had undergone a complete change inhis beliefs about other people. He has not been heard from since. It was thus with the establishment of the New Yorkcentre, plus a form of status stabilisation with Washington (viathe U.S. Navy, who intervened on our behalf with the Federal DrugAgency by placing our work in a rosy, even golden, light whichresulted in a letting-up of investigative pressure on Agora bythe FDA), plus the sketching out of rational (or neo-rational)methods of managing LSD sessions, that this New York phase ended.An astonishing, fascinating period, filled with interest, andwith lots of humour at all times to prevent us from becomingLSD's dupes. But it was only achieved by an enormous amount ofwork fed by the energy from our emotional fires. At once theimpatient reminder comes, and it is true: Agora experiment wasachieved at the cost of 'real' emotional contacts with otherpeople, including, at times, ourselves. The emotional content ofmy existence was reduced to a working absolute minimum (though itwas difficult to recognise this process as going on at the time;only afterwards did one realise at what cost the work had beenachieved). Perhaps it was all an elaborate form of 'self-therapy'during the tormenting time after the collapse of my marriage in1960 and plans to reconciliate with my wife and the consequentloss of my daughter which became formalised at the moment of my'rearranging of priorities' intellectual, rational/artisticcreative work = No. I; love, emotion pleasure, sanity = No. 2.I had reached the end of my emotional tether; I had been 'on theway' before I took LSD, but the paving had given out, and therewere not even stones left to pave new intentions. The countryahead was dark, impenetrable. I was alone at the mercy of my ownawful fluidity of self; a time indeed of that 'eleventh hourcondition' of which Jean Houston speaks—an impossible hourof the day which is not marked by the sort of clocks you see inshops—so I was never sure of the present or certain enoughto determine the content of my emotional future. It is thetemptation to withdraw from emotional involvements, perhaps evento curl up inside and stay remote from even the slightestcontinuity. But of course all things pass—'an afternoon doesnot last all day, nor a sunset all night'—and by the end ofthe year I began to realise that the pointer of my 'eleventhhour' was turning and that 'deadened time' was gradually beingdisplaced by a palpable and love-centred present pushing to thefuture. 'The world, like the big wheel in a deserted funfair,spun slowly toward the final revolution.' (Roger McGough). All I had really achieved at Agora was therealisation that the sombre doctors, scientists, technicianspoint only to the rigour of their own particular method. Ah ! butto go without aid in search of truth; perhaps this is thebeginning of wisdom—to proceed with the utmost determinationtowards a forbidding future through a series of 'crisis' instantsin which you think you're about to slip over the edge into theaweful Abyss of Elsewhere, but catch yourself just in time but bynot shrinking from the lightning and thunder, by hurling yourselfforward, unafraid of taking risks, in your struggle towards love,consciousness, enlightenment, light and God. And thus the Way wassuddenly much smoother; I was over the hump of the year. And itwas in this way, out of such emotional despair, that I stumbledout of my dark existential forest into the daylight honesty ofMillbrook . . . Chapter 5 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-34IA087-000632-B033-4http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065806 text/html 116641HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:57:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:28:11 GMTContent-length: 116421 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 5 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER FIVE THE MILLBROOK HAPPENINGS 1964 Although the world of Millbrook may seemnonsensical by rational standards to the outside world it wasmerely another way of saying reason is not enough. We lived out amyth which had not yet been integrated into our personalities.Millbrook was itself the work of art, or a mirror, or simplysomething going fast like a watch, some time. Like Kafka'scastle, it gave out messages into the ether in the form of onehigh resonant sound which vibrated on the ears of the world as ifit were trying to penetrate beyond the barrier separating 'us'from 'them'. We felt satisfied that our goals were every man's, aprojection of every man's private ambition. We sought for thatunitary state of divine harmony, an existence in which only thesense of wonder remains and all fear gone. Here was a philosophyof TO BECOME in which appear bits of Vedanta and bits of popularpantheism, bits of the Tao and bits of the Ching. In the Fall of 1964 I arrived at Millbrook.Leary and Alpert, who had proclaimed themselves the InternationalFoundation for Internal Freedom (IFIF), had had to leaveZihuatanejo, Mexico, where they had set up a training centre forpeople using LSD. They got back to New York and started lookingfor an alternative base somewhere in the States. The solution totheir problem came in the form of a sixty-four-room mansion on a2000-acre walled estate within two hours motoring distance of thecity. They had rented the estate from the young millionaire BillyHitchcock, at a nominal rent more or less—$500 a month. The mansion was empty when they and their tinyfollowship arrived, but it was the ideal place for them to be; itwas secluded and spacious and not entirely lacking in antiquatedcharm. It had been built in the 1890s to the rather bizarrearchitectural specifications of the German-born gas-lamp magnate,Charles F. Dieterich, who christened his country seat 'Daheim'. The spires and turrets pointing above the treesinto a clear open sky, 'Daheim' looked, at first glance, like thecreation of some neo-baroque American King Ludwig. In addition tothe main building, there was an out-building that consisted of adownstairs bowling alley and a large fireplace room upstairs. Itwas built in the style of a Bavarian chalet and had a littleverandah from which access to the roof was easy. There was also alodge house at the entrance to the estate, in which MaynardFergusson and his beautiful wife Flo lived with their children. Millbrook was the headquarters of the CastaliaFoundation, so named after the intellectuals' colony in HermannHesse's book Das Glasperlenspiel (The Glass Bead Game),the last and finest novel by Hermann Hesse, the story of which isset in the Alpine province of Kastalien around the year 2400. Inthis emotionally chill utopian future, isolated from the mass ofpopulation, the elite monastic Castalian Order displays itsintellectual mastery through the ritualised game of glass beads,a game encompassing all human knowledge. 'The pattern sings like crystal constellations, And when we tell our beads, we serve the whole, And cannot be dislodged or misdirected, Held in the orbit of the Cosmic Soul.' Tim was greatly interested in the writings ofHesse, but at this time, it was the glass bead game that held himunder its hermetic spell… Joseph Knecht ('servant'), hero ofthe novel, rises to be a Magister Ludi, the High Priest of theCastalian Order. Gradually he becomes dissatisfied with theexclusive and esoteric nature of those who play the game, for therules of the game had evolved into an astonishing complexity: 'These rules, the sign language and grammar of the Game, constitute a kind of highly developed secret language drawing upon several sciences and arts, but especially mathematics and music.... The Glass Bead Game is thus a mode of playing with the total contents and values of our culture.... All the insights, noble thoughts, and works of art that the human race has produced in its creative eras, all that subsequent periods of scholarly study have reduced to concepts and converted into intellectual property—on all this immense body of intellectual values the Glass Bead Game player plays like the organist on an organ… (the Game represents) an elite, symbolic form of seeking for perfection, a sublime alchemy, an approach to that Mind which beyond all images and multiplicities is one within itself in other words, to God.' [Hermann Hesse, The Glass Bead Game, tr. by Richard and Clara Winston, Jonathan Cape, 1970, p. 14ff.] Knecht left the rarefied world in which heperformed with such eminence and resolved to fashion a linkbetween Castalia and the outside world. After making thisdecision, Knecht fortuitously drowns in an Alpine lake with hisprot�g�, a misfortune that yet points a precedent for action,as the prot�g� feels henceforth, life will 'demand much greaterthings of him than he had ever before demanded of himself'. Tim thought most people missed the real message ofHesse, himself the member of the Hermetic Circle; entranced bythe pretty dance of words and theme, they overlook the seedmessage, for Hesse, in the spirit of Mercurious, is a trickster.Like nature in April, he dresses up his code in fancy plumage.The literary reader picks the fruit, eats quickly, and tosses thecore to the ground. But the seed, the electrical message, thecode, is in the core. The seed meaning is within, concealedbehind the net of symbols. Millbrook's Castalia Foundation wasits own 'sublime alchemy', and its own High Priest in TimothyLeary, who saw in Hesse's story of the Castalian Order, both aninspiration and a warning against constricting rigidity. 'Groups which attempt to apply psychedelic experiences to social living will find in the story of Castalia all the features and problems which such attempts inevitably encounter: the need for a new language or set of symbols to do justice to the incredible complexity and power of the human cerebral machinery; the central importance of maintaining direct contact with the regenerative forces of the life-process through meditation or other methods of altering consciousness; the crucial and essentially insoluble problem of the relation of the mystic community to the world at large. Can the order remain an educative, spiritual force in the society, or must it degenerate through isolation and inattention to a detached, alienated group of idealists ?' [Timothy Leary and Ralph Metzner, The Psychedelic Renew, Cambridge, Mass., Vol. 1, No. 2, Fall 1963, p. 179.] For those of us who comprised the household,Millbrook was simply 'a house', in the sense that a house is alsoa home. We lived as a community of people who had accepted acertain way of living, which had rules and goals, shared by all.We felt that our life-style was a creative solution to theproblems of living in the cinematic, labour-saving world. Wewanted to explore our spiritual individuality, discover oursecret life within, but also to test the validity of our searchby means of living and loving and sharing with other people inclose community. It was some kind of heightened feeling of self,combined with movement, a natural and instinctive reaction insuch a setting, the light, the landscape, an all-pervadingtactile quality about the place, the texture and the music ofnatural surroundings, created a corresponding ambiance of colour,affective tonality, and seriousness in our minds. Here we couldtravel into our own minds, to remote and hitherto inaccessiblerealms within. We sought the god who inhabits each and every man.We took this lofty house and turned it into a small steppingstone. Elevated or metaphoric levels of consciousness havebeen sought by a few men in each generation. The possibility oftranscendence has attracted the thoughts of men throughout theages. The visionary experience has coloured the visions of a fewWestern thinkers, and has been recorded by many Eastern mystics.It is described in the seventh book of Plato's Republicand mapped in the Bhagavad Gita and The Tibetan Book ofthe Dead. For the most part, Western psychology has ignoredthe possibilities of mind-expansion and has become almostentirely externally oriented. During the last hundred yearsparticularly we have gained an incredible expertise inmanipulating the objective environment while simultaneouslysetting up barriers against the exploration of the internal. Thisimbalance between the outer and inner creates an over-emphasis onaction and aggressive behaviour, and a neglect of the fundamentalquestion of what consciousness is. Everything is internal. Everything happens in themind. At Millbrook we wanted to develop a methodology to guide usin our journey within. In the West our most ready metaphors areneurological. At Millbrook we wanted to substitute a moreapposite imagery. We wished to confront the realities of ournervous system, not in a clinical but in a creative setting. Toovercome the superstitious dread of 'tampering with the mind' weset out to learn the language of inner space. Can this internallanguage be understood? The problem is phenomenological. To gointo external space we have to overcome gravitational inertia. Byanalogy, our ego spins around inside the mind compelling us to betied to its field of gravity. Transcendental experience is theonly escape from the prison imposed by the ego. It is the Saturnrocket that boosts us into a more differentiated and freer space.Yet so far from LSD being the withdrawal of the mind fromreality, it has enabled people to appreciate the authentic beautyof what we understand by objective reality. In the early days at Harvard we didn't know muchabout this. We knew enough not to impose rules, roles, rituals onthe brain of another; enough to plan sessions beforehand in anopen way, to remove any fears a person might have that he wasgoing to have an experience put over him. And while we knew notto get people out of their minds, we had to find a way to bringthem back. It was like having no equipment to plot re-entry.Millbrook was an attempt to bring people back in a position tosustain their spiritual transformation. And while we drew on thecollective wisdom of the great mystical texts we were notattempting a crude transplant. We desired a coalescence ofEastern insights and Western intelligence. A combination, forexample, of the Tantra and Western psychology. Regularly the permanent members of the householdwould participate in group sessions, using LSD, and we would takeit in turns to plan these. Fourteen people would turn ontogether. The appointed guide would be responsible for the music,the tapes, the readings, the lights. In one of these run by DickAlpert, we agreed not to speak for three hours, but to whollygive ourselves in responding to the input. Dick read from MeherBaba, the celebrated Indian mystic who ceased to speak on July10, 1925 and communicated, through disciples, by means of analphabet board: 'The sole purpose of creation is that the soul should be able to enjoy the Infinite state of the Over-soul (Paramatman) consciously. Although the soul eternally exists in and with the Oversoul in an inviolable unity, it cannot be conscious of this unity independently of the creation which is within the limitations of time. It must, therefore, evolve consciousness before it can realise its true status and nature as being identical with the Infinite Over-soul, which is One without a second.' [Meher Baba, 'The Divine Theme for Meditation', cited in C. B. Purdom, The Perfect Master, Williams and Norgate, London, 1937, p. 309.] After three hours we looked in the little handmirrors we had all been supplied with before the session andwatched the various physiognomic metamorphoses. For some peopleit was like entering the world of Wilde's The Picture ofDorian Gray watching 'in the dim light the hideous face onthe canvas' and realising, like Dorian, that 'each of us hasHeaven and Hell in him'. Some had a horrific experience of seeingtheir faces melting or turning bright orange or red or green. In fact these paranoid symptoms are described inthe Tibetan mystical writings where they are hallucinations ofdevils. In Tibetan tanka paintings fearful dragons withhuge red eyes belch flame and smoke from their nostrils. Theseare images of energy that exist in the mind. Under the sessionconducted by Dick we also saw the snake, which is the coiled DNA,the Kundalini serpent which lies at the base of the spine.Once released it fills the mind and heart with light. Unpreparedfor such images they create fear and terror. As we became moresophisticated with the use of drugs and studied the mystics wecould deal with the images. We saw them as mandalas, asscreens of energy. By suspending analysis we were able to passthrough the screens. We noticed that in the centre of all theseimages is a black hole, the vortex of mystical works. By focusingon this swirling, sucking void we moved through its entrance tothe other kingdom. The blind spot in the centre of each mandalais recognised by Tibetan monks as a device to reachtranscendence. It comes to life and triggers off archetypalimages. We learned to move through the mandala to Nirvana,the state of absolute bliss. In our hand mirrors we saw former selves, livespast, and lives we might yet live in the present. And in thissession with a dosage of 800 gamma LSD (justified because of thesecure supportive system) we saw the multiple facets of ourpotential. Indeed, 'it might be proposed that what we encounterhere is an activation of the phylogenetic inheritance.' [R. E. L.Masters and Jean Houston, The Varieties of PsychedelicExperience, Anthony Blond, London, 1967, p. 217] I hadexperiences of living in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,and of living in India 2000 years ago. I also dissolved into avery old man, receded into a young man, spun and shrunk into ababy being born. After five hours we still had not started toverbalism We silently prepared for the period of re-entry. Heredaily consciousness is slowly intruding and our conceptual mindperceives it with all its inhibitions, its whole pathology ofcontent. 'So far you have been searching for your past personality. Unable to find it, you may begin to feel that you will never be the same again, That you will come back a changed person. Saddened by this you will feel self-pity, You will attempt to find your ego, to regain control. So thinking you will wander here and there, Ceaselessly and distractedly.' (The Tibetan Book of the Dead) At peak experience the being is filled with love,joy and ecstasy; under LSD it is impossible to think of killinganything. On reentry we would try to choose who we wanted to be.If we were to return from spiritual heights we wanted to do sochanged, still possessed of love and radiance. This was the pointof the session, but none of us really managed it. The re-entryperiods we wanted to freeze were elusive. Dick's session was followed by a walk in the woods,a silent exercise in looking. And after experiencing the sensuousimpact of the grass, and the trees, and the animals we went backto the house and prepared a meal of rice and tamara, wineand cheese, and we began to speak to each other. We also played behavioural games with eachother, accumulating evidence to test various hypotheses. As anexample, in June 1965 we had all been studying Gurdjieff's MeetingsWith Remarkable Men, Ouspensky's The Fourth Way, andOrage's Psychological Exercises. Gurdjieff maintained thatmost people sleepwalk their waking hours away, and saw his ownrole as that of an alarm clock to wake people from this diurnalsomnambulism. To test this we planned a Self-Remembering game. Itstarted at 9.00 a.m. and, in an arbitrary sequence, a bell wouldring four times an hour throughout the day. The bell was thesignal for us to stop and record what we were doing at the time.Under the heading EXTERNAL we answered the questions Where areyou? and What game are you playing? Under the headingCONSCIOUSNESS we answered the questions When? (i.e. Past,Present, Future), Where? and What game? As thehouse was full of behaviourists this seemed a normal thing to do. Tim's wedding to 'the beautiful blonde Swedishmodel' Nena Von Schlebrugge took place six weeks after I hadmoved into my upstairs room at Millbrook. It was a radiantmorning and we were up early to welcome the guests, most of whomdrove up from New York. The marriage service was held in theEpiscopal church in the village of Millbrook in the earlyafternoon and afterwards we returned to the estate where we hadarranged a Swedish-style buffet in all the downstairs rooms ofCastalia, so guests could wander around the house eatingdelicacies. I had met most of the guests individually, or insmall groups, but this was the first really big gathering ofassorted heads. There were some 150 of us, all high on LSD, orpot, or both. It was a brilliant festive occasion with everyonedressed up so brightly that it was like watching an idyllicpageant from Elizabethan England. Most of the girls had dazzlingornaments over Indian saris. They held flowers and seemed toglitter in an extraordinary delicacy. The men wore robes andbrightly coloured costumes—harlequin pants, richly texturedjackets, sumptuous shirts. To view them on the lawn from the roofof the bowling alley was to peep into a kaleidoscopic gardenparty of glorious humanity. Castalia had been transformed into apalace and it embraced this ceremony. It was one of those days when everyone was happyand joyous and loving. Felicities filled the air. Charlie Mingusplayed his bass, Maynard Fergusson cogitated on his trumpet, andother musicians joined in to produce an elegant weaving series ofimprovisations. Don Snyder took a wonderfully sympathetic seriesof photographs. Before Tim and Nena left for New York to catch theplane to New Delhi for their first visit to India there was areceiving line and we all filed past with our presents.Psychedelic presents of course. Some gave hashish, some gave bagsof excellent grass. Some gave mushrooms. A snuff box of cocaine.A quantity of LSD. The entire range of mind-expanding substanceswere proffered to the newly-weds, and all the while people wereturning on. When Tim and Nena left we carried on with thecelebrations into the dawn, and watched the sun edging over thehorizon as the earth heaved over and took us into another day. Tim was away for more than a month, during whichtime we sent him messages about what we were doing. Tapes wouldarrive at New Delhi via American Express and would be taken up toTim and Nena, about a mile away in Almora. 'Dear Tim and Nina. We're missing you very much. We've been studying the works of Meher Baba, particularly his book God Speaks and we find this fundamental to our journey. We've also been reading Rene Daumal's Mount Analogue and our souls are climbing the mountain. Our bodies too: we've built our own mountain from chicken wire and plaster of paris, and we've painted routes and markings on this mountain, a metaphoric statement of where we're at, all climbing the mountain together. We ran seven sessions last week. Some wonderful. Jacky and Susan are very well. Jack is doing well at school, making new friends who he brings round to watch the deer in the park. Susan has been learning to bake. On Tuesday some of us went to Salvador Dali's birthday party at the St. Regis hotel. We were all dressed up, wearing ski masks, each with a different musical instrument. They were about to throw us out when they discovered we were Dali's guests. Gabi gave Dali his pet iguana for a present. Later, when Dali took us to the Stork Club for a meal, he paid and left the iguana on the table as a tip. We are sending you some LSD by next mail, to c/o American Express, New Delhi. Enough for forty trips. Love from Millbrook.' Gabi, the photographer, had entered Millbrookduring the time Tim and Nena were away, a period when we spent alot of time working on multi-media techniques. The genesis of themultimedia show 'Psychedelic Theatre' came about when, late oneevening, Arnie Hendin arrived at Millbrook with his girl, Lois.He was a very active person, tall with a little beard and longhair. He told me he was a photographer. None of us had thoughtmuch about using photography in sessions, but Arnie mentioned itas a possibility and asked if he could show me some of hisslides. He set up two projectors in the session room, selectedsome music, and we took some LSD. Then he began to manipulate theprojector to inform his photographs with a dynamic quality.Inexorably I was caught up in this dance of the fixed image. Itwas a weird mosaic of visual rhythm, pulsating vibrating colour.Arnie used our huge mirrors to reflect his slides and bouncedthem round the room. He took them in and out of focus, blendedphotographs together, and used this controlled agitation inuncanny counterpoint with the music. These pictures were real!I lived in them. A shot of the East Village, New York, would comeso alive that I could see the sounds, sense the smells, watch thepeople move. At times I had to avoid the traffic. Suddenly Arnieswitched to a pastoral scene of an old New England barn, and themood changed abruptly. He had a triangular arrangement of threemirrors which he put in front of the lens to break the image upinto multiple facets. Taking the slides out of focus he elevatedshapes to forms, and then reduced these to primal blobs ofchaotic colour. It anticipated Stanley Kubrik's psychedeliccontinuum in 2001 when the space pod enters the visionaryatmosphere of Jupiter. I felt Arnie had visually duplicated theearly stages of the LSD experience. Words had never been equal tothe ineffable. These graceful gymnastics of colour which Arniehad produced, by sheer artistry, were the apotheosis ofdistraction. He was a magician—not only a technicallybrilliant photographer, but a being possessed of mysteriouscreative powers, able to utilise new forms of energy. He hadunderstood that LSD is a non-verbal, visionary experience. Anintensity of seeing whether the eyes are opened or closed. Arniehad changed our session room from the inside of a cigar box tothe inside of a diamond. I asked him if there were any other photographerswho were his peers in these realms. 'Yes,' Arnie said. 'There is Gabi. He comes fromDetroit like me and came to New York to take up a scholarship atthe Cooper Union. Gabi spent one day looking round the place anddecided it was not for him. He lives in a small basement in thelower East Village.' I had to go into New York the following day to pickup a Tibetan monkey which had been gifted to us. Why not see Gabithen ? Arnie told me the address, but asked about the monkey. Iexplained that the Tibetan monkey had been destined for theBaltimore zoo, but had been rejected by the zoo. The donors werefriends of the Fergussons and suggested to them that the CastaliaFoundation could have it if we wanted. Of course, we did. So Iwas to drive in and pick it up from an animal emporium just offBroadway, near Wall Street. I drove into New York next morning in the Fordstation wagon we had, and went first to see Gabi. He was seatedat a table in his basement sticking coloured polo mints on to adiscarded car axle. Quite naturally he showed me a champagneglass with broken polo mints stuck around the base. Then a silverspoon hanging from a string in a box with the coloured sweetsstuck on to it. After a period spent looking at these and similarcreations Gabi introduced me to his animals. He had a pet iguana,a pet crow, a pet mouse. Later on the crow ate the mouse, and theiguana freaked the crow by doing something the crow could notdo—blink! It was this same iguana that ended up on a tablein the Stork Club as the Salvador Dali tip. Gabi was a six footer, with long blond hair, andthe largest blandest eyes I had ever seen. He looked a bit likeLewis Carroll. I suggested he come out to Millbrook, but told himthat first I had to pick up the Tibetan monkey. Would he help meas obviously he had a way with animals ? Certainly he would, butif we were going on to Millbrook he wanted to take his animals.Gabi put on his head the northern hemisphere from a metal atlas,and we boxed the mouse, and put the iguana in a cage. Gabi feltthat a trip to the financial district might so upset the iguanathat it might bite, and we didn't want that. The crow, however,was not nearly so sensitive so we let if fly above the stationwagon and follow us to the Wall Street district. We got into the emporium without incident, and thecrow still hung about the station wagon. The monkey, abouttwo-and-a-half feet high with snowy white eyebrows and beard, wasput into a huge cage. Gabi said he could speak to animals, so Icarried the cage and he carried the monkey. So we walked back tothe station wagon, an extraordinary trinity—me in my raccooncoat and tam o'shanter, Gabi with half of the world on his head,and the Tibetan monkey completely at home in Gabi's arms. Fromthe looks on the faces of passers-by it seemed as if a wholesection of New York had freaked out! Rush hour took on a newmeaning. As soon as we got back to Millbrook everyone wantedto see some of Gabi's psychedelic magic. He installed the animalsand then set up projectors, as Arnie had done. We were soontransfixed by the beauty, dazzling colour, and unique insightsperformed by Gabi with light and colour. The magicians weretaking over. And we liked it. This development led to other groups coming.Probably the most important was USCO—'US company'—threeperformers from the artists' colony at Woodstock, N.Y. The groupcomprised Gerd Stein, poet and former Playboycorrespondent; Steve Durkee, previously a pop artist; and MichaelCallahan, an electronics technician. USCO communicated through amultichannel media mix, a psychedelic orchestra of film, colourslides, kinetic sculpture, strobe lights, and live actors. Theyhad developed a system of linking all projectors to one controlmanual. With this ability to control all visual effects from onesource they used techniques of spinning sound from one speaker toanother. This, in conjunction with the images, seemed to us tooffer an exciting dramatic possibility, a unique form of theatre.A performance where the audience would be involved intimately inthe field of action, participating. At Millbrook we did not isolate ourselveshermetically from the world outside, but wished to contribute toand reflect something of the spirit of our time. Our PsychedelicTheatre or 'Tranart' (transcendental art) did not arise like adiversion or arrive like a gilded Pavlova. It grew out of alembicof creative minds, from aspects of personal experiences ofliving. We continually exposed ourselves to novel departures inour conceptual, label-making process and tried to get rid ofideas of what art must necessarily be. In the case of the Psychedelic Theatre we suspendedthe general assumption that Theatre is concerned solely withformal, fixed construction like the plays of Ibsen. We wanted toavoid the mistake tacitly committed by both spectator and artistof submitting to a mental trap of knowing what is expected ofthem. The Psychedelic Theatre arose out of something like thecave-paintings of primitive man interested in constructing apiece of reality from the flux. It was a theatre of controlledspontaneity, offered not as a virtuoso performance by asignature-artist, but as a sensory embrace. The first public psychedelic event ever performedwas at the Village Vanguard jazz club in Greenwich Village onMonday, April 5, 1965. Those taking part were myself, DickAlpert, Alan Watts, Charlie Mingus, Pete La Roca, Steve Swallow,Charlie Lloyd, Ralph Metzner, Susan Leary, Mario (a dancer), andBjoern Von Schlegrugge as stage manager in charge of theelectronic equipment. I introduced the event thus: 'Our purpose in being here is to expand our awareness. To assimilate and to see aspects of the psychedelic consciousness. To observe the phenomena of inner space. This is the Magic Theatre. By magic we mean the phenomena of everyday life through which we pass most of our time asleep. Tonight we shall be mixing auditory and visual phenomena. The brain is capable of processing all this data. It will see different images moving in a random/planned fashion. Sound tracks, some of which have been cut up, will be heard. Films and light will perform. All you have to do is focus on one point. And then you will see the rest. Diversity will be unity. But do not try to understand. The brain will do all that later. Here you will have 10,000 visions. So sit back and relax. Extend yourself to an aesthetic distance. You may have the opportunity of leaving your body. Leaving your mind. You are going on a voyage. The price of admission is your mind. For if you attempt to analyse and conceptualise you will cheat yourself of the opportunity to see things in a fresh manner.' Then I read: Is it a dream ? Shadowy Elusive Invisible All things All images Move slowly Within Shimmering nets Here Essence endures From here All forms emerge All forms Emerge From this second Back to the ancient beginning (Tao Sutra 21) And we began. The impact of this event is perhapsbest appreciated from the review in the New York Times ofSunday, April 11, 1965: 'Tamara, her blonde hair falling to her baggy white pyjamas, was passing out Tibetan incense. ' "That's because it's delightful," she explained. 'The patrons who jammed the 123-seat basement jazz club accepted the offerings with an equally earnest mysticism, for they had come to experience the debut of the Psychedelic Theatre—a simulated "session" with the consciousness expanding drug Lysergic Acid Diethylamide, or LSD. 'It was "speakout" night at the Village Vanguard… last week an LSD symposium transcended the merely verbal because, as a grave young man backed by a throbbing bass declaimed, "Our limited lexicography, with its procrustean subject-object limitations cannot communicate this experience." 'Darkness. Up tempo bass. Lights flash through the audience; slides flash on a sheet: Mount Rushmore, biological specimen, Buddha sliding in and out of focus. Drums and a clarinet pick up the rhythm. Tamara, accompanied by Tasha, a thin, haunted-looking young man also in baggy whites; they dance, not quite to a twist, with Siamese arm motions. Later, more dancing, to the Beatles, while a flickering blue light seems to stop the motion into jerks.... A noise like three monotone bears trapped in a sewer, transforming itself into an oriental fluting, bonging and chanting. A movie of a frog embryo in a glass bowl, evolving rotating and flipping to a cool jazz score, while a voice quietly intones universal truths and insights: "… muddy water cannot be fathomed." 'A hundred would-be experiencers were turned away, business at the bar was slow, and the audience was rapt and curiously split. "There's an awful lot of uptowners here," muttered a hostile hipster, glowering at a section of Wednesday matinee women. 'There was a scattering of ageing beards, but the other face was that of youth, sure of its terminology—"Cosmic consciousness", "re-entry", and "set". 'Some matched the religious fervour of the performers, residents of a Millbrook, N.Y. "utopian colony" who soberly passed out jelly beans and balloons during intermission.' As well as passing out jelly beans (which some ofthe audience imagined, with delight or apprehension, depending ontheir attitude, to be treated with LSD) we gave Dick Alpert aspot. He sat on a stool and began telling funny stories about hisexperiences at Harvard, about his early experiences with hismillionaire father, and how this world now seemed several lightyears away. The audience laughed uproariously at Dick's storiesand, after the show, the owner of the Vanguard, Max, came up toDick. 'You are a natural-born comedian. Would you like totry a week here as a comedian, doing what you did tonight?' Dick said he would try it. A couple of weeks later Dick took up the offer.Unfortunately only half a dozen people were watching him and theywere boozy and incapable of understanding Dick. Apart frommyself, who accompanied Dick to New York for his 'gig', and somefriends, no one got the point of his humour. It simply seemedcrazy to them that a man could jeopardise an enviable familysecurity and a top academic job to live as Dick was doing then.It was clear to us that for Dick's jokes to be understoodeveryone had to be high. Subsequent to the Village Vanguard evening we setup a regular Monday night series of 'Psychedelic Explorations' atthe New Theatre, East Fifty-Fourth Street, in collaboration withUSCO. There would be lectures, psychedelic improvisations,discussions, performances by the Castalia Foundation and USCO,and finally an informal question-and-answer period. The idea wasthat the Psychedelic Theatre would illustrate and amplify thethemes discussed in the lectures which in turn supplied thetheoretical background necessary for an understanding of the newtechniques of audio-olfactory-visual alteration of consciousness.Our other main forum was the Coda Galleries in the East Village.This opened in April 1965 and acted as a salon for exhibitions,discussions and demonstrations. It proved immensely successfuland on one occasion some 6000 Villagers tried to cram into thesixty-five-person capacity gallery to hear a panel ofpsychologists and artists discuss the value of chemically-inducedtranscendence for artists. The Coda's director, Ray Crossen, alsosponsored the 'Theatre of the Ridiculous' and manypoetry-readings in which I took part. There is no question butthat the work we did at that time in New York has been seminal inthe development of kinetic and optical art, the new cinema, andfreer forms of theatre. It opened up a whole vista of newentertainment possibilities. Arnie Hendin, who had suggested somuch of this potential growth on his first evening at Millbrook,was by now developing into a one-man theatrical event; as threeYale psychologists were shortly to find out. So involved had we been in the PsychedelicTheatre and so closely had we communicated with Tim in India thatit seemed like days not months had passed when he eventuallyreturned with Nena. After the preliminary salutations of welcome,Tim made it very clear that he had mainly learned from India thatall fire and metals should be kept underground. 'The great workof the future,' he said, 'will be to return fire and metal backto earth. This will be a work of joy. All works of destructioninvolve fire and metal. We must overcome them. In future we willseparate our garbage into metallic and non-metallic substances.All the metal must be buried.' I took it upon myself to bury all the empty tincans by sticking them upside-down into the footpath through thegarden. So we would walk on the metal and it would eventuallysubside into the earth. Tim began to take up his psychological work withsome intensity and announced one morning that three senior Yalepsychologists were coming to see around Millbrook that afternoon.Tim wanted this to be a serious exchange of ideas so he askedArnie Hendin—who wore funny hats, trousers made out ofmulticoloured curtain-material, and bells—if he would minddiscarding his technicolour clothes for the duration of thepsychologists' visit. 'Uhuh,' nodded Arnie. And, true to his word, he went to borrow a loungesuit and a tie and a white shirt and shoes. The psychologists arrived for lunch and sat, ratherstuffily, listening to an affable Tim making jokes andlighthearted conversation. Most of the members of the householdpresent for lunch were stoned, but, in deference to Tim's wishes,we maintained an external propriety. In the middle of lunch Arniewalked in sporting his splendidly conventional outfit andcarrying a copy of the New York Times under one arm. Henodded and sat down opposite the three psychologists who seemedsuitably impressed by his impeccable attire. Arnie opened the Timesand began to read it. Then he smiled and, as he did so, a trickleof green liquid started spilling from the corners of his mouth,and slowly ran down to his little beard. Next Arnie opened hismouth a little and the green liquid spurted over his chin and onto his white shirt. By now everyone was staring at Arnie, so heopened his mouth in a yawn and the green gushed from his mouthover his newspaper and his shirt, all the while reading the newsas if nothing was happening. Arnie had filled his mouth withgreen vegetable dye and it produced the first one-man happening Ihad ever seen. The psychologists observed this event fastidiouslyand seemed, from frowns and raised eyebrows and movements of themouth, to have agreed that this irreproachably dressed young manwas inoffensive—merely afflicted by a slight idiosyncrasy.Tim said nothing at all about it. Neither did we. It seemed thewisest course to smother the scene in silence. After lunch, Arnie having excused himself with anod, we suggested to the psychologists that we show them aroundthe house. Indulging the frivolity of a moment, one of thepsychologists asked if we had any animals in addition to the fourdogs that wandered about the front porch. Tim pointed to the lineof Tibetan monastery flags strung along the turrets on the roofof the house and jocularly linked that with the presence of ourTibetan monkey upstairs. Often the monkey roamed about the house,but at meal times it had to be kept in its huge cage because itwould perch high up on shelves and throw eggs at people.Obviously that couldn't happen to a distinguished group of Yalepsychologists. Tim said he would remember to show them themonkey. We got to the room, entered, and there, sitting in thecage with a banana in one hand and engrossed in the New YorkTimes, was Arnie. Tim let the psychologists draw their ownconclusions. Arnie was not only magical and mischievous, though;he could be practical. Once Dick Alpert got a severe cold, dosedhimself with aspirins and sleeping pills and retired to thebowling alley where he curled up in a sleeping bag before the biglog fire. Arnie asked me about Dick and I confirmed that Dick wasmiserable and had just gone off to try to sweat out the cold infront of the fire in the bowling alley. 'He doesn't need to do that,' said Arnie. 'Oh ? Why not ?' 'I know of a way to cure colds.' I had considerable faith in Arnie's powers andagreed to accompany him at midnight to see Dick. When we got intothe bowling alley Dick was sleeping like a twisted log in frontof the burning fire. Arnie started to prepare the room. Hearranged coloured pieces of glass on the floor and built a shrinewith a statue of the Buddha quite near to Dick and his sleepingbag. Then Arnie lit about twenty candles. I was watching him, ata loss to see what he was doing other than to create a settingthat would normally appeal to Dick. Arnie rushed out again andcame back with a primus stove and a huge metal crucible in whichhe melted lead. 'This,' smiled Arnie, 'is an old recipe for curingcolds.' I nodded. Every now and then Arnie would throw an apple or abanana into the molten lead and they rapidly disintegrated intosparks which filled the room with a pungent smell. Arnie felt heshould now wake Dick but it proved impossible. So Arnie filled ahypodermic with DMT (N,N-dimethyltryptamine—a veryfast-acting but temporary psychedelic drug which throws thesubject into fantastic realms and renders him incapable ofphysical action) and injected Dick in the buttocks. Just as hewas pulling the needle out, Dick sat bolt upright and we watchedhim maintain this position rigidly for half an hour while heswirled through neurological space. When he came round, Arnie fedhim 800 gamma of LSD from a spoon. After about fifteen minutesDick turned round and saw the flowing colours of the glass, theBuddha, and the crucible. He looked at Arnie, who was wearing ahat with a tassel of bells, like a troll from Ibsen's PeerGynt, and who still periodically threw fruit into the moltenlead. As a final measure Arnie put on three separaterecord-players simultaneously—a Beethoven symphony, aColtrane record, and a Stockhausen record, all at full volume.Dick seemed to swim in this incredible sonic tidal wave for anhour. Arnie asked Dick if his cold was any better. Dick smiled: 'It's gone completely.' The wonder was that he was still there after suchdrastic treatment, but in fact the cold never returned. We might,therefore, claim that Arnie had found a cure for the common cold,but somehow I cannot see his methods being universally adopted bythe medical profession. Millbrook was not confined to the activities ofthe permanent household. As its name spread we received manypeople we admired. As I had been the first person to turn Tim onto LSD, with what he felt were satisfactory results, I wasusually called upon to act as guide for the special guests.Several of these had memorable trips. Feliks Topolski got intouch with me, saying he had heard about me from Alex Trocchi inLondon. Feliks had come to New York to do murals in the St. RegisHotel and when he arrived at Millbrook we agreed to do a Cook'sTour of the mind. We went to the upstairs room of the bowlingalley and I decided to concentrate the visual input on colour,using the projectors to suggest amorphous masses ofundifferentiated tonality. I blended images and sounds and letFeliks think on them. 'Remember: The hallucinations which you may now experience, The visions and insights, Will teach you much about yourself and the world. The veil of routine perception will be torn from your eyes. Remember the unity of all living things. Remember the bliss of the Clear Light.' (The Tibetan Book of the Dead) The session commenced in the late afternoon, and atone point Tim came into the room with Billy Hitchcock. Notwishing to disturb Feliks they sat in a corner, talked briefly,and then left without interfering with Feliks. To Feliks,however, this seemed like a conspiratorial t�te-�-t�te, and hesaid to me when they'd gone: 'Wow, they're just like gangsters.' Our session continued into the early hours of thenext morning and as the first light was being refracted from theclouds I took Feliks out on to the balcony of the bowling alley.Just as we stepped outside there was a flash of lightning. 'The world is charged with the grandeur of God. It will flame out, like shining from shook foil… ' (Gerard Manley Hopkins, 'God's Grandeur') Feliks was stunned. 'My goodness,' he mumbled in his gentle way, 'lookat that.' 'Yes,' I smiled, 'we try to do our best for someoneon his first session.' Dawn came, and later sunlight filled the entireroom. Another day, another world, had come. We went back on thebalcony, smelling the air, listening to the sounds of the birds,feeling as if we were being reborn with the day. And as our eyeswere scanning the horizon we saw a car being driven very fast upthe road followed by clouds of dust. The car halted at thebowling alley and out stepped Arnie, a male friend, and agirlfriend. They were naked, and painted all over with colourful symbols. One ofArnie's legs was blue, another green, and looking down I couldmake out a painting of a torso on his forehead. All he had on wasa feather in his hair. He brought a flute out of the car and hisfriend got a saxophone. Then they started to play and dance atthe same time. It lasted a few minutes and then they got backinto the car and drove off. They came from nowhere, hadn't beenexpected, and went away again. Disappeared. 'This was a very vivid hallucination,' Feliks saidto me. I knew it had not been an hallucination, but had toquestion the whole concept of what was real and what unreal atMillbrook. Saul Steinberg the cartoonist, who lived in NewYork, came up for an LSD session. He was very fond of romanticcomposers and I played records of Ravel, Debussy and Chopin. Ilaid on some large drawing cards and pencils in case he wanted todraw, but he didn't. Nor did he want any slides. We used adownstairs room in the house, and respecting his wishes for asmuch solitude as possible, asked the others not to disturb him.After turning him on I left and looked in every hour or so to seehow he was doing. He was quiet, smiling at the fire, but asked meto stop the music. He was finding it abrasive and brittle thoughthis was his normal preference for music. Hours later he came outon his own and spent some time with our coatimundi, a SouthAmerican animal resembling a raccoon. It was a friendly beautifulanimal and it curled up in Saul's lap. He put his finger to itsmouth and it gently rested its teeth on his finger. I sat besideSaul on the porch for a while, then he went off on his own for awalk through the woods. Driving him back to Poughkeepsie for the train toNew York next day, l asked Saul if he had gained anythingpermanent from his LSD experience. 'I discovered trees,' he said. Saul's life was usually spent either in his NewYork home or in his little summer house in East Hampton, a selectLong Island bathing resort for the very wealthy. The trees he sawthere seemed desiccated. 'At Millbrook I discovered real trees. I have neverthought about trees before. That was the principal thing I gotfrom the session.' And sure enough about two months later, on the NewYorker cover, there was a Steinberg drawing whichfeatured—a huge tree. On Monday, April 19, 1965 Paul Krassner came for asession. Krassner, editor of The Realist and later, withAbbie Hoffman, founder of the Yippie party, took LSD with meupstairs in the bowling alley. Krassner later recorded hisexperience in The Realist No. 60, June 1965: 'My LSD experience began with a solid hour of what my "guide" described as cosmic laughter. The more I laughed, the more I tried to think of depressing things—specifically, the atrocities being committed in Vietnam—and the more wild my laughter became . . . I laughed so much I threw up. The nearest "outlet" ws a windoe. My hands seemed absolutely unable to open it. My guide opened the window with ease, and I stuck my head out. Was this a guillotine ? Was he to be my executioner ? Such fantasy occurred to me, but I trusted him and concentrated instead on the beautiful colours of my vomit. 'On the phonograph, the Beatles were singing stuff from A Hard Day's Night… I started crying… for false joy, it turned out. 'I had seen the film with my wife—we are separated—and there was, under LSD, an internal hallucination that she had not only helped plan for this record to be placed, but, moreover, in doing so, she had collaborated with someone she considered a schmuck in order to please me.... Filled with gratitude, I decided to call her up (the power of positive paranoia), but I also decided that she had planned for me to call her up against my will.... Then I called—collect, since I was in another city. 'The operator asked my name. 'I suddenly answered: "Ringo Starr !" ' "Do you really want me to say that ?" 'I was amazed at my calm, logical response: "Of course, operator. It's a private joke between us, and it's the only way she'll accept a collect call." 'The operator told my wife Ringo Starr was calling collect, and naturally she accepted the call. When I explained why I was calling, she told me I was thanking her for something she didn't even do. I had been so sure I'd communed with her.... ' Millbrook was music and musicians, too. CharlieMingus and I were in the kitchen one evening, high on LSD, andunaccountably the tap started making yowling sounds followed bybangs. Charlie got out his bass and played arco incounter-point to the sound coming from the watertap. He seemed toknow exactly the pattern of the sound. 'I am conducting thesound,' Charlie told me. 'I've taken it over. I've tuned into thevibrations and resonate to them.' Millbrook was Charlie Lloydplaying his flute in the woods. I walked in the woods during theafternoon following the agitated sound of flute music. And therewas a very high Charles Lloyd playing to a squirrel who jumpedfrom branch to branch. Charlie performed a flute obligatowhich matched and predicted the movements of the animal. It wasas if it was bewitched by the music as it slowed down andrelaxed. It was like watching a Disney film. Millbrook was Pete La Roca, the drummer, taking LSDand wanting to play. We hung a sheet from the ceiling andprojected on to it a nine-minute time-lapsed colour film sequenceof a frog embryo. From a black dot in the middle of the screen itgrew into a tadpole and the eyes and head appeared. Pete drummedin the dark, behind the sheet, providing a rapid pulse thatspeeded up at the climax of the film. His wife said she had neverheard him play so fast. He seemed hypnotised by the record ofcreation before him. And Steve Swallow, the bass playerassociated with Mingus, took LSD and watched one of ArnieHendin's photographs of a flower being taken in and out of focusand mixed with colour filters. I was operating the projector,when I heard Steve stop playing his bass and groaning 'It's sobeautiful, it's all so beautiful'. Then there was a double crashas Steve and the bass fell to the floor. He had fainted. Jazz musicians, psychiatrists, social scientists,people who were crazy enough to think us crazy. Mediums,spiritualists, people who had had spontaneous visions, churchministers. They all came to Millbrook by special appointment. From my point of view one of the most interesting,fluent and beautiful visitors was Joan Wainscott, an Americangirl in her mid-twenties who had been studying anthropology atLondon University. She had acquired a convincing English accent,very sharp and unbreakable. She told me she was a second-degreewitch in the British Coven of Witches, and that she had spent ayear in Africa living with primitive tribes. Before our LSDsession she told me about witches. She reckoned they werepriestesses of religion who had simply had a bad press down thecenturies. They followed a divine calling. We chatted one another up and then had our session.During this I read her 'Gate of the Soft Mystery', the Sex Cakra: 'Valley of life Gate of the Soft Mystery Beginnings in the lowest place Gate of the Soft Mystery Gate of the Dark Woman Gate of the Soft Mystery Seed of all living Gate of the Soft Mystery Constantly enduring Gate of the Soft Mystery Use her gently and Without the touch of pain.' (Tao Sutra 6) It became obvious that we were going to make love.We fed each other grapes, and touched each other on the hands andface. Slowly we merged together in an ecstatic union. What disasters we did have usually had a comicalaspect. As most of the household had taken LSD anything up to 200times we did not see fit to store it surreptitiously. Forexample, some liquid LSD was poured into a half-empty port bottleand left on the top floor, usually out-of-bounds to visitors. ACanadian TV crew came to record a Weekend Experimental Workshopfor a programme called Seven Days on Sunday. The head ofthe CBC crew, a large man of about six feet, eight inches, beganto wander about the house on his own. When he saw the bottle ofport, to him a measure of normality in an inscrutable world, heguzzled down a few slugs. Within twenty-five minutes he was on avery high LSD trip, something he was not prepared for. We weresitting in the dining-room when this huge man lumbered in withone shoe off, his tie half undone, his jacket buttons ripped off, 'his doublet all unbrac'd; No hat upon his head; his stockings foul'd Ungarter'd and down-gyved to his ankles; Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors.' (Shakespeare, Hamlet) The weekend visitors found it somewhatextraordinary that this huge TV producer, ostensibly present torecord the activities with a detached professional eye, should bestumbling around under the influence of LSD quite incapable ofdoing anything. We sat with him through the night, comforting himand playing music, until he was afraid no longer. In the morninghe was fine. I hope the programme was too. It is the sudden impact of the unexpected thatcauses so many bad trips on LSD. Or any other drugs for thatmatter, as I was to discover when I tried JB118 (the space drug)in an attempt to go as far as possible in mapping the innerHebrides. The connection with NASA, who were developing JB118came quite by chance. One morning the telephone rang. It was a Dr. SteveGroff calling from Miami. As staff hypnotist with NASA he wasinterested in the use of psychedelic substances in connectionwith astronaut training. He had just come from the space centreand told me that all the astronauts had taken LSD to preparethemselves for weightlessness and disorientation due to the lackof external coordinates from which to take their bearing. Couldhe come to Millbrook for a session to see how we wereadministering LSD? Could he examine for himself our claim to havejoyful experiences with LSD, a claim in direct contradiction tothe results of sessions taken in clinical psychiatricsurroundings ? 'Of course,' I said. Groff arrived and I ran the session for him. Duringthe session he played the Beatles' A Hard Day's Night somany times that I, as guide, felt it truly was a hardday's night. Then after he was saturated with the music we took awalk on the lawn. He told me how he had been in the Olympicsky-diving team and that the LSD experience had certainsimilarities with a free-fall from an airplane. After describinghis sky-diving exploits in some detail he suggested we go toPoughkeepsie airport to rent a plane. It was easier than I expected. At the airport hepresented his Hertz rentaplane card and his flight licence andwithin minutes a small Cessna had been put at his disposal and wewere airborne. As we had no maps we followed the winding road toMillbrook and flew towards the turreted house where apparentlyminiscule Tibetan flags fluttered. By this time there were people up on the roof, andsome on the verandah and we were 4000 feet high physically, andhigher still metaphysically, when Groff began to zoom to withintwenty feet of the roof before shooting back into the sky. We didthis about a dozen times and enjoyed seeing friends waving up atus. It was a strange visceral experience, like going on a hugeroller-coaster on Coney Island. I felt no fear, but enormouselation and was disappointed when after half an hour Groffreturned the plane to the airport. Over lunch Dr. Groff told me of his friend JimArender, the former world champion sky-diver. If anyone wouldappreciate a session it was Jim. And three days later Jimarrived, twenty-six, handsome, dynamic. All-American inappearance but with an un-American interest in astrology. Jimbrought along a movie of himself sky-diving and we showed this tohim backwards during his session by bouncing the images off amirror. He was stunned at the correlation between memories ofactual flights and the heights reached during his session. And hestayed on at Millbrook to repeat the experience many times. The links made through Dr. Groff with NASA resultedin us obtaining some JB118, the space drug officially on thesecrets list. Dick and I volunteered to try it and remarked thatit looked as if we were becoming the guinea pigs for NASA and theCIA. We went to the recording room and when Dick sat down on thecouch I took up the lotus position on the floor. We ingested thedrug and waited for the slight change in body metabolism oneassociates with LSD. But wham ! ! ! ! This took effect instantlyin the somatic sensory areas. I felt myself moving round the roomin leaping acrobatic backward somersaults. I could not preventthis, yet I was not hitting any of the electronic equipment inthe room. I was spinning round and round the centre of the roomgliding past everything. I had the absolute conviction that I wasin a small space capsule about the size of a tennis ball and thatI had broken loose from the safety-belts. I felt alarmed and sensed a paranoic antipathy towhoever had been careless enough to put me in the capsule in sucha dangerous way. Suddenly a door in the capsule opened and Whoosh! ! ! ! I was sucked out and down towards the atmosphere,hurtling down an air corridor, free-falling, able to move any waybut upwards. Observers said that all the time I was spreadeagledon the floor, lying on my stomach. But I remember a horrificsensation and suddenly there was a lurch and I stood up. Itseemed a parachute had opened just a foot before I hit theearth's surface. Yet it had broken my fall. I wanted to fly again and I was a crow. I startedto caw and flap my arms. Caw! Caw-caw! My eyes weretightly closed and I knew what it was to be a bird. I started tohop around the house, pegged my way downstairs and into thedining-room. With my eyes still tightly shut I touched people tosee who they were, let my blackfeathered wings brush over humanfaces. And still I didn't bump into anything. With my eyes closedI steered my way through the house several times. Through doors.Through corridors. Through passages. Eventually I was coaxed back upstairs with a pieceof bread as bait and I nested militantly until I finally evolvedback into a man and came round. The whole trip had lasted threehours. Dick had sat on the couch for the duration of the trip. Hetold me his experience was fantastic. 'The first thing I saw was this young chick coming in. She was beautiful with long dark hair. She had a glass in her hand and asked me if I would like some grapejuice. I said yes. She put a glass on the floor and proceeded to fill it with grapejuice until it overflowed and then a red trickle of grapejuice moved across the floor, up the side of the opposite wall, along the ceiling, down the wall near me, on to the floor again, and towards the couch. I had to get up as it threatened to pass over me. I managed to avoid it and it got back into the glass. It was utterly real.' I agreed. This JB118 drug made hallucinationspalpably real. LSD gave a sense of bliss and oneness with life.JB118 was a solid slab of hallucinatory experience that offerednothing for the traveller to bring back to the real world. Even more extraordinary, if we indulge ourempirical prejudices for a moment, was the experience of AlanEager and Arnie Hendin on the space drug. They went on anidentical trip and were aware of doing so all the time. Like methey were pulled into the vacuum of space and moved freely abovethe blue curvature of the earth. They saw a little dotapproaching them and noticed, when it came closer, that it was aspace-craft, with the hammer-and-sickle on the side. As itfloated towards them they clung to the side and saw two Russiancosmonauts inside the craft. The men saw Arnie and Alan andseemed frightened. So agitated did they become that Arnie andAlan decided to float away on their own and eventually theyreturned to earth in Millbrook. Next day, March 19, 1965, it wasreported that the Soviet Voskhod 2, containing cosmonauts PavelBelyayev and Alexei Leonov, had encountered difficulties inreentry. On their first attempt to do so their automatic re-entrysystem failed and the Voskhod 2 pilots had to make an extra orbitand then bring the spacecraft back to earth themselves. Thischange in landing site meant a long wait in the winter coldbefore rescue helicopters located them.... As few of us atMillbrook took much interest in current news it is doubtful ifeither Arnie or Alan had heard of this flight. They were surethey had not read about it prior to taking the space drug andfirmly maintained that the delay in re-entry had been caused bythe panic of the cosmonauts in seeing them. We await confirmationfrom the Soviet Union. Alan and Arnie were to take another sort of trip,this time through the heartlands of America. 'In New York we set up a centre in a large townhouse with a full working theatre in the basement, bought a roomful of divers musical instruments and opened another chapter in the history of psychedelia. In reaction to the programmed existence at Millbrook, a constant party developed which continued nonstop for months. Many of the Millbrook tribe would visit with us on their days off to play and learn. After a while we got restless. There were too many people around and it got repetitious and dull. We decided to take a trip. It was very cold in New York. I was shooting a lot of DMT… at that time a smoking form had not been discovered. Arnie, Cathy, Simba the Siamese cat and me, plus guitar, soprano sax, pocket coronet, phono, records, psychedelic magic kit and a suitcase of drugs piled in the white Alfa and headed for warmer territory. The I Ching might have suggested it, I think. 'The total picture we gave freaked out every cop south of the Mason-Dixon line and we were busted every time Arnie drove. (From the driving seat that is… we all drove at once which can be very tricky sometimes but taking a trip while tripping is another trip—if you know what I mean.) Arnie and I were in costume, he looking like Jesus, but in baseball pants, high sneakers, beads, etc., which is quite the mode now… in '64 it was extraordinary and worth a hundred gamma just to look at it. When he would add extra touches to his gear like those kid space-helmets we wouldn't get half a mile before a cop would see us go by and flip. No harm . . . we were always released very quickly. Arnie, in his best prophet manner, would promise interrogating police chiefs fire and flood unless we were released at once. It always worked.... He's a fine magician. Our clothing was a time trip and it caused short circuits in robot people. Although we ate in all types of restaurants we were never asked to wear ties or jackets. Mainly, I think, because it never occurred to them. It would have been like asking an Eskimo to wear a tie. After a few days' travelling we had it worked out pretty well. Anything we needed from the establishment would be gotten by Cathy as she had a fairly straight appearance. 'We had gotten into warm weather and we travelled and explored all over the countryside on and off the roads… cutting across fields and meadows and treating the Alfa as if it were a Land Rover; stopping at our slightest whim. Antique stores, underground caverns… far-out little towns with one gas pump the man cranked, little stores that sold penny candy in glass jars and had spittoons that were used. Rural America almost unchanged in fifty years. 'In Charleston we checked into the bridal suite of the Holiday Inn, had supper in our room (preferable to going out) and after bathing proceeded to set up shop. Out came the incense, candles, bottles, India prints, mirrors, toys, comics, phonograph, musical instruments, movie camera, fireworks (we had bought $100 worth a few hours before), magic kit and the drugs. We had everything but grass… the brown rice of drugs. Arnie tried to score some from our coloured bellhop but his mind had been whitewashed. He brought us a bottle of vodka which we duly set in place unopened. We had about thirty-five caps of beige acid which we hadn't tried yet. We each took a cap. As it came on we saw it was good and took a few more. We were feeling great and proceeded to get married. We had bought funny fake marriage licences which we signed with our other names; Vazy McKoops, Ring, Hank and the Cat Paw Print. We kissed, danced, lit roman candles off the balcony and sparklers inside, which Arnie photographed in the candlelight. We danced and drew arabesques with them, and I drew a showering sparkler out of the bell of the golden soprano. We were flying ! 'I took some more caps. Arnie followed. We were travelling very fast now. The speed of sound (all motion is relative) at least. Again we took some more caps and now really started to move. We were at a rate that was so glorious that we decided to add a little JB840 to it. 'I went out into the hall and got some Coke. Then instead of putting a normal dose in a glass, overcome, we poured three-quarters of a bottle of JB118 into the glass and drank. Suddenly, violently, and with a sickening lurch we were moving faster than light. I fell back on the bed and had a vision of a Roman or Etruscan warrior holding a sword to my stomach. It was no vision. I knew it was real. We had poisoned ourselves. Death was here. Real Death. I remembered and gave in surrendering to it. A pain lanced through my right side and my convulsive gasps stopped. BLACKNESS. And then pinpoints of light in the stygian dark. I realised the lights were stars and we were moving through the very edge of our solar system at some unknown speed, but without the feeling of movement. Then to the front of my mind, I sensed an alien intelligence. 'Curious, I probed further, trying to contact it, when it started a mind-probe in an area it thought empty of life it tripped every alarm in my nervous system and body. I could feel my body on earth panicking, ready to explode with terror. I had to withdraw the mind-probe and take care of my terror-struck earth body. My mind came and, carefully, slowly, I began to turn off the alarms and unlock the muscles, sinews and nerves, calm and soothe the glands and get my body back to normal. 'As I was working I realised through visions in another part of my mind, that all of us on earth are remnants of other races and civilisations from various solar systems seeded into earth bodies for a reason not yet revealed. I had been from this solar system originally and had been a galactic ambassador, quite used to dealing with other cultures. Arnie was not of this universe originally, and I vaguely saw his shape as it had been; huge, swift and somehow, feline… fifteen feet tall, five tons and covered with golden fur. 'I opened my eyes, candlelight flickered, and the Holiday Inn took shape. Then a silent screaming came into my mind. It was on the edge of sanity driven there by fear. It was Arnie, Arnie the Great, The Prophet, Magician, Seer, Artist, Arnie was flipping out. I tried to lock my mind on to his, but he was so frightened, his mind was like greasy Jello. I couldn't hold on, so I followed, and when it would stop for an instant, I would hover and try to coax him back. It would have been all right, but Cathy didn't understand. She was trying to help vocally, and every sonic vibration only drove him further out. It was horrible! Arnie was moaning and flickering in and out of reality, sanity pain and dimension. I finally took Cathy to the next room and made her promise to remain silent, but she has a very strong mind and, when she began thinking of medical help, I couldn't block her thoughts completely. Soon Arnie began to think for help. 'After a time I gave up and called the desk for a doctor. Less than three hours had passed when we started and we were still very high to say the least… plus slightly in shock. The doctor after a game attempt to get Arnie hospitalised, reluctantly gave him a mild sedative. After several stern reminders from me that he was a doctor, not a judge, he finally left, radiating disapproval. 'After a few more eons—earth time, about an hour—Arnie fell asleep. By then it was dawn. We were asked to leave soon after. When Arnie awoke, we moved to the nearest motel (a block away I think) and ate in bed rather quietly and slept till the next day. When we awoke we ate some more, discussed the dumb doctor, and the strange intelligence we had encountered, took stock of our drugs (we had thrown out all of the JB), and packed, giving all the fireworks to a bellhop as Arnie was afraid he would set them off mentally. We were quite down from the experience so we each took two capsules (Cathy wasn't having any), and I drove us out of Charleston through spiral type buildings, heading south, the top down. By the time we were out of the DMT-coloured city-limits and on the open road, we were feeling normally glorious. The car purred, the cat slept, and overhead the most tremendous, white thunderhead in a purple-rose sky formed a glorious paean to earth and the future and we sped into the technicolour southern dusk.' Probably the most highly-publicised feature of ourwork at Millbrook was the Weekend Experiential Workshop. Thesewere held on alternate weekends when some fifteen guests wouldarrive at 7.30 on Friday evening and leave on Sunday afternoon.The idea was to simulate the LSD experience by means of Hindu andBuddhist yogic traditions, Gestalt therapy, Gurdjieff'sselfawareness training, and Psychedelic Theatre techniques. Wewanted to use all the means at our disposal to provide anonchemical means of transcendence. Our handout advertising theExperiential Workshops outlined three steps to take to the idealof maximum awareness and internal freedom: 'The first step is the realisation that there is more: that man's brain, his thirteen-billion-celled computer, is capable of limitless new dimensions of awareness and knowledge. In short that man does not use his head. 'The second step is the realisation that you have to go out of your mind to use your head; that you have to pass beyond everything you have learned in order to become acquainted with the new areas of consciousness. Ignorance of this fact is the veil which shuts man within the narrow confines of his acquired, artifactual concepts of "reality", and prevents him from coming to know his own true nature. 'The third step (once the first two realisations have taken place) is the practical theoretical. How can consciousness be expanded? What is the range of possibilities outside of our current verbal-cognitive models of experience? What light do the new insights perhaps most important, how can the new levels of awareness be maintained ?' It was to provide the answers implied in the thirdstep that the weekend workshops in consciousness-expansion wereinstituted by the Castalia Foundation. We noted carefully in ourbrochure that 'because of the complicated current legal situationin the United States, psychedelic drugs will not be used in theseworkshops'. This did not prevent many visitors from asking us fordrugs but we had to protect ourselves by refusing these payingguests. Several guests, wise to our methods, took LSD beforearriving but that was not officially our affair. The vulgarisation of these weekends commenced at anearly stage. In an article in the New York Sunday News ofAugust 29, 1965, beneath a banner headline asking ARE THEY OUT OFTHEIR MIND ? and suggesting 'You might call these sect members abunch of weirdos', the article noted: 'On alternative weekends they are joined by ten to fifteen paying guests recruited by direct mail and word of mouth. Most are middle-class professionals—teachers, doctors, psychologists, students. The fee of $75 a person or $125 a couple includes plain home-cooking and a mattress on the floor.... There is no happy hour of cocktail chatter. Instead, each guest is escorted silently to a box-like room in the old servant's wing and left there for an hour to meditate. 'The rooms are decorated with madras hangings, wall-sized paintings of Buddha, a collage of words and images collected from a psychedelic fantasy, or religious posters from India. The only furniture besides the mattress may be a lamp, a bookcase or a writing table.' Such succinct details suggest the guests werepaying for a self-imposed ascetic exercise in hardship, but itwas nothing of the kind. The money from the workshops paid foroil-heating bills and food, and helped to secure aself-supporting community for the weekends. The CastaliaFoundation, after all, was a non-profit corporation. Before the guests arrived on the Friday the guides,of which I was one, would prepare spiritually by taking LSD orpot and would reflect on the imaginative possibilities ofMillbrook. The house would be completely silent and the guestswere met by a beautiful girl in a sari holding a flower andgiving out copies of Max Picard's text on silence: 'Silence has greatness simply because it is… It is and that is its greatness, its pure existence… There is no beginning to silence and no end… Man does not put silence to the test, silence puts man to the test… Silence contains everything within itself; it is not waiting for anything, it is always wholly present in itself and completely fills out the space in which it appears… Silence is original and self-evident, like the other basic phenomena, like love and liberty and death and life itself… And there is more silence than speech in them, more of the invisible than the visible… There is also more silence in one person than can be used in a single human life… ' This observation of silence had two reasons. First,as Tim said, 'One of the oldest methods of getting high issilence.' Secondly, it allowed us to impose an essential moodthat saved the time of the visitors. For the first workshop wehad welcomed the guests with a cocktail party, to break the ice,and the straights immediately plunged into the cocktail partygame of which they were the experts. 'Hi, I'm Jack Smith fromDenver, who are you?' 'Jack Smith, eh?' And so on. The wholeevening had been wasted, and as we were novices in the cocktailparty game we were completely flattened. The guests were merelyputting an extra spin on their social whirl, while the householdwas brought down by the experience. In instituting the idea of silence we wanted toimpress on the guests that they were entering a new kingdom. Thatthey were tuning out of their everyday 'normal' world and turningon to ours. Passing through the gates of Millbrook had to be likestepping on to a spacecraft—they had to leave behind themall their usual judgements and normative expectations. Having welcomed them with silence we gave eachguest MESSAGE ONE which requested absolute silence and asked themto look, listen, to non-verbal energy and experience directly.With the initial ambiance established we took each guest to aseparate small room on the ground floor and gave them three moremessages to read in solitude: MESSAGE TWO This period of silence is designed to help youclear your mind from routine thoughts and to encourage an openingof your awareness in several ways. Please follow this programme: 1. Fill out the question sheet. 2. Then spend the next ten to twenty minutes tryingto meditate. Focus on the candle and see if you can turn offplanning and thinking. Concentrate on the moment-to-moment flowof time. 3. After ten to twenty minutes turn on the lightand read MESSAGE THREE. This is your game contract for theweekend. There are many implications and meanings contained ineach paragraph. Read it carefully. Make note of any questions orcomments. These will be taken up later. After reading MESSAGE THREE, then re-read it. 4. Turn off the light and meditate again forfifteen minutes. Watch how your mind keeps interrupting. 5. Next, turn on the light and read MESSAGE FOUR. 6. Wait serenely until you are contacted by a staffmember. Be aware of your body, your flow of thoughts, youremotion (you may be bored, or feel rejected, or irritated; youmay be excited, hopeful, etc.). MESSAGE THREE "HOW TO PLAY THE 'EXPERIENTAL WORKSHOP GAME' " What Do We Mean by Game? A game is a temporary social arrangement with thefollowing characteristics: goals, roles, rules, strategies, space and timelimits, values, rituals. All of these characteristics of any game aresubject to revision. Ecstatogenic games are voluntary and thecontract explicit. You have been invited to participate in the"Experiential Workshop Game" during your stay atMillbrook. This means you are a three-day member of a socialsystem which in some ways may be novel to you. This contract isdesigned to lessen your "culture shock" and aims to setup a memorable weekend. Goals 1. To communicate and exchange ideas aboutconsciousness and its expansion and control. Relevant theoriesabout consciousness-expansion will bediscussed—neurological, philosophic, religious,psychological, oriental. A wide variety of methods willalso be reviewed. 2. To employ several of these methods during theweekend, to expand the consciousness of participants and tomaintain as high a level of ecstasy as possible. Roles While there are many roles involved in running suchan enterprise, in this contract we are solely concerned with theroles involved in the visitor game. The roles which have been most comfortable to youand of which are of most use to you in your regular life will beof lessened utility here and, indeed, may handicap you. The aimof the workshop is to get out beyond your routine robotconsciousness. Thus there is little interest in who you are(were) and much more concern with where and how far you can go.What you can obtain during the weekend depends in part on howmuch of your routine ego you can leave in your room. . . . Why don't you check it in your suitcase ? Staff roles. Around ten people will bepresent during the weekend whose job is to facilitate the goalsof the seminar. Their functions are assigned and scheduled. Visitorroles. In general, the actions of visitors are addressedtowards the two goals of the seminar: i.e. to learn as much aspossible about the theories and methods ofconsciousness-expansion and to put this knowledge into practice.It is assumed that each visitor is here because of his pastexperiences and his current interest in consciousness-expansion.It is hoped that you can contribute any special knowledge youhave when it seems relevant. The Seeking Help Role. This is not apsychotherapeutic situation and the doctor-patient game is notplayed. Personal problems cannot, therefore, become the focus ofdiscussion. Rules 1. Be aware of and try to minimise the attempt ofyour robot to capture audiences for its personal dramas. 2. Please obey the laws of the land. In particulardo not bring marijuana or any other illegal chemical to theweekend workshop. 3. Visitors are asked to maintain their own roomduring their stay. Strategies The ecstatic-psychedelic experience can be reachedby several means: intellectual emotional bodily movement sexual somatic-sensory One of the aims of the workshop is to encourageexpansion of consciousness in all five of these functions in somesort of balanced harmony. (Consciousness-expansion in the sexualwill be limited to indirect methods.) Since the average personquickly falls into habitual and stereotyped modes ofawareness—mental, emotional, physical, sexual, andinstinctive—the weekends are designed to produce novelexperiences which deliberately "break through" thesestereotypes. If you feel yourself reacting with shock or outrageat the challenge to your favourite habits, please remember thatthis sort of friction probably points to an under-development ofsome function and is a challenge for growth. For the same reason,do not concentrate only on one of these methods ofconsciousness-expansion. Take advantage of this opportunity toexpand consciousness at all levels. Space Factors After a while one of the staff will show you aroundthe house and grounds. During your leisure time you are free touse any areas except for the third floor (which is residential)and the kitchen, except during breakfast period. Time Factors The schedule of programmes will be announced.Consult a staff member about additions and revisions to theschedule and about leisure play. Values According to the "game model", values arespecific to the particular game and hold only for the definedspacetime limits of the game. In the ecstatic game, the"goodness" or greatness of your robot performance is oflessened importance. Each person starts each second with a freshneurological slate. "Good" is what raises the ecstasycount of all persons present and "bad" is what lowersthe ecstasy count. Mythic Context While any human behaviour sequence can be seen asunique and original, another illuminating perspective can beobtained by recognising that certain classic human games arecontinually being re-enacted and that any social situation youfind yourself in is a current version of an ancient drama. Thequestion is not How does it turn out? (that is probablypre-ordained by the script and the role) but rather, How well doyou play your part ? and, How conscious are you of your role ateach moment ? and, How can you change your my/this game? The Millbrook Workshops are clearly a re-enactmentof one of the oldest and most ambitious games—thetranscendental game, expansion of consciousness, internalexploration, ecstatic discovery. Our endeavours here aredescended from and indebted to those groups of explorers inIndia, Persia, China, Greece and to their current westerncounterparts. Rituals The creation of consciousness-expansion experiencesusually involves rituals—some of which are directlypractical, others of which are designed to evoke mood orreadiness to change. The use of certain rituals (candles,mandalas, pictures, incense, etc.) is strictly experimental anddoes not involve any commitment to sectarian systems on the partof staff members or visitors.' Finally MESSAGE FOUR reiterated the five mostimportant areas of consciousness accessible to the averageperson—intellectual, emotional, body movement,somatic-sensory, sexual—and requested the visitor to spendthe next ten minutes reviewing his stereotyped methods ofawareness in each of these five areas. Naturally many of the visitors were overwhelmed byreading MESSAGE THREE in solitude, and there was always one guesteach weekend who would decide—in silence—that theexperience was going to be too much. 'They think they have falleninto the hands of a mad scientist,' Tim used to say, 'and that'swhen we hear them creeping down the back stairs and screechingout of the driveway.' Those who stayed on would be divided into groups offive and taken by their appointed guide for a walk in the woodsby candlelight. We walked silently in Indian file, then returnedto the oak-panelled library for a lecture by Tim or Dick or Ralphor myself. We outlined and discussed our philosophic andmethodological ideas and hoped that the guests would sleep onthem. For some sleep was rather difficult as they tried toanticipate what was to come. Saturday morning breakfast was a food game.Everyone had to be up at 7:30 for Ralph Metzner's yoga session,including instructions on sitting in the full lotus andhalf-lotus positions, standing on the head, and eliminating thedoubting fly of the mind. After this Ralph took them to thekitchen for breakfast (where a cupboard door bore the legend'Take LSD and See') and let them look at it for a while. He hadreversed the visual connotations of all the food. The scrambledeggs were green, the porridge was purple or bright orange, themilk was black. As the guests sat down to eat Ralph would say: 'Our ideas dictate to us what we imagine reality to be. And we are very much affected by the imprints we have, particularly those of colour associations. When someone says sky, we think of blue, when someone says meadow we think of green, when someone says scrambled eggs we think of yellow. But this is a mental hangup. It doesn't really make any difference whether scrambled eggs are green as they are today, or whether they are yellow. Why is this ? All of these colour changes were achieved by a non-toxic, odourless, tasteless vegetable dye and as you are eating your green scrambled eggs and drinking your glass of black milk try to reconcile in your mind the different subjective responses that you have, and notice how your brain deals with this input.' Needless to say Ralph always took the precaution ofeating before the visitors and he would sit and observe theirattempts to appreciate the anti-food. Hardly any visitor gotthrough this breakfast and, as well as having a mental impact,this method of serving food cut down our weekend budget as weonly needed to offer very small portions. The rest of the morning was spent in sweeping upthe parquet floors, and in relaxed preparation for the simulatedsession. In the afternoon I would take groups to the waterfallwhere, submerged in the gently churning water at the bottom ofthe fall, I had a bottle of sherry on a string. As my group stoodlooking at the waterfall I would slowly pull this piece ofstring, finally revealing the sherry bottle. I also had a box ofglasses hidden in the bushes flanking the waterfall. After spending some time in the woods we went backfor the evening meal, taken in the huge dining-room where guestssat crosslegged or knelt on cushions around a circular tableraised six inches above the ground. From this room, dominated bythe massive fireplace, great windows offered a view of the frontlawns. There was an oak-panelled ceiling, a carpetless parquetfloor, and sliding doors which led off into the corridor. Themeal was simple brown rice or wheat and fruit. Hiziki soaked inwater. Baked pumpkin. Aduki beans and onion. And our own breadbaked from roast corn flour, water-salt, and saut�ed vegetables.The meal itself was a yoga. Once the guests were seated, the mantra OM waschanted by Tim, followed by a suitable period of silence. Then alittle bell would ring and a disembodied message would be relayedinto the room: 'With the next mouthful of food contemplate on thewonders of the body: where this food goes, how it is digested,how it is transformed into energy, into you. Think carefully asyou chew the next mouthful.' 'Observe your body Mandala of the universe Observe your body Of ancient design Holy temple of consciousness Central stage of the oldest drama Observe its structured wonders skin hair tissues blood bone vein muscle net of nerve Observe its message.' (Tao Sutra 24) After the meal we took the guests to a longdarkened room at the back, the session room. It was dominated bymirrors and a huge mandala painted on the ceiling. I always feltconscious of the wood panelling and felt that at times it waslike being in a cigar box. All around were mattresses coveredwith Indian prints. Slide projectors were humming in the dark.Six speakers were linked to a tape recorder so that we could getcircular sound. Several pre-programmed movie projectors wereready. I would then say: 'This is not a show, not somethingoutside yourself. We, for our part, will experience some of thesame things as you. This is a teaching device. All of us in thehousehold have been engaged in psychedelic work for a number ofyears and we have developed methods of duplicating the world wesee on these trips. We want you to share some of these methods ofseeing inner space. We want you to go out of your minds and intoyour heads.' And I would read: 'Let there be simple, natural things to contactduring the session — hand-woven cloth uncarved wood flowers—growing things ancient music burning fire a touch of earth a splash of water fruit, good bread, cheese fermenting wine candlelight temple incense a warm hand fish swimming anything which is over five hundred years old Of course it is always best to be secluded with nature.' (Tao Sutra 19) In an instant, from all sides, came an electricbombardment of sound and image including many of the images usedin the Psychedelic Theatre: the US flag, Buddha, the frog embryo,amorphous colours. A voice would spin from speaker to speakersaying: 'That which is called ego-death is coming to you Remember: This is now the hour of death and rebirth; Take advantage of this temporary death to obtain the perfect State— Enlightenment. Concentrate on the unity of all living beings. Hold on to the Clear Light. Use it to attain understanding and love.' (The Tibetan Book of the Dead) Then there would be silence and darkness relievedonly by candlelight. Watching the perplexity on some faces Ithought how strange it was that modern Americans should findsomething strange in a technique that had been used for thousandsof years in one form or other. It was clear that the one whoresisted the experience needed a new morality, a set of naturalharmonious rules to follow as they spun off into neurologicalspace. They sat, some responsive, some astounded by theassault on their senses. Just as they were becoming accustomed tothe candlelight, the stroboscope would start making multipledivisions of light, hitting the retina in a staccato burst andforcing chemical changes. By now the whole concept ofenvironmental reality had been altered. We encouraged the gueststo walk around in the flickering movement-stopping light. As abody moved in the stroboscopic light it looked like a series ofstill photographs being crudely animated. Guests who tried todance in the light were reduced to chaos because they could notcoordinate with their apprehension of their partner's movements.Abruptly the strobe was stopped and we saw only the candles,their light weaving in the warm air of human breath. Slowly theroom was bathed in yellow which is the colour of the Root Cakrawhich we reinforced with Tibetan chanting music. After twentyminutes the Water Cakra would be played on thetape-recorder: 'Can you lie quietly engulfed in the fierce slippery union of male and female ? Warm wet dance of engeration ? Endless ecstasies of couples ?… Can you feel the coiled serpent writhing While birds sing ? Become two cells merging Slide together in molecule embrace Can you, murmuring Lose All fusing.' Twenty minutes after this came the Sex Cakrawhen the room would be suffused in a pale silvery light and wethought of the energies surrounding our sexual feelings. RaviShankar music would dissolve into a Caribbean bossanova and wewatched slides of men and women in the act of love. So on to the Heart Cakra. Colour of redfire. The room bathed in crimson light. Music by Scriabin andMiles Davis and Bach. And the sound of a child's heartbeat. Thenthe Throat Cakra: blue bubbles of air. Debussy, Indianmusic, Japanese flute music. Finally the Head Cakra withStockhausen and the sounds of outer space. Slides of the starsand galaxies would edge around the room. At the end of this timeless session we would bringthe visitors back, carefully prepare them for re-entry: 'As you return Remember to choose consciously Power is the heavy stone wrenched from your garden of tenderness Virtue is the heavy stone crushing your innocence What can be learned From nature is Harmony Therefore— Shun the social Cuddle the elemental Avoid angles, lie with the round Shun plastic, conspire with seed Do no good But For God's sake Feel good And Nature's order will prevail' (Tao Sutra 3) Undoubtedly many of our visitors obtained genuinespiritual edification from these simulated sessions, though it ismy experience that they can never be a substitute for thesacrament of LSD. For their money they had been changed in someways. Even those who did not seek change had access to theMillbrook facilities of seminar rooms, meditation house, forestpaths, the lake for swimming, vegetable gardens, art andphotographic libraries, music and book libraries with anextensive section on Eastern Philosophy, and our library of tapelectures and experiential films. Some were astounded at what theyfound. Those willing to drop the sensation-seeking game had aninsight into the religious aims of Millbrook. Though many membersof the public who might have been otherwise willing to openthemselves to the experience were alienated by lurid pressreports of which the following, from The Charlotte Observer,is typical: 'A quick belt of whisky from the suitcase improves things considerably. OM. ' "I am Michael Hollingshead," says the man in the doorway, half an hour later. He is tall, thirty-ish, baldish, with cold, cruel grey eyes. "I am your guide for the weekend. Will you follow me?" He has an English accent and a soft voice of sinister authority. 'Down the hall (OM OM OM) down the stairs. Outside four people gather silently in the back of a battered Land Rover: two women and two men, one of them an egg-bald bespectacled young man from Ottawa. "'Right now we're in the period of silence," says Hollingshead. "First we'll go for a little drive, then a little walk, then dinner." He drives along a track through dusk-hushed woods, then out into a field and stops at a pond… Hollingshead produces a bottle of cocktail sherry and paper cups. Dusk deepens. The pond is covered with a film of green growth, which creeps. ' "Is the period of silence over ?" asks the poison ivy woman, emboldened by sherry. ' "Not for you," says Hollingshead with a little smile. 'The drive continues through the woods and fields, then back to the house… Timothy Leary enters and sits. He is tall, forty-five, handsome, barefoot, a dentist's son, the father of three: a boy, a girl, and the psychedelic movement… Leary talks… The reason psychedelic experiences are important and valuable is that people live their lives by their own "chess-boards", playing the lawyer-game, the merchant-game, or some rule-ridden ego-game, rarely if ever expanding their consciousness to the point of true awareness and understanding of man and nature, including themselves. 'He demonstrates: Susan Leary and Hollingshead enact a short skit, she as a wife asking her overworked husband to take a holiday, he as a school principal firing a teacher. Their chessboards do not match; they do not understand each other… 'The appearance of things around Castalia's baroque bastion indicates a certain abandonment of modern survival values… No particular concern is shown for the house… Castalians are above the landed-gentry game. Furniture is not important to them… 'The woodwork and windows need washing, the old parquet floors need polish… the dogs… anoint the porch at will… 'An air of sad decline pervades the house, like a Rolls-Royce being used as a dump truck.' The fact that the local press had praised our workin maintaining the house and improving the lawns and plantingthree acres of corn and vegetables is beside the point. Like somany people, that reporter looked without seeing, listenedwithout hearing, calculated without thinking. I had been a guide for invited guests, a guide forpaying visitors, and after taking so many people on an internaljourney I felt it might be time to do the same in othercountries. Mark Twain said that 'Guides cannot master thesubtleties of the American joke', and though he was not thinkingof a psychedelic guide, he had a point. There were too manyAmerican jokers doing injustices to Millbrook. One of thegreatest guides, Virgil, says to a Dante tormented by frighteningphenomena 'But, as for thee, I think and deem it well Thou take me for thy guide, and pass with me Through an eternal place… ' (Inferno, Canto 1, tr. Dorothy Sayers) And Dante passes through a hell which in itsrealistic aspects corresponds closely to the unenlightened dailylife. It is the desire of the guide to take his voyager toparadise. As guide to many travellers I have taken them out oftheir hell and offered them at least a temporary glimpse ofparadise. 'The role of the psychedelic guide is new in our society, but the newness of the role should not blind us to the antiquity of its precedents. Priest and shaman, after all, were the first purveyors of its technique. Seer and sibyl mapped the cosmography of its domain. Perhaps the finest of its precedents is to be found in the figure of Virgil in Dante's Divine Comedy.... It should be one of the chief tasks of the guide to assume the role of Virgil in this chemically-induced Divine Comedy and to help the subject select out of the wealth of phenomena among which he finds himself some of the more promising opportunities for heightened insight, awareness and integral understanding that the guide knows to be available in the psychedelic experience. [R. E L. Masters and Jean Houston, op. cit., p. 130f.] I guided Leary and Alpert through their firsttrips. I guided the authors of the above passage through theirs.I acted as guide to Krassner, Topolski, Steinberg, Mingus, SteveGroff and dozens more. None had bad experiences. None returnedwith distaste for the spiritual or natural worlds. I endorse theideal of the guide as Virgil, though could not claim to be anideal guide. At the most I could claim to be conscious of mysubject's creativity and that, in itself, is a step on the roadto paradise. And so I felt it to be time to take to the roadagain myself. By September 1965 I felt that the ExperientialWorkshops had been stimulating and often extremely successful. Ifelt satisfied with our work in New York developing thePsychedelic Theatre. Americans, the sensitive ones, wereresponding to the wonderful implications of LSD. Artists andscientists were admitting they could learn from mind expansion.LSD was becoming quite popular with a growing number of peopleand, in addition to the black market supply emanating from theWest Coast, two very devoted student alchemists were synthesisingit at Yale. As a European I felt the time had come for us toshare with Europe some of the things we had discovered about themethodology of taking LSD in positive settings. I wanted to ridpeople of their inhibitions about mystical writings anddemonstrate to them that The Tibetan Book of the Dead, theTao Te Ching, and the I Ching were really basicmanuals with fundamental instructions about taking LSD sessions.We felt we had supplemented this ancient knowledge by theexploitation of modern technological means of transmittingaesthetic phenomena. From what I had heard in letters and conversations,the psychedelic movement in England was small and badly informed.It appeared that those who took LSD did so as a consciouslydefiant anti-authoritarian gesture. The spiritual content of thepsychedelic experience was being overlooked. We had a meeting at Millbrook to discuss thisquestion of disseminating the results of our experimentalresearch. It was agreed that I should return to London with theidea of introducing The Tibetan Book of the Dead in thetranslation by Tim, Dick and Ralph; the cyclostyled typescript ofthe Tao Be Ching by Tim and Ralph; and the PsychedelicReview, a magazine devoted to the theoretical discussion ofpsychedelic experience. Tim came to see me on the day of my departure. Hewas going to join me in London in January 1966, which gave methree months to set the scene for his arrival. The idea was torent the Albert Hall, or 'Alpert Hall' as Tim called it, for apsychedelic jamboree. We would get the Beatles or the Stones toperform, invite other artists, and, as the climax of the evening,introduce Tim as the High Priest. Taking a piece of paper from his pocket Tim said,'These are your marching orders, your instructions.' What theywere I don't know because he decided to scrap them and took aclean sheet of paper and wrote the following on it: 'HOLLINGSHEAD EXPEDITION TO LONDON 1965-66 Purpose: SPIRITUAL AND EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT To introduce to London the interpretation and applications and methods developed by and learned by Michael Hollingshead. A YOGA-OF-EXPRESSION BY MH. Plan No specific programme of expression can be specified in advance. The Yoga may include 1. Tranart* gallery-bookstore. 2. Weekly psychedelic reviews—lectures—questions and answers—Tranart demonstrations. 3. Radio—TV—newspaper—magazine educational programme. 4. Centre for running LSD session.' Thus it was I arrived London in the fall of 1965,with several hundred copies of The Tibetan Book of the Deadand thirteen cartons of the Psychedelic Review on theirway. * Tranart was the term we used to describe the artof psychedelic simulation. The name never became widely acceptedand to this day there is no adequate label for psychedelic art . Chapter 6 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-35IA087-000632-B033-37http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065824 text/html 59753HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:58:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:27:51 GMTContent-length: 59534 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 6 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER SIX LONDON ON MY MIND London 1965 It is always interesting to come back to London(why do we love the places we are born in ?) and see how youreact to the people. Here I am no longer 'the traveller', but aresident, which is something you realise the moment you stepoutside Heathrow—abroad, you can treat the outer world asmere reaction; at home this is impossible. When an Englishmanlooks at London he is seeing in its masonry the reflection of hisrace, like a clean slate, with his own face on. He may not likewhat he sees, but it is a place he may nod to and really feel heknows. Here, then, I am at the mercy of my own particular form ofexistence; here I am responsible in a definite way, just acitizen like everybody else.... Accordingly, I exchanged the consciousness ofMillbrook as rapidly as possible for that of the resident.Through the far-sight of a generous friend, I soon became thelease-holder of a large, comfortable, Pont Street, Belgraviaflat, with high ceilings and thick walls. It was here that weopened the WPC ('World Psychedelic Centre') with Desmond O'Brien,a Lloyd's underwriter and Etonian, as President; and, later, JoeyMellen, also ex-Eton and a graduate in law from Oxford, as itsVice-President. I had brought with me from America a quantity ofLSD, about half a gram, or enough for 5000 sessions, part of anexperimental batch made available by courtesy of the CzechGovernment laboratories in Prague, who had taken over assuppliers after Sandoz stopped selling it anymore, that is, afterthe Leary-Alpert Harvard storm. But as far as Britain wasconcerned, there were as yet no provisions for LSD et al.under the 'Dangerous Drugs' Act. The possession of this drug didnot become an offense until the summer of 1966, when Britain fellin line with American legislation in this matter. But it wasthrough this loophole in the 1965 legal situation that the WPCwas able to operate in an open way—though we had to watchanything else, particularly hash, for which we could be busted(and eventually were, just five months after we started). But forthe time being, and encouraged by the accelerating interest inpsychedelics amongst our Chelsea neighbours, we believed thatLondon would indeed become the centre for a world psychedelicmovement. In a city where world-feeling is expressed in theform of an impulse for empirical expansion, our 'message' wassimple: If you can't capture the world, then try to conquer theheavens. For the idealism of the conquistador would bechanged to that of the mystic, the man who conquers nobody excepthimself. 'The energy which, a little while ago, was able to filluniversal space is now condensed into the confines of theindividual self; for isn't it said that what is without, is alsowithin ? It is just that the eye of insight—the eye that"gets in" where reality "gets out"—hasatrophied in man during the past few thousand years; man is blindto the world inside himself and needs the help of threeeyes instead of two to gain true wisdom of his ownindividuality.' We wrote it; we may even have believed itsometimes: and 'acid is to help us see … '. Now we could believe with Camus that 'realgenerosity towards the future lies in giving all to the present'.And since it happens so rarely in a lifetime that one ever getsthe chance to give one's all to something, or someone, wefelt a tremendous sense of involvement now that we had pledgedourselves to spread the psychedelic doctrine. And in one of ourearliest manifestos, we wrote 'Man's vision of the future is his recreation—the fulfillment of it is his procreation. The essential ritual is procreation—creation. 'The future is what man thinks up in the present—the logical extension in all cycles of thought of the point of each revelation—the illumination of darkness by the word. 'In the dawn of a new evolutionary phase poets chirp like sparrows....disregarded—like sparrows—the poets keep singing of a vision which is theirs pour encourager les autres.... ' But the nagging question in such matters was howwere we going to communicate this message with the rest of theworld? Some of us had began to wonder if the solution didnot lie in the direction first suggested by William Burroughs (in1961): 'The forward step must be made in silence. We catchourselves from word forms—this can be accomplished bysubstituting for words letters, concepts and verbal concepts,other modes of expression: for example, colour.' And silence is golden for those who live in theland of gold. But from the revolutionists' point of view, thehuge monopolies of power and influence could be seen in 1964 tohave become places synonymous with intellectual bankruptcy andspiritual (religious) emptiness. To take one example, thesituation with regard to the University Establishment. They couldbe seen to be institutions of intellectual servitude: 'Studentshave been systematically dehumanised, deemed incompetent toregulate their own lives, sexually, politically and academically.They are treated like commodities with a price-tag, so much rawmaterial to be processed for the university'sclients—business, government and military bureaucracies.Teachers have been relegated to the position ofservant-intellectuals, required, for regular promotion, topropagate points of view in harmony with the military andindustrial leadership of our society.' The silence of responsible opinion in the face ofsuch calls to integrity, and ultimately even to sanity itself,all but amounted to a scandal; and certainly a scandal wider inits implications than any freedom movement growing up aroundpsychedelic drug-use, which the mass media promptly called'abuse', and saw LSD made into a 'dirty' word, like masturbationor VD. We couldn't simply bundle the drugs into a bag and buryit, hoping psychedelics could all somehow be forgotten. This wasthe problem—what do we do with these psychedelics now that'we' in the sense of Everyman have them ? It was—and is—a bit extraordinary, inBritain of all places, that LSD has been rarely a subject, andeven more rarely a successful subject, for our best thinkers(with such notable exceptions as Robert Graves on the subject of'mushroom' visionary experience, Aldous Huxley, and Gerald Heard,all of whom, perhaps significantly, lived abroad). The reality of the LSD world was too random andfragmentary for any but the most mentally flexible to identifywith it, and the unemotional 'cop-out'—synthesis—wasimpossible. British intellectuals were not going to confuse theLSD experience with their literary'stream-of-consciousness' techniques for discovering the truthabout processes of deep consciousness, either—you wouldhardly call Tom Wolfe or James Joyce an 'acid tripper'! What theywere unwilling, or unable, to see was that acid literature andacid thoughts are really only those ideas that deal with highlevel revelation, mysticism, telepathy, and transcendence of theego. And to that extent we were a new human game and had amessage of universal interest. The developing cult of Exploring Inwardness hadbecome a new truth, the stable core around which a new radicalmovement would evolve. Truth and response are not a privateaffair, for the truth comes to one man for all men, endowing therecipient of it in his relation to his contemporaries with theauthority of the Prophet or of the High Priest. But men do notwillingly recognise a new voice that cries from the modernwilderness … and if they are ever at a loss for a scapegoat,they have their man in him who would seek to remove thedistorting web of Maya, the cause of all illusions in the self. Martin Buber, and a prophet of our time, reminds usthat, according to Hasidim, the 'teller of tales', ' … theeffective exploration of the heart is the beginning of the way ina man's life,' it is the one journey in which 'each man must findhis own way for himself'. Or such were my esoteric influences inthis period, which fed my vision of a future happier world … Thirteen cartons of books arrived at Pont Streetvia the S.S. Samaria from America, a private importationfor which H.M. Customs required a Bill of Lading and a completedform C.3. (Now you can't get more accurate than that). This wasour 'psychedelic stock' for this 'Operation London'—300copies of the Leary/Alpert/Metzner The Psychedelic Experience:A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead, 200 issues ofThe Psychedelic Review ed. by Drs. Weil and Metzner, and200 copies of The Psychedelic Reader ed. by Gunther Weil.It was not only that, at this time, in 1965, there was nothingsimilar originating in Britain, but such literature was virtuallyunobtainable here, except possibly through Bernard at TurretBooks in Kensington. It also meant that we had a Manual forrunning 'guided' LSD-sessions through which we could observe theelaboration of 'the Art' as well as various new art-forms. Now wecould conduct intensive group-sessions in which the group-mindmight participate in an ancient Tibetan ritual, and in the safetyof our own homes. All that now remained was an opportunity to usethem, which soon presented itself on the night of the first FullMoon. (Alas, for those who do not actually feel thebiogenetic vibrations of a Full Moon, it must seem no more than apathetic, paltry, 'astronomical' phenomenon.) But for the tinycircle of participants who asked to take part in an experience onthe Bardo plane, it was a night to hear mysteries whichquicken the heart, the mysterious power that makes all things newagain … There were twelve of us on this spacetrip. We sawourselves as voyagers in search of answers to the secret ofmagical self-liberation. In Tibet the responsible institution is,or used to be, the College of Magic Ritual. Since it wasobviously impossible to duplicate any of this, we structured thedecor of the large living-room along the lines of Sutra 19from the great esoteric work, the Tao Te Ching … soonthe front room was emptied of all furnishings, except the carpet,and we tried to have around simple, natural things to contactduring this session— hand-woven cloth uncarved wood flowers—growing things ancient music burning fire a touch of earth a splash of water fruit, good bread, cheese fermenting wine candlelight temple incense a warm hand fish swimming anything which is over 500 years old. We also had lots of cushions, some excellent tapesand hi-fi equipment, a slide projector, and several chillums. We began shortly before midnight, moving into thenew temple room with a kind of piety and seriousness you find inacts of faith, when we all took our place in the 'Magic Circle ofLiberation'. After a short silence, we passed round the bowlcontaining grapes impregnated with acid—about 300micrograms, or what is considered to be a relatively high dosage,likely to last from between eight to twelve hours—thesympathetic discharge would follow in about forty minutes,indicated by enlarged pupil diameter, rise in body temperature,increased heart-rate, variable blood pressure, and sometimes amoderate amount of physical trembling. Yet they are no strongeron the body than the effects of a game of tennis—onlythinking makes them so. During this first period, the period of'countdown', when the psychic energy first begins to be felt,there is a growing sensation within of thousands of delicatethreads moving about the body, subtle lines of force whichtremble like Pampas grass, as if some thing had opened inside andthey were all streaming out. It is as though one's body isdissolving and floating away, and the 'essence' of Me was beingliberated to join the 'essence' of everything else about me. Onefeels open to a total flow, over and around and within the body,and one becomes more and more conscious of these threads ofenergy, of their vibrations, like harpstrings giving forth theirindividual tones. There is something purely physical about it, asensation, something felt rather than recognised, a matter forintuition, not intellect. This sensation lasts for perhaps ten to fifteenminutes (though one is hardly conscious of the passing of time).Then the threads seem to collect themselves into a single vibrantstrand, circular, coiled like a snake; and then like a snake itslowly begins to unwind, moving almost imperceptibly up thespine, which feels like a hollow tube, gathering in force andintensity and bathing the body in a silvery light and very, verysensual indeed. And one's pale introspective self sits in theboon of these tingling strings, sensitive to the least vibrationbeyond time, beyond place, rocking to the motion of all thatis.... The dominant impression is that of entering into the verymarrow of self … as if each of the billion atoms whichcompose the body under normal circumstances is summarised andaveraged into crude, discriminate wholesale impressions which arenow able to be seen and savoured for itself. The impressionsbecome more intense. The vibrations turn intocolours—brilliant blues, purples, and greens with dashes ofred and streaks of yellow-orange. One gradually becomes aware of movement, a rockingtype of movement, like on the crest of a wave, yet the body doesnot move at all … with an overwhelming acceleration one isturning around and around, swirling, then shuttling back andforth like a piece of potassium on water, hissing, sparkling,full of life and fire. This experience may be likened to anemotional-reflective visual kaleidoscope … experiencesinvolving these three components keep dissolving continuouslyfrom one pattern to another. Emotionally the patterns ranged fromserene contentment and mild euphoria to apprehension whichbordered on, but never quite slipped into, alarm. Butoverwhelmingly they involved (a) astonishment at the absolutelyincredible immensity, complexity, intensity and extravagance ofbeing, existence, the cosmos, call it what you will; (b) the mostacute sense of the poignancy, fragility, preciousness, andsignificance of all life and history. The latter is accompaniedby a powerful sense of the responsibility of all for all …intense affection for the others in the room … importanceand rightness of behaving decently and responsibly—of tryingto remain 'open' and cool in all areas simultaneously. As the 'guide' for this first Bardo session,my job was to look after the music, the pre-recorded tapedmessages from the book, and keep the participants in the flow.The set and setting are positive, supportive, anxiety-free sothat the reaction will be ecstatic, insightful, and educational,just as when the set and setting are clinical, experimental,non-supportive, and impersonal, the reactions are invariablyfrightening and confusing. Thus, In the greatest sessions One does not know that there is a guide In the next best sessions One praises the guide In the good session One admires the guide It is worse when One fears the guide The worst is that one pays him If the guide lacks trust in the people Then The trust of the people will be lacking The wise guide guards his words The wise guide sits serenely, When the greatest session is over The people will say— "It all happened naturally" Or "It was so simple, we did it all ourselves".' (Adapted from Tao Sutra 17, by Timothy Leary) Shortly after dropping the acid, I played a tape ofBuddhist Cakra music, followed by Concert Percussionby the American composer, John Cage. I then read from thePsychedelic manual: 'O voyager The time has come for you to seek new levels of reality. Your ego and identity are about to cease. You are about to be set face to face with the Clear Light of the Void. You are about to experience it in its reality. In the ego-free state, wherein all things are like the void and cloudless sky and the naked spotless intellect is like a transparent vacuum; at this moment, know yourself and abide in that state. O voyager That which is called ego death is coming to you. Remember: This is now the hour of death and rebirth; take advantage of this temporary death to obtain the perfect state; Enlightenment . Concentrate on the unity of all living beings. Hold on to the Clear Light. Use it to attain understanding and love. If you cannot maintain the bliss of illumination and if you are slipping back into contact with the external world, Remember: The hallucinations which you may now experience, the visions and insights, will teach you much about yourself and the world. The veil of routine perception will be torn from your eyes. Remember the unity of all living things.' About one hour had passed since we ingested thedrug, and we were well into the first Bardo. We werebeginning to confront the awesome illumination of themetaphysical void and new energy transformations. Theinstructions from the manual acted as necessary guideposts. Wewere learning how to spin in neurological space. Psychedelicequals mind-opening consciousness. Psychedelic means ecstatic,which is to stand outside our normal patterns. It means going outof your mind, your habitual world of contingencies, space-timecoordinates. And the key issue: 'Anything that exists outsideexists there inside'. The human brain is analogous to thegalactic one—there are some ten to thirteen billion cells inthe brain, about the same number as there are stars in theuniverse where the planet earth is invisible. The problem ofconsciousness-expansion is the same as the external inertia toget off this planet. The brain is 'hooked' to the external world.Put a person into a sensory-deprivation tank for very long and heis overcome by 'withdrawal' symptoms—anxiety, tension,physical discomfort, and paranoia. Next I played some music by Ravi Shankar and somebossanova. Interval of fifteen minutes. Then some music byScriabin and part of a Bach cello suite. Interval. Some Debussy,and Indian flute music by Ghosh. Interval. Bach organ music andsome John Cage 'space' music. Interval. The Ali Brothers andJapanese flute music. We also looked at slides projected on tothe ceiling Tantric yantras, Vedic Gods, the Buddha, Tibetanmandalas. I suppose that the room in which we had gatheredwould appear eccentric to most modern minds—candlelight,flames, incense, drapes flowers, bowls of fruit, but to us it allseemed harmonious, natural and very appropriate for theexperiences we were undergoing. The session was not to be thoughtof as some kind of show, a piece of theatre, an entertainment,but a demonstration and a sharing of novel energy levels andunusual forms of perception. And the decor was to assist thevoyager in his experience, a sort of ABC of internal language. Itwas a device to help one go outside routine modes ofexperiencing, beyond learned or familiar concepts, so that onewas—albeit briefly—no longer aware of oneself as asocial figure, but as another entity. We stood outside thefamiliar self, outside parochial worlds of experience, outsideLondon outside the idea of being English/American/Danish. In this sense, the psychedelic experience was notsomething invented by the Sandoz Chemical Company, but has beenknown since Vedic times and for which an enormous literatureexists. In the West we seek to explain mind in terms of a sciencecalled psychology, which is externally oriented towards actionand behaviours. But here one faced the fact that in the lastanalysis everything is internal, everything happens inyour own mind. 'O friend You may experience ego-transcendence, Departure from your old self. Do not cling in fondness and weakness to your old self. Even though you cling to your mind, you have lost the power to keep it. You gain nothing by struggling in this hallucinatory world. Be not attached. Be not weak. Go forward. Relax. Merge yourself with them. Blissfully accept the wonders of your own making.' There were still the instructions of the ThirdBardo to follow, and crucial to this session, because they gaveinstructions on how to re-enter one's normal state ofconsciousness and thus the everyday world … 'O Voyager, Now, if you wish to see the truth, Your mind must rest without distraction. There is nothing to do, nothing to think. Recognise that this is the period of re-entry into the normal world. Do not struggle to re-enter the denser atmosphere of routine game existence. Do not attempt to use force or will-power. Do not hold on to thoughts. Allow the mind to rest in its unmodified state. Meditate on the oneness of all energy. Do not struggle to explain. Trust your guide. Trust your companions. Trust the compassionate Buddha, and meditate calmly and without distraction. Do not struggle to return. The re-entry will happen by itself. Recognise where you are. Recognition will lead to liberation.' Recognition, in this sense, does not lead toliberation, but is liberation. He who really knows (that is tosay, vitally, not merely theoretically, with his intelligence)that he is one with the entire universe, is beyond all fetters byvirtue of this knowledge. The world no longer binds him to it;because, having once been above or outside ordinary existence, hesees the things of the world differently, from a different pointof view, and they no longer possess the same power over him. This'seeing differently' means at the same time recognition;recognition, therefore, does not only condition, but is,liberation. In his deepest being man is spirit, and the more herecognises this, the more firmly he believes it, the more chainsfall away from him. Thus, it could happen that, in accordancewith the teachings of the Bardo Thodol, complete recognitionovercomes even death. All it needs is a believing soul, which iswhat is meant when we talk about the power of faith. Ordinarypeople will only be able to believe when they are convincedsimultaneously that the content of their faith is alsoobjectively real: that Krishna was really an Avatar, that theBible is really the Word of God, that Christ saved humanity fromdeath in the historical sense. The visionary, on the other hand,knows that faith in the religious sense, and believing-to-be-truein the scientific one, have nothing in common with each other,that religiously it is completely indifferent whether Christexisted or not, and that the true visionary who is spiritualized,employs faith as he would an instrument. Ramakrishna, forinstance, was, for a while, a Christian and also a Mussulman; hewanted to know the effect of these ideals; and in the meantimehis faith was so strong that Mahomet as well as Jesus appeared tohim in the spirit. For the rest, he kept to the worship of Kali,the heavenly mother, as being the cult best suited to his nature,for he knew that no one form was intrinsically adequate todivinity. In the session we have just considered, it wascollaborative, and the planning increased the likelihood thateach person would have the sort of experience he wished. Thus hisinternal freedom, his control over his consciousness isincreased. The readings from the Tibetan Manual were tobring about 'recognition'; that is to remind the voyager at themoment of ego-loss that he is prepared; to insure that he willflow with the process trustfully. While the Buddhist language maystrike the Westerner as 'far-out', keep in mind that this is onlyone of many manuals and instruction sequences from which theprospective voyager can choose, and that the esoteric quality ofthe language serves as a mnemonic device, that is, say, a sharpmemory tap so that the former instructions and resolutions can berecalled. If we agree that the human mind was born free buteverywhere it is in chains, it will take a miracle to free it:because the chains are magical in the first place. We are inbondage to authority outside ourselves; and to exorcise thesechains is the great work of magical self-liberation. And the oneway of doing this is to activate the soul. Then the eyes of thespirit would become one with the eyes of the body, and god wouldbe in us, not outside. God in us: entheos—enthusiasm:this is the essence of the psychedelic experience. And how, you may wonder, shall we recognise theindividual who has thus freed himself from the bonds ofappearances, the man who has liberated himself and now walks theearth? 'He who returns in the flow of spirituality Brings back a mysterious penetration So subtle That it is misunderstood. Here is his appearance Hesitant like one who wades in a stream at winter Wary as a man in ambush Considerate as a welcome guest Fluid like a mountain stream Natural as uncarved wood Floating high like a gull Unfathomable like muddy water How can we fathom his muddiness ? Water becomes clear through stillness How can we become still ? By moving with the stream.' 'He stands apart Serene Curiously observing He stands quietly Looking forlorn Like an infant who has not yet learned to know what to smile at He is a little sad for what he sees While others enjoy their possessions he lazily drifts, homeless do-nothing, owning nothing Or he moves slowly close to the land While others are crisp and definite he seems indecisive He does not seem to be making his way in the world He is different A wise infant nursing at the breast of all life Inside.' Again and again I must think of these verses fromthe Tao Te Ching, for they remind me of so many of thehippie voyagers I meet on the trail, who live at a differentlevel as the result of extraordinary internal experiences, whichalone affect men. With Jesus, they can say: I have, like myfather, all life within me. They are 'different'. The milieu of 'swinging London' in 1965appeared to me like the best possible caricature of the Edwardianworld, that mighty institute for the threefold passion ofindependence, indulgence, indifference, which gave soul to theiresprit and their art of living. Real love was unknown to them,they had no serious interests of any kind- the whole of theirexistence was spent in grooving, getting high, making the scene.And yet many of them were intelligent and profound and theirprofundity was not impeded by their life-style; on the contrary,it gave them a means of expression. And for this reason thefrivolity of this period occasionally gave an impression ofgravity and profundity which struck me as being strange and madeone dream.... It was a period when people paid attention todress, and clothes were no less essential than theirbodies—it was a means of expression, and their dressedcondition mirrored in their consciousness the outer expressionfor themselves. 'By changing his clothes he changes the manwithin.' The mode of dress assisted in expressing certain traitsof his being. In this way the process of dressing-up can not onlyheighten or lessen the individual's power of expression: it canindeed bring about self-realisation. How did I come to make this observation ? Shortlyafter I moved into the Pont Street apartment, a couple of myfriends took me aside and suggested that I get some new clothes,costumes of the Chelsea of the mid-sixties—Edwardianjackets, embroidered in gold and silver, and silk shirts withhuge collars, velvet pants and blue suede shoes, and soforth—and thereby prove that the spirit of this age is thespirit of its wearer. It was a method of clothing oneself with acertain purpose—expressing certain traits of one's beingwhich in the ordinary course of events remain in the background.It is a mode of dress to reveal what the individual is; italters, as it were, the centre of his being. Such an individual,they argued, is more himself than he is otherwise in his 'real'existence. Accordingly, I let myself be persuaded to exchangemy jeans and sweat shirt for a new wardrobe, and Michael Rainey'sshop 'Hung On You' sent round a huge pile of fashionable clothesand a bill for �600. There were about five of us staying at theapartment and we divided the clothes between us. I ended up witha pair of flared pin-stripe trousers with an enormous belt andsilver buckle, several silk shirts and ties, and a couple ofhand-embroidered jackets. Now I was at one with the fashion of mytimes. The only problem was a psychological one—I wasembarrassed to be seen in them and consequently I stayed indoors,ignoring all invitations and gradually reverted back to my jeansand sweat shirt much to the chagrin of those for whom clothes hadgreat significance. There was also the additional factor of thecheque, which bounced, and I felt somehow uncomfortable wearingthese expensive clothes as a result. My associations in this period with a select groupof young aristocrats and artists and musicians and writers,responsible for influencing sharply the patterns of the NewVanguard of British culture and intellectual life, was felicitousin the extreme; but it cannot be held solely responsible formaking a revolutionary of me. l was certainly surrounded by a number ofhigh-powered anarchists. My partner, Desmond O'Brien, was alreadyachieving renown as one of the most far-out LSD exponents inLondon and had ever been described in one publication as 'Mr.LSD'; and our Vice-President, Joey Mellen, one of the firstpersons to trepan himself, had already embarked on a career as apriest in a new order which was to make him a distinguishedfigure of great importance to English evolutionary religion. Inaddition to my colleagues, associates of the World PsychedelicCentre included such notables as Victor Lownes, who co-foundedthe Playboy empire with Hugh Heffner; Julian Ormsby-Gore, thefilm maker; Alex Trocchi, the philosopher-writer; MichaelO'Dwyer, the art gallery owner; Julie Felix, the singer; GeorgeAndrews, the poet; Jo Berke, the psychiatrist working with RonnieLaing- Feliks Topolski, the painter; John Hopkins, the writer;Nick Douglas, the painter; Kim Ella, the singer; Ian Sommerville,the multi-media expert; Roman Polanski, the film maker; BartHughes, the high priest of the trepanation movement; Sir RolandPenrose, a director of the Tate Gallery; Hugh Blackwell, thewriter; as well as Roger Lewis, Billy Bolitho, Virginia Lyon,Steve Groff, Mark Warman, Olivia de Haulleville, Shelley Cholst,Maggie Russell, Shirley Scott James, Bill Burroughs, BobbyDavidson, Donovan, Paul McCartney, Jim Arender, John Eason,Nicholas Gormanstone, Christopher Gibbs, Suna Portman, andVictoria Ormsby-Gore, all of whom made outstanding contributionsto the current London scene. They exemplified a constellation of attitudes thatwere of great importance to the cultural-artistic life of London.They represented perhaps the seminal non-conformism of England'smid-sixties intelligentsia—not the evangelicalnon-conformism of such as the Millbrook sect, but anintellectualized form of psychedelic enlightenment, of whichpopularised Learyism was largely a culmination—that freed somany of England's educated people from the rigidity of social andclass and cultural patterns which had outwardly been solidifyinginto right-wing Toryism. Their rebellion was typical of thisperiod; the Establishment was the enemy, the representative ofthe rigid patterns they felt needed to be violently rearranged. These exotic friends were supplemented throughtheir contacts; and affiliations developed with such places asSt. Martin's School of Art, the Institute of Contemporary Arts,where we conducted a 'Workshop in Consciousness Expansion', andsuch literary figures as Professor Neville Coghill, NormanMailer, and Philip O'Connor. And yet … there was a problem, aself-indulgence of mine which earned me some social suspicion, ifnot also social ostracism, and which led me—though againstall my instincts—well over that line which divides thenormal from the abnormal. I refer, of course, only to my taking ofmethedrine. It was not illegal to take methedrine, providedthat one has a prescription, signed by a registered medicalpractitioner; and one could legally receive regular supplies ofthis (or any other 'hard' narcotic) drug, provided that thephysician prescribes for an 'addiction'. In 1965, not only was my purchase of methedrinelegal: friends bought their heroin and their cocaine with no moretrouble than that with which they purchased their cough syrup. Itook my methedrine in the 'pure' form, as a liquid, being theform in which the drug is most easily assimilable. And in dosesthat medical descriptions of the typical methedrine-addictionsyndrome indicate to have been heavy ones, about seven injectionsa day. But that I had a serious addiction, a descriptionof my nervous activity makes clear: the restlessness, the abilityto work for days without adequate sleep, and even without rest atall; the abrupt changes of mood; and the equally abrupt collapseinto somnolence not far (if at all) removed from a torporbordering on coma these, to those who have studied the effects ofmethedrine addiction, are the unmistakable evidence of heavy andprolonged indulgence in a powerful narcotic. I also smoked pot and hashish constantly, and triedevery chemical I was handed. I also took acid about three times aweek and in dosages in excess of 500 micrograms. I never slept,and after about two months I had turned myself into a sort ofzombie. Every now and then I injected myself withdimethyl-tryptamine—a fast-acting psychedelic of shortduration—to jack myself back into life again. Naturally, this 'hard' drug-taking led to acomplete disorientation of my life, which was now chaotic in theextreme, and I spiralled further and further down until I wascaught in a mental prison of anxieties, paranoia, frictions andmost despairs of consequence. It was all very, very frightening,and I began to think that I would remain forever hung up on anendless chain of manic-depressive emotions. It was ironic,really, that after all those lessons in meditation, all thosedisciplines and yogic exercises those trips under LSD, thoseausterities and years of metaphysical reflection, the mysticdreams, quiet days, the idea that there was no need to achieveanymore or to go about and do things and make things happen, Iwas now at the mercy of a non-miraculous addiction. In vain I tried to kick the habit, but it wasimpossible, the monkey was on my back and I could not remove it.I began to believe that it was all somehow a cosmic plot in whichI was the victim. I had nightmares which nearly scared me todeath. I reached a point where communication with other peoplewas impossible. I saw the whole world conspiring against me. Iwas literally out of my mind and living in some kind of hell ofmy own making. And, worst of all, there was no one I could turnto for help, for there was no one I trusted; such were theeffects of this poison I injected into myself. And the situation at Pont Street became more andmore unreal so much so that all my friends stopped coming roundand everyone thought I was crazy, which I was, if my behaviourwas anything to go by. That is how I appeared to them, what I wasfor them—a stupid, insensitive, unthinking person. What thisdrug had done was to reveal the hidden monstrousness and infernaldepths within my psyche. Certainly, I made conscious efforts toexorcise the sources of my confusion, but in vain. How would Iever rid myself of this methedrine hell, this habit which waskilling me? I had plunged into the abyss, gone beyond mylimitations, beyond even the confines of my reason which hadserved me so well. This was the land of madness, of death. Howundignified, despicable, meaningless! Yet, like all addicts, I clung to my drug. I hadgrown accustomed to it, I had even formed a superstitiousaffection for it. I didn't want to stop my habit. One fix meantfour more hours of life another fix, four more hours of life. Icouldn't just let myself go, for this would have meant death, andI still clung stubbornly to life. But there was a sense in whichI was already dead. The taking of methedrine implies excess oflife, intemperance, and surfeit; it is also a way of killingyourself. This realisation accounted for the uncontrollableterror, the panic, which gripped my soul at nightfall, when I wasalone with the alone and lost in a maze of contradictoryemotions, when I knew that my addiction was at once tragic,dangerous, terrifying and immoral. And I was not the only one who thought so. GeorgeAndrews, obviously disturbed by what was happening, wrote me aletter: 'Dear Michael, I have been hearing some strange stories about you from a lot of different people. In Tangier I learned to draw a very sharp line of distinction between the psychedelic guide, who is rare, and the psychedelic hustler, who is a dime a dozen. For someone with as much experience as you have had, to be using it the way you seem to be, you have in your hands the Void in crystal form, the lightning of the gods, the jade wine of the immortals. All the flip-outs and bad trips one is responsible for are added to one's daily load of karma. Why make the load even heavier? Why not lighten it instead?' But the advice could not be heeded. Like a poisongas, the methedrine had become all-invading, and I knew that Iwas close to death. I ought to have known better. What a situation tobe in! The euphoria of the drug had become my refuge from thereal world. It was a barrier between myself and other people, awailing wall, a wall of separation. And I wondered what wouldbecome of me. Was I a helpless puppet in the hands of someunimaginably cruel demon, tugged and pulled on invisible strings,but off from myself, since my innermost being was no longer incontrol. What was the use of knowing mystical truths ? What helpwere they now ? That I had to stop injecting toxins into my bodywas obvious enough. But how must I do this? Never have I, thewanderer, felt such pains of anguish in my soul. It seemed to meat times as though the demon methedrine was at hand to strip mymind of all reason. I was in the depths of despair, and anguish. WhereI should be laughing and playing, I felt horror and disgust. AndI did not understand how I had got myself into such a situation,how my addiction was possible. The demon laughs: what is there tounderstand ? It is something to like and enjoy. It is a matter ofcourse ! Is this the secret?—I felt as though in somemysterious manner, in some indescribable sense, I was living in aplastic world where there was neither light nor fertility nor, onthe other hand, any wish to understand my former research aftertruth. The spiritual light was extinguished in the same suddenand mysterious way as it flashed up. The old dregs filled me up,took me to task, threatened to weigh me down; I felt my humanityas something alien, burdensome; worse still than that of thehelpless animal in a trap, because I knew how to question thevalidity of that which was beyond my power to control. It was an impossible situation. It would never haveoccurred to me a few years ago, when I first started to extend mysensory appreciations and nervous system, that one day I shouldfind myself sitting in the living-room of a Belgravia apartmenttrying to inject myself with 'speed'; or that if by some freakyaccident such a bizarre experience had come my way I should wishto write about it. (Still less that my publisher would condonesuch an eccentric choice of subject.) But the relation of theindividual fettered to earth through addiction with theindividual who knows the light of Brahma or Jesus or Buddha,resembles that of the ant with the human being who crosses itspath: no matter how certain the ant is by instinct, it cannothelp itself when faced by problems which must appeartranscendental to its organism. Just so in the case of the addictwho attempts to solve the riddle of his own addition. From theangle of reason, it is insoluble. 'Don't you see?' says awell-intentioned friend. 'Just look at the mess you are making ofyour life ! Stop ! Understand ! … ' How can an addictunderstand ? And even if he wants to give it up, he cannot do so.The intentions he calls forth turn back, thoughts take flight, hecannot grasp the totality of the experience, he is afraid ofexploding into a million bits of protoplasm. So he continues. Andto ask a psychiatrist or the local vicar to cope with youraddiction is as senseless as to ask an Indian yogi to repair ajet aircraft. Today, neither psychiatry nor religion have much tooffer in the way of comfort or cure. Hugh, a friend of mine, also shooting speed,came round to see me. He was desperately seeking to reassurehimself that there was some meaning to his life and that thisdrug could help him find it. He had been up for the last threenights writing his 'Journal' in which he attempted to solve theriddle of the universe, seeing in his crazed eye previouslyinvisible relations and connections between words and worlds, andhimself as the sun-like source of boundless energy, ceaselesslygiving, ceaselessly pouring out words without hindrance orresistance. He showed me a few pages from his never-endingwork-in-progress … 'Aquamarine light smoke the slow drift and eddy of youth in blue jeans and a painted face—sounds like chandeliers drip glitter and tinkle chime pagodas—Pont Street and Sunny South Ken sweet sounds of Donovan on a pyramid of people spotlit in a flurry of congas—the black saint dressed in tribal white moans blues and mike yells lights hurt by the finger gleams of lunatic heads creating a collage of movement—HEY BABY WHAT IS THIS ?—it happens in murmurs and purple planes of light in mauve rhythms in slow syncopated tinsel quivers and glitters in their eyes—blond hair—stripes and fragrance Drugs, man ? Sure Likewise … It all made coherent sense to me when he read italoud, but I include it now as an illustration really of therandom processes of thought which occur in states of methedrinenarcosis. It was also fortunate for Hugh's reputation that, aspopular prejudice against speed began to grow—and the lawbegan to take cognizance of that prejudice—Hugh was steadilybeing weaned from his habit by the undemonstrative, patient andassiduous attentions of his girlfriend. In my case, three events occurred to shake me outof any feelings of indifference. The first was a telephone callfrom Texas telling me that Leary had been found guilty oftransporting three ounces of marijuana across the Laredo-Mexicanborder as well as failing to pay taxes on it and had been fined$40,000 and given the maximum sentence of thirty years in jail.'That s the same what Prometheus got,' the lawyer added, somewhatcasually. The second was a half-page advertisement in theLondon Evening Standard: 'LSD—THE DRUG THAT COULD THREATEN LONDON. Just for kicks, some famous artists, pop stars, and debs are "taking a trip" on LSD—one of the most powerful and dangerous drugs known to man. It produces hallucinations. It can cause temporary insanity. Kicks like this may be bought at the appalling cost of psychotic illness or even suicide. It is banned in America and elsewhere—but is still available in London, quite legally. Still more appalling—just half an ounce of LSD could knock out London. Socially, the stuff is dynamite. London Life magazine has investigated LSD fully and has uncovered a social peril of magnitude which it believes demands immediate legislation … to stop the spread of a cult which could bring mental lethargy and chaos. London Life reporters have also traced the man who calls himself Mr. LSD. He has given them an astonishing series of interviews. Read all about him, and about LSD, in this week's London Life.' Mr. LSD was of course our President, DesmondO'Brien, and believe it or not—the reporter was Hugh, whosemind, as I have already indicated, was racing ahead of itselfinto the higher realms of associative paranoia due to methedrinepoisoning. When I telephoned Hugh about all of this, he said thathe had been so stoned that he had told the story of what wasgoing on at the World Psychedelic Centre to the London Lifeeditor who was, as it happened, the reporter who first broke theProfumo-Keeler scandal. 'This thing is bigger than the Keelerstory,' he had told Hugh. But of course it was too late for me todo anything. There were even advertisements ontelevision—spirals of colour in and out of focus and a voicesaying 'LSD—the drug that could turn on London. Read theexclusive story in next week's London Life.' And the third and final straw was an article in theSunday tabloid, The People, that was headed in one-inchlettering. 'THE MEN BEHIND LSD—THE DRUG THAT IS MENACING YOUNG LIVES.... The drug is LSD-25—Lysergic Acid diethylamide. It is by far the most dangerous drug ever to become easily obtainable on the black market. LSD, which is said to give "visions of heaven and hell" is used legitimately by psychiatrists to produce carefully controlled hallucinations. In the wrong hands, the hallucinations it produces can lead to utter irresponsibility, disregard for personal safety and suicidal tendencies. IT IS, IN FACT, A KILLER DRUG. We have obtained evidence of "LSD parties" being held in London. We have discovered an alarming group of people who are openly and blatantly spreading the irresponsible use of this terrible drug. These men run what they call the Psychedelic Centre. It has operated from a number of addresses, including one in St. James's Street, and a flat in Pont Street, Chelsea. Amongst the Centre's activities is the publication of a handbook called A Psychedelic Manual. This lists recommended doses of LSD and other drugs and antidotes, and contains a treatise on drug-induced hallucinations and other "benefits". The manual gives various reasons for the use of drugs such as LSD. These include: "For personal power … for … fun …for sensuous enjoyment … " The manual which is written by "B. Goldstein", says the taking of LSD and similar drugs offers "a release from our conditionings" and "senses become more acute". Recommending group sessions of drug-taking, the writer says: "A person should approach the experience with love and trust in the company of those he trusts." "A psychedelic experience lasts normally from eight to sixteen hours … but the results may last from several days to several months. "The voyager should set aside at least two days for the experience itself." This is irresponsible, dangerous gibberish. The Centre was deserted and in a state of considerable chaos when our investigators gained entry on Thursday. There were used hypodermic syringes, empty drug ampoules and a variety of pills. Among the litter of papers were dozens of phone numbers, some of them of well-known show-business stars and personalities.' A 'paranoid', according to Bill Burroughs, issomeone who has some idea of what is really going on. In thissense you could say that I was a 'paranoid'. I had read thenewspapers and realised that my time was up, that the policewould now be on to me, so I split London for the country, thoughwith little or no idea of where I should go or what I would do. I rented a car through Hertz and set off for theNorth, to Durham to be exact, arriving there late one evening,and very, very stoned indeed. I still had several dozen ampoulesof methedrine, about two ounces of hashish and a similar quantityof good grass. I spent a couple of days in Durham retracingfamiliar places of my early childhood, visiting family andgenerally grooving around. London seemed a memory only as Iwandered the narrow streets and alleyways surrounding theCathedral, a place that had become somehow unreal in myimagination, a place I did not wish to return to. But in myparanoid state (one of the real dangers of modern life), I beganto suspect that the Durham police were on my heels, so I left assuddenly as I came, this time for Yorkshire and the open moors. For the next three days I just drove and drove anddrove, staying at country hotels and leaving early in themorning. I think I must have clocked up 2000 miles since leavingLondon. My drug intake had also increased, so much so that therewere times I had to park the car because I could not see theroad—my vision was blurred and distorted, and I haddifficulty remembering how to change the gears or which pedal wasthe brake and which was the clutch. My paranoia level alsoincreased and to such a degree that I thought I was beingfollowed by the police (such are the delusions of the advancedmethedrine-taker, who sees danger even in shadow). But the mostamazing experience occurred on the fourth night. I was cruisingthrough the lanes and by-ways of the Lake District in the earlyhours; there was no traffic on the roads and the countryside wasstill and motionless, when, suddenly, the mirror lit up and Iexperienced a sort of panic. Police. It could only be the policeat this time of the night, and they had somehow got on to me. Iimmediately accelerated and sped through the lanes like anexpress train, swerving round corners, darting through emptyvillages … but still the light in the mirror. I could notshake my pursuer, probably a cop specially trained at the PoliceDriving School, I reflected. Faster and faster I sped. And stillthe light in the mirror. Sheer panic. I was trembling all over.Terror gripped my soul. I was like an animal being chased by apack of dogs, with no hole to dive into. Then I saw an openfarmyard, and turning into it, I drove through the potted yarduntil I came to a narrow path overgrown with grass. But it wasstraight and somehow I managed to keep on the path. I must havedriven three or four miles along this bumpy grassy path when theheadlights picked up a gate blocking the path, and for a moment Iwas tempted to accelerate and smash my way through it, as theyseem to be able to do in the cheaper American movies. But Istopped, and very fortunately so, because when I got out of thecar to open this 'gate' I discovered that it was a barrier fencewith a drop of about 100 feet to a river below. And that the'path' was not a path at all but a disused railway track with therailway lines removed. My next discovery was equallysurprising—the 'light' I had been picking up in my mirrorand which I had believed was the light beam of a pursuitpolice-car was only the reflection of a full moon ! I was beingchased by the moon. And it was this extraordinary hallucinationthat brought me back to some kind of sanity again, and I slowlybacked my way to the farmyard and on to the road again, where Iparked the car and fell asleep, thankful that I had had such alucky escape from certain death. At dawn, when my head was a little clearer, Idecided that I had had enough of this fantasy existence and, at aleisurely speed, drove back to London and to my flat in PontStreet. Strange! Back in the face of this flaming world I amreminded of the serenity of the Buddha. And my mad car ride waslike a dream, induced by all the drugs; I had been to hell, butthe flames had done me no damage; they were as harmless asshadows. … A new dawn breaks. Once more, as on thefirst day of creation, I am born. The laughing moon, insecure andpale, hurries away from the flaming sun in a sweeping curve. Thesilver has changed into a dull red. The black background whichbut a few hours ago threatened to absorb me, reveals itself nowas a grey crust of dross. And I am back in reality once more. Athought strikes me: must addicts all contend with a nisus toself-destruction ? In my case, it is only bad temper that keepsme going … the blessing of Siva. Bom! Chapter 7 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-36IA087-000632-B033-61http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065842 text/html 42292HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:58:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:27:34 GMTContent-length: 42073 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 7 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER SEVEN THE NEW HERESY Six accused in Chelsea drugs case 'Arrested at a flat in Pont Streets Chelsea, yesterday evening, an artist, writer, physician, company director and an art dealer and his wife were each remanded on �100 bail until March 18 at Marlborough Street today. All were charged with unauthorised possession of cannabis sativa (Indian Hemp). They are: Joseph Chase Hunt Mellen, 25, writer; John Laurence Doyle, 29, art director; and Mrs Monica Doyle, 23, all of Pont Street; Sheldon Cholst, 41, American physician and author of Pembridge Square, Bayswater; Mark Anthony Warman, 21, company director, of Bywater Street, Chelsea; and Michael John Hollingshead, 34, artist, and occupier of the flat, who was also accused of permitting it to be used for smoking cannabis.' Being busted is like going bald. By the time yourealise it is happening it is too late to do very much about it.So one tries to minimise the consequences as best one can, thoughof course the damage is already done. Later, perhaps, it may evenbecome one of those stories that, suitably edited, you tellagainst yourself… No one was particularly surprised when the policeraided my flat. The place was a centre for all kinds ofpsychedelic experimentation, and it was only a matter of timebefore someone complained or turned me in. There had been anumber of 'incidents' surrounding the history of this flat, suchas a party attended by some eighty guests who got accidentallyturned on via a spiked fruit-and-wine punch, amongst whom weresome police spies masquerading as hippies. There was also theproblem of noise since the speakers were seldom off, alwaysplaying at full volume. Yet despite all this, I observed thescene with complete indifference; I was in any case unable orunwilling to do very much about it. It was an oversight I was to'learn to regret', as the saying goes. Indeed, yes, it was, for Ihad not expected anything quite so serious as it subsequently allturned out. I think this was due in part to the fact that Learyhimself had been busted in Laredo, Texas, only a short timebefore the police in London got after me. Tim had been passingthrough Laredo on his way to Mexico with his daughter, Susan, andhis son, Jackie, and Susan had a small stash of grass hidden inher brassiere, which the American customs found. Tim did the onlything a parent could do under such circumstances, he admittedthat the grass was his and that he knew where it had been hidden.The Texan judge sentenced him to thirty years' imprisonment. AndSusan got off. The American Establishment had got their man. But this left me in a somewhat difficult situationin London, for the plan had been that Tim would join me beforeEaster for a big Psychedelic Rally, possibly even at the AlbertHall, with pop musicians, poets and members of the Britishunderground taking part. I had come on ahead to set it up, and,like a juggler, I had several things suspended in mid-air at anyone time in the sure knowledge that when Tim came he would beable to act as my 'apologist' and catch them. Now that he wasunable to leave America, l suddenly found everything tumblingabout my head. My world had come crashing down and I was unableor strangely unwilling to do much about it. I simply let eventstake their course, that's all. It was difficult to explain any of this to eitherthe judge or the jury. The 'politics of ecstasy' was a completelyforeign world to them, and one moreover they seemed to equatewith drug-taking of the very worst kind. l had also violated thelaw. I was now liable for a penalty of ten years' imprisonmentand a fine of �1000. Yet despite the seriousness of the charges and thefact that I would almost certainly be found guilty, I treated thewhole matter as an exercise in breathtaking intellectualnegligence. It seemed to me that the whole purpose of the Britishlegal system, with its roles and rules and rituals, is toconvince you that, by its gravity and seriousness, it knowsbetter than you do. And it was through this insight that Idecided to defend myself rather than have a barrister do it. I had also taken some LSD before arriving at court,which enhanced the unreality of the scene, myself high in thewitness box on a charge of getting high, the judge in his robesand wig, the jury banked in rows like eggs, a gallery filled withplain and faceless men, and I saw myself as an actor in aB-movie. There was one exchange I remember; it was during mycross-examination of a Detective Sgt. Dalton of the London FlyingSquad, who had arrested me in the first place. The case had begunto drag a little. The witnesses—for theprosecution—were uniformly serious in their evidence. Theyall made me look like some kind of horrible pervert who tooknon-prescription drugs as for themselves it would be, say, whiskyor beer. The scene had become 'heavy'. Now that Dalton was in thewitness-box, I could try to lighten the proceedings a little, andaddressing myself to him, I asked him to tell the court what hehad done when he first entered the bathroom, where the marijuanahad been found. 'I went over to the toilet-bowl,' he replied. 'Very good, you went over to the toilet-bowl,' Isaid, carefully lowering my voice so that it was almost awhisper. 'And did you see anything in there ?' 'Excuse me, but I didn't hear the question.' I raised my voice slightly: 'Did you see anythingwhen you looked into the toilet-bowl ?' 'Yes. I saw some leaves of what I believed to be cannabissativa floating on the surface of the water.' 'So,' I said, my voice in rising crescendo, 'yousaw some grass floating about in the toilet. Well, isn't that agood place for it, then—in the toilet-bowl?' I thought it was a good joke, and inoffensive, butI was told later that it had probably cost me an extra six monthson my sentence. As it was, I was unprepared for thesentence—twenty-one months for less than an ounce of hashishand a negligible amount of marijuana. It seemed altogether toolong and I must have just stood in the dock in utter amazement,for the next thing I knew was being grabbed on both sides andpropelled down the staircase to the cells under the court, thereto await the Black Maria or something, to take me and the othernew prisoners to Wormwood Scrubs. When my name was finally called, I was brought outand handcuffed and put in the van. And it was a strange sensationto observe London through the grillwork and glass, handcuffed,and coming down off a trip. It also happened that the vanactually drove past my old flat, and I wondered how I would havereacted if a few weeks earlier someone had said that one day Iwould be passing the place under the exact circumstance Idescribed. It was all very curious. Soon enough, however, we reached the Scrubs, a hugemausoleum of a place that could have been built as a Victorianfactory, with high walls and gothic towers, dustbin-dirty in theway of railway stations, and rife with the smell of incontinenceof urine. I felt as if I were entering the bowels of the earth. Idon't think that I have ever been quite so depressed as I was forthose first few minutes in prison. My soul turned grey, if such athing is possible. I felt drained of all light in thisnetherworld place in which it was impossible to imagine howanything had ever been young or beautiful. My sensibilitiessimply turned themselves off in the face of this monstrousuniverse. I could have been a stick a stone, a zombie, for herethere were none who could emphathise with my plight. But after a night's sleep, my heart began torevive, and my curiosity about my unknown daily routine got theadrenalin working. There was also the novelty of getting into mynew prison clothes—a striped shirt with a black tie, socksabout quarter of an inch thick, a pair of trousers andmilitary-style jacket made of thick material, and a pair of heavymarching boots. Nothing fitted properly, of course. Oh, I feltlike a walking scarecrow, which was probably the intentionanyway. I had no sooner got dressed than the landingofficer unlocked the cell and told me to go down and getbreakfast. The noise in the hall and passageways was quitedeafening, redolent with the sound of male voices, hoots oflaughter, crashing metal and bells. It was like living inside ahuge alarm-clock, I reflected, as I made my way down the narrowiron staircase to the main hall. Prison is one huge sensorydeprivation tank, an incredible human vault that echoes to theleast footfall. It is a way of life to suit a sort of monk. Breakfast consisted of a plate of watery porridge,a couple of table-spoon measures of milk, a dry sausage, as muchbread and marge as you could eat, and a mug of tea. After breakfast, I was told to go back to my cellwhere I would be called during the morning to see the Governorwho liked to meet each new charge. He would also allocate mywork. My cell was not very big. The walls had beenpainted a sickening pink, the colour of corned beef, and the celldoor was a bright green. Light entered through a barred windowrecessed some two feet into the wall. There was a table, a plankhard chair, a bed, and a metal chamberpot. To look out of thewindow you had to stand on the table, and it was possible todiscern in the distance beyond the high prison wall the contoursof the city, to look out nostalgically at all the lightness ofheart and foot going past in the park, never knowing for surewhether you would ever rejoin it. This is something of what itmeans to be a prisoner. The morning passed with monstrous slowness. Aprison sentence is a certain fixed period of enforced idleness.Things—I was to learn—have their own momentum ofrealizability. You can rush your life on the outside by thescruff of its neck, but in prison everything happens according tothe rules. It is a permanent 'working to rule', you might say;rushing anything would be like trying to rush a stalactite. Soone needs to be philosophical about the slowness of it all anddevelop the necessary mental and physical yogas to overcomeinertia, impatience and boredom. It's not so strange this worldas so different. Like most new inmates, I suppose, I went throughquite a few mental changes during those first few days. They wereappallingly difficult. My head was ambushed by depression andstagnation, and it seemed that I was beset with all sorts ofcares, existential longings to be free again, angst. I think thatto be locked up without freedom—that is, without access tolove—is something you have to adapt yourself to, for mancannot live by bread alone. We like to think it. And of course weshould, but we really cannot, you know. Individual human lifeneeds the closeness of another body, a warm hand or look, theoccasional kiss and merging with another. The inhuman regimen ofprison existences does not allow for spontaneity with joy, butdictates a certain style of living in a prescribed manner, alwaysto form, always to rules accepted as facts. It is indeed anexperience of so-called reality. I continue to be amazed thatthere are so few suicides, singly or even on mass scale, areaction to the tyranny of a system that allows bodies of men topress on the bodies of men, and usually for so little reason. Butwith patience and the passing of time, the mind-body adaptsitself, trying as best it can to keep a little flame of humanityalight in the dark, womanless silence, and later, even achieve asimple affirmation of the world. You must or otherwise you woulddie. So you live on in the hopefulness that once beyond thesewalls your heart will quicken and your tongue renew. I thinkprison is really dedicated to the idea that we should think ofways in which to bring each other down not up, and is thus theantithesis of the aims of our new 'psychedelic revolution'. When the Governor finally sent for me, I was takento the main administration block, and told to remove my shoesbefore entering his office. I saw the reason for this when I wentinside. The Governor sat at a desk about fourteen feet from whereI stood. We were separated by glossy linoleum as smooth and asslippery as an ice-rick. It seemed that inmates were sometimes inthe habit of reacting violently to the Governor's decisions, andthis (almost) foolproof method protected him from assault. He hadof course nothing to fear in that way from myself. The Chief Prison Officer gave my number and name tothe Governor, who looked up and asked me if I had ever been toprison before. 'No, but I've worked in a prison.' 'In thiscountry ?' the Governor asked. 'No, in America, at a maximum security prison. Iwas with a group of people from Harvard who used to run LSDsessions for some of the inmates—revelation followed byreformation, that sort of stuff.' 'Yes, I see. Now, it seems you were charged withpossession of dangerous drugs. And that is why you are here now.It seems a pity that someone like yourself who is obviouslywell-educated and literate should find consolation in drugs. Howis such a thing possible ?' Like the New York call-girl from Radcliff who isasked how a nice girl like her came to be in such an occupation,I replied 'Just lucky, I guess.' The Governor also expressed concern about what workto give me. He finally settled on the steam laundry. And I wastold to report there after lunch. The chief laundry officer was an amiable sort ofman who had been at the same job for twenty years. He began byshowing me around the laundry. There were huge steam rollers andpresses, washers and dryers, ironing rooms and drying rooms, andabout thirty prisoners variously engaged in keeping the flow oflaundry moving at maximum speed, or so it seemed at the time. Hethen showed me what I had to do. My job carried 'a lot ofresponsibility'; I was on the reception desk, and I had to checkin and check out all the laundry and to see that what came inalso tallied with what went out. A simple enough job on the faceof it. There was one snag, however: the nurses' laundry. It couldhappen, if one didn't watch the articles like a hawk, thatbrassieres and panties simply 'disappeared' at some stage on theway through the various laundry processes. And a number of sucharticles often found their way back to the cells. My main job,the officer told me, was to see that this didn't happen. Therewas also a complicated system of record keeping, which wasexplained to me, but my brain couldn't embrace all the detailsand I simply 'tuned out' halfway through the hour-long laboriousexplanation by the officer. The result was that by the end of thethird day the laundry was besieged with complaints, particularlyfrom the nurses' home, which reported nearly a dozen pantiesmissing and several brassieres. There were also complaints fromthe long-term prisoners, for whom clean laundry was one of thefew remaining pleasures, who were understandably impatient thattheir bespoke shirts or specially fitted trousers had not beenreturned. I was transferred to the ironing room and told toiron shirts. Here again I seemed to get things cocked or somehownot quite right. And this time the complaints were that shirtswere coming back from the laundry with big burn marks, missingbuttons, and twisted collars. Once more I found myself standing shoeless beforethe Governor. I had not been charged with negligence orinsubordination, but the implication was there. I was given a'second chance' and transferred to the book bindery, which isconsidered something of a plum of a job at Wormwood Scrubs. The book bindery is run by a civilian, and it isquiet. In appearance it resembled a Dickensian solicitor'soffice, with high tables and chairs and strained faces buried inpiles of books. I was put in the paperback section to be trainedin the craft of hard-cover binding, a job by which none would beparticularly impressed but requiring a certain amount of manualskill, nonetheless. The civilian supervisor told me in thisconnection that book-binding required three things: 'The first isdexterity, the second is dexterity, and the third is dexterity.' I was glad to be away from the old steam laundryand was quite enjoying my new job when another one of thoseunwritten minor tragedies occurred. I had left a foot-high stackof books in the press; the new covers had been glued on and theidea was to let them dry overnight. This was the culmination of aweek's work, and I was naturally excited to see how the finishedproducts looked in the morning. The civilian supervisor came overwith me to unscrew the press and see what kind of a job I hadmade on my first assignment. He began to turn the handle; and hisdismay was equal to my own, for all the bindings had stucktogether with the result that the books rose as one, inconcertina fashion, and then crashed on to the floor, sendingloose pages all over the place. The civilian supervisor stood fora moment, his mouth wide open, and then said very, very slowly,and with great pathos: 'Good God! Good God! Good God!' (I waswith him on the first two all right, but he lost me on thethird.) That was the end of my stay in the book bindery. Acomplaint was made to the Governor who immediately despatched meto a foetid factory building to sew mailbags, the finaldegradation, no doubt, for after mailbags there is nowherefurther down the work rung to go, except possibly being a waiterin the Prison Officer's Mess. With the slowness of the Himalayan range, itseemed, my average uneventful days passed into routinely ordinaryweeks. There had been quite a bit of news about hash and LSD inthe daily Press, mainly about people getting busted, so that bythe beginning of the summer quite a few of my friends were insidewith me—Nick Douglas, the painter; Hugh Blackwell, thewriter; Hugh Lansdowne, the poet; Pat Ryan, the musician; RobertFraser, the art gallery owner; and John Hopkins, one of theeditors of the International Times of whom ChristopherLogue wrote in his poem: 'Mistakes like mine occur Bored with the cosy spiral of my galaxy I went off limits And time slammed around me like The door into a pillar box.' And there were to be several hundred more'psychedelic' inmates in British jails before the year was out. The Press was having a field-day on the topic. Potand LSD were the new twin menaces of our Western kind of society,evils which had to be stamped out. 'At least 100,000 more Britonswill take psychedelic drugs this year in spite of new provisionsin the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1966,' said one headline, and wenton to say that this figure was the result of twelve-monthnationwide survey conducted by a Dr. Jim Marle, the Atlanticpsychiatrist, at a meeting in Oxford. In fact this was more likely to happen becauseof the provisions in the Dangerous Drugs Act. Restrict anythingand immediately people want it. There must be thousands ofreaders now buying grass and LSD who would never have done so butfor articles of this kind; and quite a few I daresay now believethat LSD is compulsory, like vaccination or fluoridation Besides,total prohibition has never worked. Yet drugs is a subject that can never come underdiscussion without so much emotion that rational argument becomesobscured if not totally banished. The Press, and to some extentpublishers as well, seem to delight in touching people where theyare most vulnerable—producing articles and books whichthreaten the incredulous and the superstitious. Whenever one ofthese articles or books appears in public they set off a chain ofarticles or letters, each more heated than the last. This ispossible because the problems concerned with drugs are notsusceptible to single convulsive solutions. It is as though wherequestions of morality come in that detachment quits the scene. And often the Press would slant a particular pieceso that not even an idiot reader could miss the point. Oneexample comes to mind, also from this period in the mid-sixties.It is from the now defunct Daily Sketch. It showed aphotograph of Leary, smart and serious in a suit, deep inconversation with the reporter. The article was headed 'I'll TurnOn Britain, says the leader of the Drug Church'. And Leary isthen quoted as saying: 'I don't imagine I shall run into as muchopposition for my religion in Britain as I have here in theStates. The British are more tolerant and have a sense ofhumour.' The question of drugs inside the prison was also amatter of some concern, for as the 'psychedelic' inmatepopulation rose, and as other prisoners became cognizant of thephenomena LSD and hashish, there was a corresponding increase intheir availability. Many ways were used to get psychedelics in,from felt-tip pens stuffed with Red Lebanese to bunches of grapesspiked with acid. I myself had a reasonably steady supply ofhashish, and a stash of LSD which Richard Alpert and Owsley hadleft during their visit to the Scrubs. There was very little ifanything the prison authorities could do to stop it. Naturally, I would often be approached by otherprisoners to tell them something about these drugs, or theysimply wanted to score. And as a general rule, I would share anyhashish I might happen to have, whilst refusing to give them LSD,that is, unless they were already pretty experienced in using it.There were exceptions, however, most notable of these beingGeorge Blake, the spy then serving a sentence of forty-threeyears' imprisonment. He had served about five years of hissentence when I met him. And it was not long before we werehaving long discussions about 'turning on'; and he said he wouldlike to try it. We decided to run a session on the Sunday, when thecells in 'D' Hall are left open all afternoon and one can roam atwill about the landings without supervision. Blake's cell was onthe ground floor, comfortably furnished with a carpet andcurtains, a bookcase stuffed with books and, on the table, ashort-wave radio, which he had somehow acquired in order 'tolisten to Arabic language stations'. Nothing much happened for the first hour. But asthe session developed, Blake became quite tense, a nervous strainverging on complete paranoia, and seemed to believe that I was aSecret Service agent who had administered him a truth serum. Hetold me that I'd be killed within the next twenty-four hours, andmade other similar threats. I felt quite baffled as to what todo, so I did nothing, merely listened as he went through hisflip-out, and tried to reassure him by means of treating thewhole affair as if it were all somehow something quite ordinarystrewn into the everyday, though secretly I was quite alarmed incase a prison officer happened to look in and hear what was goingon. He finally settled down, however, and the lastcouple of hours were spent in deep thought and quiet reflectionconcerning his future existence, and he said he might not be ableto stand up to many more years of incarceration. I suggestedthey'd probably let him out on parole in a few years' time, buthe doubted this. He felt that he was in prison as a livingwarning to others who might be similarly tempted. But I said thatwas an old clich�, and had never worked anyway. As it happened, Blake escaped only a few weeksafter the session, by scaling the wall one Sunday afternoon bymeans of a rope-ladder thrown over by an accomplice, who had beenin touch with him via the short-wave radio in his cell. When Ilast heard about him, he was living in Moscow and working for theCairo Section of the Russian Foreign Ministry. I had been at Wormwood Scrubs for about fourmonths when I was asked about going to an 'open prison' atLeyhill, near the English-Welsh border. I said I'd prefer thecountry. And shortly after this interview, I was transferred toLeyhill Prison. Leyhill was in some sense a reprieve from thedouble-dense monotony of a 'closed' prison like the Scrubs, whereno-life and all-life hang precariously together there. Here inthe country one could not only see the beauty of the naturallandscape but also feel it, and I am eternally grateful towhoever it was who got me there. Upon arrival, I was taken to the kitchen and givena dinner of fried eggs, bacon, beans and chips, freshly bakedrolls and butter some cake, and coffee. The Duty Officer told methat there were some 450 inmates and two night guards, that therewere no walls or fences surrounding the prison, and that anyonewas free to escape at any time. I was then shown into a dormitory of about fourteenpeople and given a bed and bedside locker. Pat Ryan, themusician, occupied the bed on my right, and Jerry, a singer andlyricist, the one on my left. They had both been busted forhashish. A couple of others in the dormitory had also beensimilarly busted for possession, and not a few of the ordinaryprisoners were starting to smoke. I was called to meet the Governor the next morning.He was an amiable, elderly Scot, who managed our meeting verywell. He told me that this was his retirement year, that his wifewas dying of cancer, and that he was a lover of Robert Burns andElla Wheeler Wilcox. He suggested that I join both the bridgeclub and the debating club, help start a flying club, and applyfor a course in fish ecology at nearby Bristol University, all ofwhich I subsequently did. My first job at Leyhill was as a waiter at thePrison Officers' Training School, which was sited in the formerEarl of Ducy's estate and house, next to the prison. It was agood job as it meant in effect that one ate civilian food, whichmade quite a change from the plain prison fare. And the work wasfar from boring. I would wait on about four tables at which wouldbe four trainee prison officers attending their eight-weekinduction course. I was probably the first live prisoner they hadever seen. And it was interesting to observe their reactions. My initial approach would never vary. I'd meet themat the table on their first day, extend my hand to each one, andwelcome them individually. By the end of the second day they allknew why I was in prison. And by the end of the week, ourconversation was generally about ways to get high. Some of thegroups were quite generous, and would slip me the occasionalbottle of wine. Some let me use their billiard room. Some evensaid they were looking forward to meeting me again at some pointin my future, when they would see that I got an easy deal. Theywere a pleasant crowd, by and large, mostly respectableworking-class, who needed some kind of job with tenure in orderto keep their game going. It was a job. It gave financialsecurity. It made their respectability possible. Life at Leyhill had a particular flavour all itsown. Physically, the layout was perfect. There was a huge sportsground with cricket, rugby, and soccer pitches, running tracks,and places to fly your kite. The Ducy estate contained anarboretum filled with trees and bushes from every part of theworld, a constant delight to both mind and eye. There was onetree in particular I was attracted to. It was Japanese and, Ibelieve, magical, whose flowering one spring turned me on to theplant kingdom. The exquisite beauty of this tree was like awindow in which you could see the existence of this Other World.And it was a point of routine for me to spend most of my lunchtime smoking praises for Shankar in the half-lotus position underthe boughs of this holy tree. One of the highlights of my stay at Leyhill was theproduction of a physio-psychedelic musical called ParadiseLost — The True Story, which had been sent to me by JoeyMellen, friend and former associate from Pont Street, who haddecided that the best way to stay permanently 'high' was bytrepanning a hole in his head the size of the old sixpenny piece.The play was a strange mixture of Milton and Mellen, with lyricsin praise of trepanation or 'getting the hole'. I reproduce oneof the songs below, called 'The Great Brain Robbery': THE GREAT BRAIN ROBBERY By Joe Mellen Up stood the ape—down came the drag— The beginning of the blues— Can't talk your way out of it adult Daddy there's a drag on you. Oh adult the mistakes you make You ignorant little man Adult oh the liberties you take You mistaken little man. Between your meals you make your deals And send your sons to war Talk all you want but don't you know We've heard it all before. Adult will you never see All you want is to agree— The lies you tell to save your face Constitute your grave disgrace. You're losing and you think you're gaining It's just your ego needs maintaining Adult d'you know what is true ? The drag is bearing down on you. What you're trying to regain Is blood belonging to your brain Will you know before you're dead That paradise is in your head ? You was robbed—so you made belief— It's gravity—we've caught the thief All you prayers won't save your soul Adult you need a hole. Another song, called 'Brainbloodvolume', has beenset to music by Julie Felix in her furthest-out number yet. BRAINBLOODVOLUME It was lost and now it's found again Don't drive it underground again Brainbloodvolume— They call it love and heaven above Some take it for the hell of it That's sugarlack— Brainbloodvolume— It's you it's me it's good Understood ? Brainbloodvolume. It's what the poets have written for Painters have painted for Priests have prayed for Prisons have filled for Soldiers have killed for Brainbloodvolume. It's what the pipes have been smoked for Witches have been cloaked for Headstands have been done for The whole thing was begun for It's what the world was made for The price must be paid for— Brainbloodvolume. It was necessary to approach the Governor to obtainpermission to stage it in the prison theatre, perhaps even beforean invited audience of students from Bath and Bristoluniversities. I decided to plug the Milton section at the expenseof the rest, feeling that the Governor would be more sympatheticto it than the modern additions. The Governor was most attentive during my outlineof the play, and wrote a memo to the Prison Chaplain that heshould consider staging it one Sunday in the Church. Accordingly, I met with the Chaplain, a nice,easygoing man with a strong sense of Christian vocation, who hadbeen at Leyhill for four years and had a good understanding ofprisoner psychology. I introduced the matter by suggesting thatthere is a mystery in the story of Paradise Lost that liesat the heart of all our lives. And this is older than that ofOedipus. In the play there are overtones of the great fourstories of the world's various religions, and specifically of theHebrew-Christian tradition. Guilt and Sin are pretty powerfulthemes of the Christian Church, and any attempt to understandtheir place in the world and their relevance to contemporary manwas, I assured him, a matter of concern to today's criminal. Onebegins by depicting man as some kind of "hairless talkingape" who is unable to benefit from the possibilities of hisown existence, who then has a revelation, in this instance,through piercing a small hole through his skull to increase thevolume of blood to the brain. The Chaplain looked puzzled. 'But what has ParadiseLost got to do with making holes in your head ?' he asked. 'Well, the theory is that by increasing the amountof blood to the brain the surface of thecapillaries—millions of them—increases, which in turnrelease glucose from the blood into the brain cells. This is thephysiological secret of "getting high". So the"hairless talking ape" who does not know that his"fall" (loss of brainbloodvolume) has a purelyphysiological cause. Thus he lives out his simple life or deathwithout ever realising his golden future, truly the parable offallen man.' 'It sounds all rather godless to me.' 'Well, the modern writer uses myths and metaphorsin order to get his message across. And in the case of this play,he has found modern counterparts to the story of the Fall inpoetry, science, and music to express an awareness that we allhave, however obscurely, that there are vast capacities in manwhich he continually fails to realise. The message of the play issimple. If things are not right inside yourself, then changethem. The evolutionary leap in being from monkey to man produceda new kind of animal, a creative animal, an animal withimagination, who could devise ways to regain the lost paradise oflost brainbloodvolume.' 'But why trepanation ?' the Chaplain persisted. 'Because trepanation offers a solution on amanageable scale.' 'A solution to what ?' 'A solution to the problem of staying"high".' 'But what has staying "high" got to dowith putting on a musical play in my Church?' 'The Governor and I thought that because of thereligious themes you might… ' 'But I find the whole thing utterly"godless", and I could never allow such a production tobe shown. And now that you have explained it to me, I doubtwhether I could allow it to be performed in the theatre.Prisoners are very suggestible you know, and we could not riskwholesale trepanations. It is just what the Daily Expressare looking for. I really think, Hollingshead, that you ought toconcentrate instead on more practical plans for your own futurethan try to launch a social movement based on people puttingholes in their heads. Have you ever considered the profession ofthe church ?' 'I'm sorry you don't like the play. I thought youwould. What we are seeing today is merely the visible aspect of auniversal neurosis, and the Fall myths, in whatever language,illustrate humanity's unconscious awareness of human suffering,which is the failure of humanity which Paradise Lostsymbolises. God is simply a creative power which is part of humanlife in the Garden. A voice within man tells him that he can andshould regain the lost brainblood of childhood—shouldexercise some degree of control over his own consciousness, inother words, which is the message of the new developing religionsin the West. The problem facing the established Church is that ifman lived up to his full creative capacities, there would be noreligion.' We decided to go ahead anyway, and startedrehearsals. Hugh Landsdowne, a poet and magician, who had beenimprisoned for growing half an acre of marijuana at his farm inEssex, linked in the I Ching; and together we made a hugestroboscopic mandala with an electric motor we pinched from oneof the machines in the tailor's shop. The play was neverperformed in either the church or the theatre, due to themisunderstanding as to what the play was actually about; but itwas seen by most of the inmates at some point in its actualunfolding; and helped keep our minds off more dangerous matters. I tend to remember perhaps only the positive thingsabout my last year in prison. Yet in all honesty I cannot ridmyself of the thought that my life there might have been very,very different indeed. I think all of us carry around in ourheads some picture of how we imagine prison life to be, thoughdoubtless altogether impossible to identify in reality. Mine wasa superstitious mixture of Gestapo camps and what I had seen inAmerican movies. The reality is quite different; there is, forinstance, very little real fear of the intentions of the prisonauthorities, who tend to stick to a rule book that does notinclude physical brutality or torture or idiosyncratic sadism.There is also very little physical violence going on betweeninmates, though incidents happen from time to time, like anywhereelse. Man is only human after all. And violence is part of hishuman nature. And yet… the experience of prison is apainful one. It may be no more than an enduring slight headache,but it is always there, forever encroaching on your privateworld, an impersonal, indifferent environment in which you arephysically contained; and all for the greater public good. Prisonis a feeling, a subjective as well as a purely physical thing. Ithits directly at your sensations, but acting more like a dampenerthan an actual brake. It lowers by its sense of decay, itscorridors of refuse, its wasteland approach to fallen humanity.No wonder one feels saddened to observe how as our twentiethcentury develops so too does the machinery of incarceration andthe illegality of our various legal actions, who seek to condemneven the children who comprise our future brave generation. Prison is some kind of other place in which I wouldnever wish for anyone to have to live out their simple life ordeath. Chapter 8 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-37IA087-000632-B033-83http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065852 text/html 29367HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:58:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:27:18 GMTContent-length: 29148 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 8 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER EIGHT 'WHERE THE WILD THINGS ARE' Scandinavia 1967 'And when he came to the place where the wild things are they roared their terrible roars and gnashed their terrible teeth and rolled their terrible eyes and showed their terrible claws till Max said "BE STILL!" and tamed them with the magic trick of staring into all their yellow eyes without blinking once and they were frightened and called him the most wild thing of all and made him king of all wild things… ' (From a children's story by Maurice Sendak) My life has something of Peer Gynt's about it, moreintimate to me even than I am intimate to myself; just now Ihappened to hear Solveig's song on the radio; it quite got holdof me; to wait loyally a whole lifetime for someone… thekind of love that triumphs over the hostility of space and timeand separation: this is love. So it is not entirely without reason that it is toNorway my spirit will sometimes return, back, I suppose, to itsmythological roots and the magic landscape from which it sprang.For I am at heart a Northerner, most at home in my ScandinavianKingdoms of the snows; essentially a Tundra type. It had been a long, steamy pig of a summer inprison and I wanted to empty its bog breath out of my bones:Norway sounded like the one good place to be. It was thus with adelicious sense of escaping from the freedom of the cage that Isat down at the First Engineer's table on the M.S. Blenheimas she slowly broke anchor in the Tyne at the start of a two-dayvoyage to Oslo. This I had arranged.... Once more Proteus expandsacross the space of the North Sea, returning to a place wherethere is someone 'who loves him best of all', to the land wherethe trolls and the Solveigs live—to the Gudbrandsdal Valley,to be exact. A few days later I was sitting by myself in anoutfarm high on the upper reaches and timber line of Raynebergoverlooking Lake Mjoesa and the town of Lillehammer, where theair is as thin and as pure as Vichy water; and all sounds arepermanently sharp in the mountain stillness. Rock was now a feature of my landscape—and thetiny farm I rented sat plum in a nest of great rocks, and it waseasy to see why the old dalesman family left it for aState-provided modern apartment in the town. My window looked outover an untouched moor and the eye was drawn downwards downtousled slopes of ubiquitous bracken to the lake some 2500 feetbelow. There was a prehistoric feel about the place and Inow understood why it was this valley which Ibsen chose to setthe home of Peer Gynt, the universal wanderer, the exile in theheart of each one of us. Yet would a Himalayan Rishiunderstand Nordic gods (which the vision of these mountains quitenaturally created in my soul) were he to observe the landscape ofthis valley?—I think not; he would probably die of excessivecold. Yet I loved the place, especially at night, sittingby the open peis or fireplace, listening to the softlystirring firs outside, so silent in my solitary retreat. For mylife here had something of Advent about it—waiting andhoping and getting on with ordinary things. In certain moods I'doccupy my time translating Old Norse Sagas. I found this to be anexcellent aid to concentration. There is one text I particularlyremember, from Morkinskinna, a history of twelfth-centuryNorwegian kings, which was compiled by an Icelander in 1220; thetext is called 'Audun buys himself a white bear', which actuallyturned out to be something of a white elephant; the story isabout one Audun who, desiring to see the world, made thedangerous voyage from Iceland to Greenland; there he exchangedhis entire cargo for a single white bear. That is all. Nothingmore; it is an exquisite story, exquisitely told: and in the mindof the thirteenth-century narrator, Audun's behaviour in spendinghis cash like this was perfectly reasonable, for Greenland was animportant place at that time, and a white bear a greattreasure—like a white Cadillac might be today, somethingwhose price is simply our All and not a penny less. I also got to know a few people in the district andalso in Lillehammer itself, where I would go for my weeklyshopping. On one of these trips I met a Norwegian poet—whosename escapes me who invited me to attend a reading of 'Nordicpoets' which he had arranged at the local Folk High School, whenI could also read something myself if I so wished. A lot ofpeople from Oslo were going to be there. And Vesaas, thecelebrated author of The Ice Palace—by which Englishreviewers are not much impressed—had promised to attend. Thus it was, on the appointed day, at the appointedtime, and with due solemnity appropriate to the almostreverential sense of 'presence', if that is the right word for arather stiff atmosphere. It reminded me more of a meeting of KirkElders than any poetry-reading I had been to before. Absoluteseriousness is not without a dose of humour except in Norway,where it is absolutely serious that is, until the 'snaps' beginsto flow, when everyone seems to get very wild and something inthe structure of their thought completely snaps, as it were; itis a completely different psychophysical effect from that ofgetting stoned on hashish or marijuana. (A recent report by WHO,Geneva—'The Use of Cannabis' notes that 'Individuals whohave no taste for the cannabis experience per se—regardlessof moral or other considerations—are more apt to exhibit apreference of a controlled, structured, rational and secureapproach to life,' as it also suggested that alcohol is much moreclosely associated with crime, aggression, and violence than iscannabis.) At any rate, I had taken the precaution of smokingseveral joints on my way down the mountain, and arrived verystoned that is, 'quiet' and 'sensing'.... 'Those who enjoycannabis tend to prefer an unstructured and spontaneous style oflife, are relatively prone to take risks, value states of alteredconsciousness, and tend to seek such effects both through drugsand through other methods.' (Same WHO report). Soon the booze began to have its effect, and thefirst poet—from Sweden—was helped on to the stage,where he raged through his mother tongue like a prairie fire, hisbull voice crashing through our heads like fallingmasonry—and with about as many mixed metaphors in each lineas in my description of his reading. He finally collapsed in awave of laughter or tears, and disappeared backstage and was seenagain no more. Then followed a lady poet from Denmark, who read aseries of poems on the theme of Vietnam, and in the form ofimaginary letters from a Vietcong private to his mother inHaiphong, telling her about the effects on his mind of beingbombed from planes 'too high in the sky even to see'. And thishad a temporary sobering effect on the listeners, who had perhapsbecome aware, even if ever so faintly, that they were somehow, insome way, also a bit culpable. Three or four poets in quick succession. And thenit was my turn.... 'Cannabis users are most frequently young,male, unmarried, and exhibit some instability with respect toresidence, work, school and goals.' (Ibid)… I seatedmyself on the stage in the half-lotus position, lit two candles,which I put on either side of me, and asked that the hall lightsbe put out, which was done, though not without a bit of protestfrom members of a party from Oslo, who had, I gathered, beenwanting to dance on one of the large tables. There was a hush, finally. And into this silentspace I inserted, in the Danish, Timothy Leary'stranslation of Tao Sutra number fourteen from the Chineseclassic, the Tao Te Ching, which I reproduce here in itsmore familiar English form: 'Gazing … they do not see it they call it empty space. Listening … they do not hear it they call it silence or noise Groping … they do not grasp it they call it intangible But here … We … spin through it Electric … Silent … Subtle' And since it was the last poem of the evening, andsince Tarjaas Vesaas insisted only upon us speaking what for mewas the obscure dialect form of 'Nynorsk', I made my farewellsand silently…softly… I spun off into a crisp, clearnight of stars, gliding like a fish upstream, reaching Ravnebergjust as a new dawn was breaking. To the sounds of the clapper ofthe cattle bells swinging back and forth, moving in flow,regular, without stop or start so harmoniously held… After a few hours' quiet reflection, I realisedthat what had really upset me about the poetry-reading theevening before was an overheard remark following Ulla Ryum's'Vietnam poems'… 'Det tross alt er farlig aa leve i Norgeogsaa—hva med superhighwayene og alt, ikke?' ('Despite that,it is pretty dangerous living in Norway too—what with these"superhighways" coming along and everything.') From onepoint of view, the person was right but I could imagine therewere many in Vietnam who would gladly exchange the dangers ofNorwegian highways for the sort of life they had to contend withthere. But if I felt this strongly, why should I remain 'aloofwith Hermit Eye' ? Wasn't my situation just as much a 'cop-out'as for the indifferent majority—just living out our simplelife or death? Or in some Nietzschean sense, was not my life nowalso a kind of 'germinative regression', an attempt to return tomy roots ? I had taken to acid and later to myths and ancientstories to seek a formula that would turn the surrounding worldto dust and reveal the sought for paradise. 'For now I am homesick after my own kind: and these people touch me not.... ' I remember myself as an ancient hero, a wild man of the mountains, a guardian of the door, a paradox— To sing… of heroes… Now ? In this forgotten age ? of giant men ? No! —Yet I shall speak that our giant flies might listen and would know the glory that man is… IN THE BEGINNING, then were men men hard and tall, the warriors, who fought with man and beast, who knew the call of blood and fire, and whose swords cut paths to… but who shall hear this—here ? The paths, the paths! Immortal paths! Cuhulain rides his five fiery chariots across the firmament! Arthur and Lancelot in battle! The ground shakes! IN THE BEGINNING was blood and fire… And now ? The matterings of the civilised yet impotent conscience of modern society ? No. The sound a new-minted coin makes upon a concrete street ? No. Silence then ? Yes—silence. Heroes are dead! We buried them, and did the rites And they've long forgotten us. (by Kristof Konstanty Jastrzebski-Glinka) And thus one sits, day in, day out, in urn-likesilence, staring wearily into nothing—you can almost see thenothing. And yet in this nothing it was something to knowthat it's not enough to see the light; you have to market themessage. The meaning of silence is only the suspense of ourbreath before the storm and the stillness is nothing but theprelude to catastrophe… like a thunder-cloud in the processof materialisation, it is the tension of violence held in check.And do we notice ? Not a bit. We sail on in our aimless craftlulled in the cradle of all that is—that supremely ordinaryhuman condition of wakefulness which accepts, without reflection,the universe as we find it. We are the proverbial'sleepwalkers'… we experience without any awareness of themeaning of our experience of life; we are the monolithic mass whoact and speak like men asleep. We are as good as dead. And is acid to help us wake, or help us dream ? Itcan make us conscious of our own mental states as somehowdependent on the predispositions left by the world we experienceas an impersonal universe; the all too personal soul fashions itsown world in the imagining of dreams—the spirit serves aslight for itself: or worse, we somehow see the visionary delightof the ego in its own spirituality, its purity, as if it wereitself absolute and infinite.... 'Behold! from the travails of mysoul, before me, above me, between heaven and earth, finite andyet all penetrating, I see a tremendous figure growing out of thenothingness of my being, the figure of One whose materialisationis the Spirit Mercurius !'—Or is it 'Aquarius' ?—thereis such a pantheon of gods in the alchemic line. But about the state of conscious wakefulness,or prajna (wisdom), the Vedas tell us that it is a divineattribute in one who has become aware of the One and is full ofBliss, Bliss, Bliss.... 'In conscious wakefulness there is noneed or greet, no desire, no thought, and all confusions arefused into a blessed peace; only knowledge and Bliss remain.' And as for the state of 'transcendentalwakefulness', the truly wise know it is incapable of being spokenof, grasped held, imagined or manipulated; it is withoutdistinctive marks of any kind—unthinkable, unnameable, forit is that into which the essence of the knowledge of the One isresolved, it is the Peaceful, the Benign, the Non-dual.And—the metaphysical paradox!—One is the self; 'He' isto be known. Whenever imaginative man penetrates into themystical universe which surrounds him, it brings forth spiritsand gods. And the creatures thus born into the world appeardifferent according to the peculiarity of their parents—justlook at all the historical pantheons, the first recordeddivinities of the Vedic poets, the gods of the Old Testament, theEgyptian and Greek gods—sometimes maternal, sometimespaternal… But the unknowable, unnameable, ungraspable 'He'is at the root of them all, and thus the source of all that was,and is, and will be, living as an ancestor continues to live inHis distant descendants. And occasionally 'He' appears again inHis own intrinsic form. 'He' is not Jahveh neither is he Allahnor the Vishnu of the Hindus; 'He' is none of the historicalGods, for 'He' is nameless. But when 'He' appears we knowit—it was 'He' whom the tribes of Israel saw in thewilderness, as it was also 'He' before whom the Aryans of theHimalayas once trembled. Thus Leary himself writes in each generation a fewmen stumble upon the riddle of consciousness and its solution;they discover, once again, that beyond the ordinary world ofmacroscopic tangible, material things, there are endless levelsof energy transformations accessible to consciousness. They learnagain the age-old lesson taught by mystics and wise men of Eastand West: that most of mankind is sleepwalking, movingsomnabulistically through a world of rote perceptions andconflicting emotions. As have many internal explorers of thepast, they become dedicated to the process of consciousnessexpansion, to the ideal of maximum wakefulness and internalfreedom. It is perhaps significant that the psychedelicexperience, which has been popularised by Leary through hislectures and books in America, has not helped a single Americanto a higher education and here I do not exclude myself—but,on the other hand it has brought all the more into hospitals andjails. LSD is considered, even in India, as dangerous. Or is itthat it takes a very great deal of acid to produce even a littleelevation of consciousness. The fact is, no one has yet provedthat an increase of individual human awareness—drug-inducedor not—is appropriate to the organisation oftwentieth-century society in the West; it may be that it doesmore harm than good in the case of most people. No, I think the psychedelic experience doessomething quite different—it is not a question of thevalidity of facts or even of personal manifestation of thespirit, but of becoming aware in oneself of how to fashion anew and better reality. I wanted to go on living in Norway, but howeverwell one tries to understand oneself and sort out one'spriorities for happiness, reality is forever getting in the way.You never know what you will be doing until you find yourselfdoing it, mysteriously at work again. I had been toying with theidea of writing a book about my experiences in America, somethingpositive and forward-looking, reflecting somehow the optimism Ihad for the future, the 'practical Utopia' of the Underground smanifesto of liberation. My need to communicate was very greatindeed, but it had nothing to do with the ego or things likethat; it was, I think, something similar to the urge thatcompelled Marco Polo to write about his travels. But there aretwo things more important than writing—action and meditation—andI was impelled by the former. There is perhaps atranscendentalist anticipation of what I mean in Emerson'saddress on the American Scholar: 'The sacredness which attaches to the act of creation, the act of thought, is transferred to the record. Instantly the book becomes noxious. the guide is a tyrant. The sluggish and perverted mind of the multitude having once received this book, stands upon it, and makes an outcry if it is destroyed. Colleges are built on it. Meek young men grow up in libraries. Hence, instead of Man Thinking, we have the bookworm. I had better never see a book than to be warped by its attraction clean out of my orbit, and make a satellite instead of a system. The one thing in the world, of value, is the active soul.' Books make bondage. But the bondage is to anauthority outside ourselves. Freedom lies in getting control ofour own lives back into our own hands—'to stand on one's owntwo feet'—and everyone united by mutual affection withpersonal relations as the touchstone, creating an environment ofcreativity and harmony. But it will take a miracle to free thehuman mind: because the invisible reins and chains are magical inthe first place; and each individual will only free himself inthe measure that he knows how to locate and discover his ownproper powers. Whitman, likewise in a transcendentalist sermonsays, 'You shall no longer take things at second or third hand,nor look through the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectresin books.' And the man who is not possessed of an active soul, orof a self-conscious able to recognise that it is everywhere inchains to authority outside itself, will not know how to setabout the task of magical self-liberation. But to concentrateoneself in this direction is a thing which very few individualsof the West have ever known how to do, for to the rational mindthe ideal of a 'practical Utopia' accomplished on earth is anapparently impossible task. It would seem to depend upon directincarnation of the soul/spirit/Christ in each individual if he orshe were to give direct expression of spiritual values in dailylife. Our Western philosophers have always beenrationalists, for their insights do not depend upon the awakeningof their own souls (most philosophers lead private lives that arereally quite hellish sometimes) but upon a special facility intheir treatment of symbols which awakenspiritual/religious/philosophical associations in the mind of thereader. Any true change would have to be based on a differentconcentration from that of reason. We must create ourselves outof whatever it is that is within ourselves, unconcerned withstandardized answers, the so-called scientific methods: it has aninner rhythm, like that of music. Or, as my Guru puts it, 'Wemust first recognise Atman within ourselves, and then realise himin the world; we should assist Brahman, whose partial expressionwe are, to perfect himself in appearance.' And this is somethingbeyond all power of words—Life is not an art so much as anexperience. 'With the Pillar of Fire goes the Pillar of Cloud.'At dawn, a pair of trousers; at noon, a cloud. But such mysteriesare unpublishable except as poetry, the veiled truth. This isalso the new doctrine of Ezra Pound, who says: 'Prose is noteducation but the outer courts of the same. Beyond its doors arethe mysteries. Eleusis. Things not to be spoken of save in secretThe mysteries self-defended, the mysteries that cannot berevealed Fools can only profane them. The dull can neitherpenetrate the secretum nor divulge it to others.' What is the poet doing in trying to expressmystical reality objectively ? He is looking for a scheme whichwould circumscribe it from all sides. And if he describes itscontours clearly and correctly, then every other intelligenthuman being could place the content there for himself, so that hemight believe that the poet had shown the 'thing'. But that isimpossible. All the poet has done is to present a frame for thatwhich we must be conscious of anyhow in order to recognise it.And recognition is liberation That is perhaps why people who have had apsychedelic experience can 'tune-in' to the secret and occult, inwhich God is better honoured and loved by silence than by words,and better seen by closing the eyes to images than by openingthem. So let's not try to understand everything. LSD may provideyou with a clue as to what is happening. It opens the Doors ofPerception and beyond those doors who can really say ? There is no future, with modern man and man ofthe future, which does not resemble what 'free' people are doingin the world. All are trying to get control over the making oftheir own lives; growing their own food in country meadows orbackyards, building their own homes out in the forests, learninghow to farm 'liberated' land and live off the produce of the sea;learning how to bake their own bread… and learning to loveone another as one enormous family, and with a conscious relationto, or respect for, the environment. And this implies, in one word, Revolution, not therevolution against the 'given' which has since the time of Hegelprovided the avant-garde with an excuse for anarchist expressionor behaviours—the answer from the outside—but therevolution within the self. Total Revolution isinner-change-in-the-world; the tools are a cultural frameworkwhich bypasses (transcends) the existing projection structure;and 'religion' is an artistic tool for getting there, throughimage, vision and symbol's symbol. ONE METAPHOR CAN CHANGE THEWORLD: 'Peace of Mind brings Peace on Earth ?'—Yes, but onlyif we recognise how the ego is the cause of all the wars insidethe human mind and, by implication, also of all the wars in theworld-at-large. How strange that I 'should' do anything again!But these 'revolutionary' ideas were becoming decisive: actionwould decide the rightness or wrongness of our ideas, successthat of volition. It is not enough to take your ease in the worldof ideas and live there naively, as I had earlier thought, forthis would mean that we had merely allowed ourselves to be drivenby the stream of events. We have to know how to guide ourselvesto the goal. I found it increasingly difficult simply to sit andreflect on all this, for there was still the job of translatingrecognition into action. I could not hope to 'change myself'through 'meditation'—a temperament like mine collapses underthe burden of living in another kind of existence that simply'is' and needs the challenge of 'should' in order to realise thegoal of 'becoming', which is, I suppose what our Western sort oflife is all about—we believe we 'should' grow, become,create, perform, perfect again, and this is the impetus forconscious volition, since our ideas remain nonexistent until theyhave been tested in reality, with the self as the first testingground. From the point of view of the world, it is mere illusion,if a holy man regards himself as an incarnation or a Saint hemust become saintly, change himself, if he wishes to betaken seriously. In my own case, I felt strongly that I shouldreturn to America, see how my old psychedelic friends were makingout on their 'voyages of self-discovery', meet Tim and RichardAlpert again, perhaps even settle over there for a time and tryto build a structure in which 1 could exist without losing sightof my goal. But it was a difficult decision to make, seeing how Ihad been out of touch for so long. And apart from considerationslike these, there was the fact that life in America actuallyscared me stiff. If paranoia is 'having some idea of what isreally going on', then you could say that I was definitelyparanoid about returning to our brave New World. Just thinkingabout New York could send icicles up and down my spine.... myparanoia took the form of imagining myself walking alone on 115th Street from Riverside to Broadway at midnight, orequally—due to some error in my direction—ending up, anobject of unpleasant attention by members of the 'Roach Guards'or the 'Five Points Gang', in Broome Street down on theBowery… At any rate, my fears and doubts were overcomesomewhat by Christmas, and early in January I found myself onceagain airborne over the Atlantic on a flight that was to land mea few hours later at Boston's Logan Airport, and the start of anew chapter… Chapter 9 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-38IA087-000632-B033-113http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065910 text/html 64451HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:58:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:27:11 GMTContent-length: 64232 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 9 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER NINE 'A GRAM IS WORTH MORE THAN A DAMN' 1968 'Turn on to acid, man, Get into the channels of your mind Go see what there is to find— No one knows the human mind... There are doors as yet unopened So much to see, Drop some acid, man, Go see what you can find. I never saw life as I know it, man, It was all in my mind. Things have become much clearer Now that I've opened up my mind. Before all this, life was such a drag; Working on Chrysler's pressure line Just to pay for a shag. Working on the track Just to score some bread So I and the wife and kids Could be fed and comfy In our suburban shack. But all that's gone now Since I've seen life for the first time Through the channels of my mind. Acid was the key, it turned me on And helped me to find The right channels in my mind.' (Anonymous—Found in a book in cell-block beneath Bristol Central Prison) Returning to America after an absence of nearlyfour years was much more than a sentimental journey, much morethan just filling in time; I was a man trying to maintain hissoul alive. Keep the candle flame ablaze.... When all was growingdark. It was the wriggling to avoid death, essentially a poeticthing, undertaken without either rationality or reason. I wantedto probe something solid to live by. And travel was an availablemeans to see, look, find — 'la vraie vie'. My internal space had changed since Millbrook andour first brief experiment in 'transpersonative living', whenacid was the lance with which to ride after the Grail. There wasnow (1968) little good acid around, and what there was—theso-called 'street acid'—came mainly from California. Therewas something wrong with the synthesis; it was not pure. And youwere never sure what it was exactly that you were taking, so Ionly dropped it on those rare occasions when someone gave meeither 'Sandoz acid' or 'crystal acid'. I think the problem forthe underground chemists manufacturing clandestine acid wasshortage of ergot, without which the synthesis of d-LSD-25 isimpossible. Until 1965, supplies of ergot could be bought withlittle or no difficulty from three or four European chemicalcompanies; but pressure from Washington put a stop to this,doubtlessly hopeful that this would lead to an end of clandestineLSD. In one sense the Federal authorities were right. Theunderground ceased turning out d-LSD-25; instead, they discovereda wholly synthetic substance, akin to d-LSD-25 in so far as itproduced marked change in consciousness. But the new syntheticacid lacked, in my opinion, that invisible non-pharmacologicalfactor—the magical, spiritual component that was really whatacid was all about. Sure, the new stuff 'worked' in the sensethat any mind-altering chemical 'works' to produce subjectiveeffects within the body, but it didn't seem to produce in thosewho used it any particularly noticeable elevation of either heador heart; at least, that was the conclusion I had reached inLondon. But it was—and probably still is—an unpopularview amongst the 'cognoscenti', who claim that some of the streetacid is capable of producing positive subjective effects of a'long-lasting nature', though they readily admit that a lot ofthe stuff sold as 'pure acid' is actually methylamphetamine (aconcentrated form of amphetamine, first developed by the U.S.Army) or a stripped-down ergotamine compound by modern molecularchemistry. My evaluation had nothing to do with the notionthat a wholly synthetic drug produced a wholly syntheticexperience—the intellectual response—but was based ondirect, first hand experience (about thirty trips with streetacid in all). And in each session I felt there was something itlacked—it was too 'electric', too 'speedy' and too'mind-shattering'. The earlier clarity of 'insight' which I hadobtained via the Sandoz acid was replaced by confusion,brokenness, words and worlds thrown into absolute dismembermentor even, absolute chaos, though, I must add, often coupled with afeeling that I can only describe as 'sublime inflation', asuperabundance of emotive energy; but it could not signify; morea passionate flame and less the life-giving sun, as it were. Ihave read that d-LSD-25 is a semi-synthetic substance, of whichergot is the organic, i.e. 'living' part. And to say that the'spiritual' component is contained within the ergot moleculesmust sound like a superstition to some, but what I intend here isto suggest that 'pure' acid has 'metapolitical'implications—there is a hidden truth or statement in eachacid session which is unaccountably missing in most of myexperiences using the clandestine stuff, Owsley and'white-lightning' notwithstanding. There is, it seems to me, aqualitative decline in the subjective acid experience which issomething that does not admit of scientific analysis; it is anintuitive thing I'd say. At any rate, I personally observed avoluntary moratorium during this period and would take nothinguntil I knew the exact chemical synthesis and where it was madeand by whom. Besides, there was little or no shortage of goodmarijuana or hashish, our so-called 'mild psychedelics'. A psychedelic is the solvent which dissolves thevigorous stereotypes of egocentric behaviour—it transformsthe familiar self without changing a thing; it expands themoment: yet there isn't anything we can count on or accumulate;its value is poetic—it helps ferry us across the abyss andwe may thus gain a new amplitude; it is not a 'psychological'experience but a poetic one. It is best of course to undergo suchmetamorphosis by means of tuning in to nature, though it is onlythe very rarest of Westerners who can do this; we seem unable todevelop our own power of concentration sufficiently to liveconsciously and continuously in our deepest self. We cannotbecome more than we are. It may be that we cannot even becomewhat we are—'there is only becoming' e.e. cummings says; forus, then, Being is becoming; yet it remains possibility only,never achievement. It is all a matter of recognition; we mustbecome capable of visualising ideas in order to live at the veryheart of our being. It is all so simple that any child could doit (if only we don't try to explain). Or: only a child can do it. Cambridge, Mass., is the home of both HarvardCollege and M.I.T. and stands across from the city of Boston,separated by the River Charles, about thirty minutes by taxi fromLogan airport. It was snowing when I reached Gunther's house inMount Auburn Street; the town was as if deserted by man. Thegigantic apartment block on the opposite side of the streettowered up from a snowy wasteland, surrounded by a few stragglingtrees. Every now and again one saw the lights of a car slowlymoving along the driveway flanking the river; visibility was soonalmost reduced to nil. The lady taxi-driver swore as I paid thefare, wishing she'd stayed in Boston. Then she propositioned me.'We could get to know each other in the parking lot,' she added,waving to the back seat. 'There's not much else to do on a nightlike this.' I said I was bushed after the long flight from Londonbut this only seemed to add spice to her game. 'I've only made itwith one English guy before, and he was the best ball I've everhad, though a fucking bastard otherwise,' she added. Why not? Shewas pretty, in her late twenties. 'Okay. Let's get to the parkinglot,' I said. 'Crazy! But in case you're kinky or something, youknow, want to cut off my tits or anything, Jack-the-Ripper style,I'll blow your brains out with this.' And reaching inside theglove compartment she suddenly produced an enormous revolver.'Protection, you understand. If you want to live in Boston, baby,you've gotta have a piece. Bam! Get it?' 'Are those things legalhere?' I asked, seemingly dumb. 'Legal, regal; the fuzz ain'tgonna bust ya for a piece, though they get pretty rough if youkill someone. No, it's protection.' 'But what if everyone carrieda gun, then what...?' 'Then you'd be stupid not to, right?Anyway, I was only kidding. It ain't got no bullets in thechamber, maybe just two or three. I use it to scare drunks whoget fresh.' I was in the right mood when, a couple of hours andseveral drinks later, I rang Gunther's doorbell. I had calledGunther from the airport but the baby-sitter said he was at theGurdjieff centre and wouldn't be back much beforemidnight—(a well-observed ritual vouches for the truly humanand therefore natural sequence of human behaviours; if themeeting which a person needs is missed, then the psyche feelscheated, and a sense of loss and remorse or worse is bound tofollow. Gunther believed in the ritual attendance of theGurdjieff meetings; he didn't necessarily believe in Gurdjieffrituals, which, so far as one can understand them at all, seem todepend on the presence of the Master himself, but the weeklything was important for the harmonious function of hiscreativity.) But Gunther was back, and we greeted each otherwarmly with hugs and smiles and 'Wow-it's-great-to-see-you'stuff. Yes, it really did feel good to be back; (almost) asthough I'd never been away. We spent the first few hours rapping,filling in the blanks, trying to find out what had happened to usboth across the random and haphazard years since Harvard andMillbrook. For myself change, unceasing change, as though changewas the only constant in my life. And Gunther? He was nowteaching at Boston College. 'A bit ironic, really, a Jew teachingat a Jesuit establishment', working as a consultant with aNew York media company, 'They sent me to India recently to tapesome Indian music for a record', and running the Boston GurdjieffCentre. 'Man, that cat knew more about human psychology thananyone I've come across before. I really dig his work.' I then discovered that quite a number of the oldHarvard psychedelic class of 1961-62 now worked for the HarvardCorporation—George Litwin was a professor at the HarvardBusiness School, Al Alschuler lectured at the Harvard School ofEducation, Dave Kolb was an instructor at M.I.T. and Huston Smithwas still professor of religious philosophy (M.I.T.), Dave Katzwas teaching at Boston's Brandeis University, Walter Clark was aprofessor of the psychology of religion at Tufts University andhad helped start the Cambridge Neurobiological and PsychedelicStudy Group (together with Clemens E. Benda M.D., and the lateMax Rinkel M.D.). Obviously, the medicine of hallucination and thewonders of indiscipline had lost their appeal—everybodywanted to forget the 'Harvard Drug Scandal'. 'It all seems so ordinary now.' Gunther was almostapologetic when he spoke about former times. 'People turn ondifferently nowadays, you know, sans drugs, sans trips.Not Young-Man-Left-to Old-Man-Right but evolution of sensibility.Today people dig astrology, Meher Baba, the Tarot, the I Ching,Gurdjieff, macrobiotic food, yogas, even plain work.... ' Sure enough, when I did the telephone rounds thenext morning, everyone was into their own 'non-drug' thing. Itwas as if Tim Leary and the Harvard Psychedelic Project had neverexisted—Al Cohen hadn't taken acid for over four years andnow busied himself as head of the American Meher Baba Group. 'Idropped acid for three years, and it took me three years totranscend acid. Now I don't even think about it. Of Acid, theAvatar had this to say: "It doesn't bring you closer to God,for I am God and I tell you it takes you further away fromMe".' Rolf von Eckartsberg, who used to co-edit ThePsychedelic Review was a psychology professor at theUniversity of Pennsylvania and was running a 'global village'project in Pittsburg; Paul Lee, also a former co-editor of ThePsychedelic Review was teaching humanities and religion atthe University of California in Santa Cruz; Stanley Krippner wasthe director of The Dream Laboratory at the Maimonides Hospitalin Brooklyn; Frank Barron was a professor at Berkeley and theauthor of 'Creativity and Psychological Health'; Joe Havens wasalso still lecturing and writing papers on the theme 'ReligionPonders Science'; and Richard Alpert was in India with his HinduGuru, Neem Karolli Baba, or simply 'Maharaj-ji' as he is usuallycalled, who told him, � propos LSD, 'In a quiet placewhere it is cool and you are feeling much peace, taken alone, itcan bring you into the presence of Christ to do pranams.But you can only stay a few hours and then must leave. Better byfar to become Christ. For that, Love is the best medicine, betterthan LSD. LSD is not the true Samadhi. These medicineswere known about in the Kulu Valley, but now that knowledge islost.' It felt almost obscene to mention this three-letterword under the circumstances and I began to wonder whether I hadgot things cocked or somehow not quite right. I was frequentlyasked the same question: 'Do you still take acid?' which alwayscontained a definite, if unspoken clause—after what happenedin Manhattan's Lower East Side and the Haight-Ashbury district ofSan Francisco, after reports of people jumping out of windows orstaring at the sun until they were blind, can the psychedelicexperience still claim to a place in the New Age? Did Leary dofor LSD as the liberal-humanist did for stereotaxic surgery(leucotomy), (which is the selective destruction of braintissue—'Law'n Order surgery') and its claim as a therapeuticadjunct to mental anguish? Not a few thinkers have thought so. During theyears following the Leary-Alpert firings many attacks againstnon-prescriptive drug usage have appeared in the mass media. Thecorruption of the original mystical insights reported in theearly (1960-63) literature has led to the corruption of popularopinion, who now view the psychedelic experience as a subject toocomplex, too weird to be discussed in a rational way. The mysticwith the gift of the third eye expected to proclaim the reign ofthe happily integrated modern soul but instead he had foundhimself considered something of an oddball, and a resented one atthat. Now he sits in solitary exile or behind the bars of thelunatic asylum whilst the village idiot walks Times Square with agun in each hand. 'Do you still take acid? Does Leary stillproselytise for LSD, trip out for days?' our visitor asks, as onemay also be supposed to know about heroin, cocaine, speed,glue-sniffing and nitrous oxide. 'Mass-mysticism is poetry, anopen secret—the message is in the seed.' As ancient Zenmight have had it—'Take LSD for ten years, become LSD, andthen forget about it'. The power of Zen—there is nothing to hold onto; the power of the aphorism. In his Frederick William Athertonlecture (Harvard University, 1967), Norman O. Brown reminds usthat 'Aphorism is instant dialectic the instantaneous flip instead of the elaborate system... And so perishable that it cannot be hoarded by any elite or stored in any institution.' 'Aphorism: the word smells of literary self-consciousness the reality is brokenness words in absolute dismemberment or even, absolute self-contradiction.' Like the historical Oxford Movement the PsychedelicMovement is a Western response to the pathogenic signs of ourinner disruption, and is recognised as such by the New Radicalsand by a tiny circle of metaphysicians in both the West and theEast, just as the revolutionary anarchist movement was a centuryago. For LSD is anarchistic, it shatters our complacency,explodes our stereotypes of ideology and dogmas, wakes, shakes,and makes the inner sleeping man from the somnambulist gravity ofrectitude or righteousness. It is the madness that revels in thecategories of being in which not one member is sober. Madness need not necessarily be a cause forgloom—our greatest blessing, says Socrates in the Phaedrus,come to us by way of madness—provided; and the madness comesfrom God, he adds, someone like the God Dionysus or the spiritMercurius or Siva, a condition which cannot be programmed,something whose truth lies beyond all power of words. Yet smileat our sad impasse. We cannot simply let ourselves go. 'I amfully aware of this,' Ionesco says, 'teach me how to untie theknots. I know I ought to undo them on my own and that this is atask everyone must carry out for himself, but at least give me alittle guidance, so that I can see how the bonds I cannot loosenare tied.' But no help is forthcoming. The only reality is thetruth of our own contradictory nature; truth is simply a moreefficient form of fiction, Maya like everything else. Can anyone teach Ionesco to untie the knots? 'Theprincipal instrument of monopoly and control that preventsexpansion of consciousness is the word lines controlling thought,feeling and apparent sensory impressions of the human host,' saysBurroughs, but he makes a common error for he fails todistinguish the word from the experience. Another answer:according to Joey Mellen and Bart Huges, is that it is man'srigid cranium that prevents him from expanding his consciousness,not his words... 'When the skull seals the tide of brainbloodvolume is out on the beach the adult dangles from the gallows— around his neck a chain of word associations— suspended on his own sentence the adult passes judgement on his children— his children—if they've any sense—pay no attention but bounce about on a cushion of intra-cranial pressure until their skull seals.... ' Ionesco, the new message is: 'If you want to getahead get a hole in your head.' Perhaps the advantage is withTibet where prayer wheels are another way of arriving at the sameresult—an egoless involvement with the abyss inside theself—any fool can do it: the mechanism is external while themind if left vacant; and vacancy is not the worst condition ofthe mind; the go, being non-existent, does not have to store,retrieve, catalogue, analyse or identify. But perhaps the lastword can be left to Norman O. Brown, speaking of the place (andneed) for the 'transforming spirit of play' and of that greatrevolutionary intellectual of the twentieth century, James Joyce: 'who reduced all that solemn nonsense to nonsense leading us in the path to which Wittgenstein directed us from disguised nonsense to patent nonsense a transition that is accomplished not by linguistic analysis but by poetry.' Leafless trees, the cold, clear air of winter;wide, snow-covered streets on which students wander about, whosephysical appearance is different from when I was last here. Odd,really, how quickly the young respond to change. Whilst onlyseven or eight years ago the style was teeth-and-tweeds,button-down shirts and college ties, the mode of dress now veeredon the far side of informality—jeans, denim shirts, cowboyboots and Afghan coats; and beards and long hair were everywhereprevalent. It was as if one psychic atmosphere had spread fromCalifornia to Italy. Millions of similar people everywhere in theWest. And their lifestyle was loose, unstructured; they seemed toroll on like the waves, whose movement is regulated by invisibleforces emanating from the moon. They were beings who were inpossession of a secret which provided the impetus to their lives;their aims were more inward; they had a feeling for values; theyhad achieved a certain level of consciousness. Were they notsomehow more open than in any age previously, which gave themthis new amplitude and a sense of purpose? And if you were to askthem, 'What for the future?' it is to themselves they wouldpoint. What folly to believe in a Providence which guides lifefrom the outside! This is the change in itself. Where growth isguided by conscious volition, development of the personalitytakes place; everyone progresses, marches onward, further andfurther, and no end is in sight. Here was a new generation forwhom time is real before eternity. How good for the mental health of modern youth toimbibe a little Eastern wisdom. Everybody who believes inhimself, no matter who he is, stands on a higher level than thetimorous—yes, the formative power of the Brahmanic andBuddhistic, but also the Islamic East, can help us achieve theideal of universal brotherhood, whereas the received teachings ofthe West fail in spite of their ideals. For whatever power thespiritual message has exerted over the minds of men has surelycome from the unique degree of involvement which it positsbetween the divine and the here and now. As I wandered the Cambridge streets, I thought ofmy earlier days of largely harum-scarum activity and what hadhappened to us all across these random and haphazard years ofpilgrimage. And sometimes, when I am in a reflective mood, Iwonder if there is a secret connection between spiritualnecessity and empirical accident? How is it that this strangedrug LSD had such immense consequences, and was discoveredseemingly by accident alone? For the revolution in sensibilityproduced results which the LSD-users did not—and perhapscould not—foresee. But this is true for allrevolutionaries—revolutions have to be considered as verycomplex series of actions initiated in highly particularcircumstances and at particular points in time. 'Each age getsthe revolution it deserves', is perhaps a truism, yet it is infact that a small change of empirical circumstances, and thepsychedelic revolution would not be the widespread manifestationwhich it is. It was now possible to see that an acceleration inour brief new renaissance had turned the Leary-Alpert streamsinto a river and that the whole movement, first of Harvard1960-61, then of the International Federation for InternalFreedom in 1963-64 and the Castalia Foundation of 1964-67 and theLeague for Spiritual Discovery of 1966-68, etc., etc., was theresult of a series of accidental circumstances in which groups ofLSD-users discovered a peculiar disposition in their thoughtwhich allowed them to transform a triviality into a profoundspiritual belief and allowed them to appreciate individual humanexistence as the living expression of metaphysical reality,because the psychedelic experience signified the reality and thebeauty of the flower of the spirit. And thus the Age of theFlower Children was born out of the individual experience oftranscendence, just as, in an earlier age, the Vedic Somabrought the light of consciousness into the world. What is the significance of the psychedelicmovement? I do not know myself. I have struggled with the problemfor years. But the facts are beyond question: the psychedelicrenaissance, like all great periods of culture, cannot beexplained altogether out of a demonstrable series of causes. Ifanything, they seem to owe their existence ultimately to aspiritual influx which bears the unmistakeable stamp of divinegrace, something given rather than made. And once the source ofinspiration has dried up, no effort and no talent is of anyavail. Further, since the height of the psychedelic impetus, theinsights have declined, in spite of all the psychedelic sessionswhich have occurred through these years, and today the LSD-userprobably possesses less creative taste than any educatednon-user, although they are still spiritually the most developed.What does this signify?—I know only that LSD has decoratedthe world of ideas. In what then lies LSD's unique quality, itsappeal for the person who takes it? Perhaps it is the discoveryof the existence of shades of inner meaning one would notnormally credit with the capacity for signifying so much. Let us transpose ever so slightly the elements ofvisionary knowledge, or change the varieties of the spiritual, oruse a different method for gaining deeper insights; or place theindividual, as he is, into another setting which is subject todifferent environmental conditions, such as, for instance, adamp, ill-lit and unheated cave somewhere high in the Himalayas:it would be the revelatory 'mystical' experience no longer. Ihave seen such non-drug revelatory methods for getting westerners'high' not fifty miles from Kathmandu: they lack the crystal-likeclarity or immediacy of the psychedelic experience. Thepsychedelic experience makes particularly clear what the natureof individuality really is. It must seem a pity to some thatanything could be metaphysically real which is manifestly sodependent upon empirical circumstances, in this instance, upon apsychedelic drug. It illustrates, on the other hand, that thespiritual component in man can only become visible subject tospecial empiric conditions. It doesn't solve the riddle of man'sspiritual nature, nor is it a key to a metaphysics of ecstasy (assome thinkers have claimed); no matter how many causes andrelations we establish: the essential escapes us. This sayslittle in favour of those who incline to the belief that theLSD-user may thus far participate of metaphysical reality. Butthe visionary experience is essentially brief; once achieved andexpressed, it becomes subject, like everything else, to themerciless downward pull of gravity and the world of threedimensions, that non-miraculous world of appearances we calleither prison or home, which is manifest everywhere around meeven now as I type these lines. But reality must still count for something, andthis is perhaps more true in America (than in any other countryI've ever lived in), where prosperity is regarded as normal; hewho simply contents himself, i.e. turns himself on, is regardedas feeble. The idea that divine blessedness and prosperity areconnected is still effective today: the man who discovers Christwithin him will become rich, healthy, an accomplished individualin this lifetime; it is a religious belief that teaches thepossibility of uniting one's struggle for the goods of this worldwith ideal aspirations. The man who is pleasing to God mustbecome rich; the fruits, which hitherto have fallen only to thelot of him who renounces the world, can now be shared by him whoaffirms it. This is the teaching of 'a religion of democracy';the materialism of our era is Hallowed in Thy name... I am constantly relapsing into didactics, thoughno teacher I; on the contrary, I discourage any kind offollowership, since my capacity for head-work is limited. I amalso without the necessary information. So I drift; I am thataimless drifting man who, setting out in the first light of dawnlike a ship to sea, never knows when or with what cargo he willreturn to port; and to invite anyone to follow me on such areckless enterprise would be akin to negligence, if not actuallyactionable. One has a few friends, and of course they helpsustain one through periods of change or difficulty, but in thefinal analysis, one must chart one's own drift course through thepeculiarities of our modern kind of existence. It is a situationI once discussed with Tim Leary—who confided in me his ownstrategies as a mentor of modern youth, which again confirmed mybelief that he is one of the wisest, most illuminatory beingsthat the world has ever known.... The main theme of hisphilosophy, which he has dealt with in his book, The Politicsof Ecstasy is the 'seven levels of consciousness—solar,cellular, somatic, sensual, symbolic, stupor (emotions) and sleep',what he calls 'the seven tongues of God'; 'seven dialects ofenergy, each triggered by the appropriate chemical—LSD,mescaline, hashish, grass, stimulants, booze, narcotics'. Leary's message is that we die, creativelyspeaking, when we cling too fast to the definite, and that beyondthe falsifications of egocentric consciousness lies the world ofawareness which we must locate, pry out and finally weld to ourbeing and in this way achieve affirmation of God, the world andthe other people in it. 'The yoga of drugs is of course a key method. The sexual yoga is also key—access to and control of sexual energy. Nothing can be renounced. All is God. Every energy is divine. All must be understood and controlled for spiritual purposes, including the yoga of power. All energy is available to him who accepts the basic energy formula; all energy is available to him who knows that it must not be grabbed, held, possessed or used for any other purpose except spiritual.' (Private correspondence.) It is a beautiful message and one that could becomea proper matter of concern for a generation raised on Marx,Dulles, Thieuing gum and Coca-Cola. It is thus not withoutprecedent that Leary, like Socrates before him, should beconvicted by his peers of corrupting a nation's youth, forhistory, like the big wheel in a cosmic funfair, spins slowlytowards the final revolution... and mankind has not progressedeven one iota. And, most tragic of all, the protoplasm seemshappy. Seeing how many of the original HarvardPsychedelic Project were working for the Corporation, it was nottoo difficult to persuade the university to have me back, thistime, however, not as a four-hours-a-week instructor tothird-year graduate students in psychology but as a traineelibrarian at the Harvard University Library. The plan was that Ishould work as an assistant curator of Scandinavian Aquisitions,attend a two-year course in Library Science at Boston's Sammer'scollege, and then stay on as a full librarian, with facultyprivileges; and perhaps teach one course after this probationaryperiod. The authorities were nervous, perhaps understandably, butin their own way showed a remarkably liberal, open-mindedattitude about having me back. The first few weeks were spent learning how bookswere indexed and catalogued and how to find my way around the'stacks' underneath the main library building, which is an art initself, for the Harvard Library (second only to the Library ofCongress in Washington) had been assembled through the years withstolid incompetence, and I dare say that no one is entirely surewhere all the books are. Certainly in my section, theScandinavian language collections were catalogued in such amanner that it could sometimes take a whole day to locate aparticular book, even for an experienced librarian. The reasongiven for this odd state of affairs was that until quite recentlythe Curators were usually eccentrics and not infrequently quitepossessive about 'their' books, often devising an elaboratepersonal coding system to stop students borrowing them; that is,unless you asked the Curator himself to locate the particularbook for you. But times and people change. A new breed was takingover, as it were; soon only professional librarians wouldbe in charge. No more muddling through. Efficiency was now thetouchstone by which a librarian was to be judged. The library didnot offer a complete life, as enclosed and dedicated as amonastery, but a career, like any other. Certainly, it helpedif you had a taste for books or reading, but the main thing wasknowing how to catalogue the stuff. It was even envisaged that,in time, the entire library would be computerised, though plansfor this innovation had met with little response from the higher'invisible' echelons who contemplated such suggestions in thecloistered calm of their private rooms. I was told about oneCurator, in charge of Burmese Acquisitions, I think, who had beendead in his private room for nearly two months, and was onlydiscovered when a student, due to some error in his walk, hadaccidentally opened the door and saw this decomposing figurehuddled in a huge leather armchair. The story goes that thestudent, far from being surprised at the condition of the oldman, actually asked him for directions to the Poetry Room. The work was interesting enough, however, and Isuppose I could have stuck it out through the two-year trainingperiod, but something happened to change my direction. Guntherand some other friends had obtained space in a huge loft-likebuilding in Nutting Road near Harvard Square. It was called the'Cambridge Readeasy'—a sort of free university-cum-workshopin 'Communication, Creativity and Awareness'. And they invited meto run a poetry workshop involving poets and students in thegreater Boston area. This was fine as far as I was concerned forit gave a focus to my life and an excuse to meet and hear some ofthe younger poets, who I encouraged to drop around and take partin the experiment. The Readeasy soon became quite popular with thelocal Underground, who kept us all well-supplied with grass andthe occasional pipe of opium. But this was not the reason why Ileft Cambridge (in fact, it was probably the high quality of thegrass that was keeping me there), but the arrival of Leary for alecture series in Boston, when we met and he invited me to joinhim in Berkeley. I was a bit hesitant at first, perhaps because Ifelt more at home on the East Coast, but my curiosity got thebetter of me, and a few weeks later I resigned from the libraryand was jetting across America to San Francisco, where Tim pickedme up at the airport; and the start of a new adventure. California—land of the Brave or land of theFreaks? Tim had no doubts in his mind: 'California is at leastone year ahead of the East Coast in Aquarian life-styles,sophistication, and enterprise. Here is where it is allhappening.' I said the weather was nice. 'Yeah; warm, sunny andsoft, just like a beautiful woman.' Soon we were in the city and Tim said he'd give mea tour, starting on Fisherman's Wharf and home of some of thebest seafood restaurants in America. From there we drove alongChinatown's Pacific Avenue and Grant Avenue, where the solebusiness seemed to be food. Chinese variety shops ran like astrip of tinsel through the heart of the city. From there wedrove up to Nob Hill, home of the rich and the elegant, wheretradition is slow to change and the residents carefully preservean air of bygone days while sparing no modern convenience. Thenback to Market Street where we dropped by a couple of bars beforegoing on to the Haight and a Japanese restaurant for lunch. Then in the afternoon we visited Eldridge Cleaverof the Black Panthers, a very impressive personality who was inthe middle of his campaign to become the first coloured presidentof the United States. Basically, the line he presented wassomething like this: 'When you vote for me you are voting forthis finger'. He would then hold up the index finger of his righthand. 'This finger. Because this finger is the finger thatpresses the button. And, man this finger ain't never goingto push any button. Do you trust Nixon's finger anywhere nearthat red button? I don't. So when you vote, remember, you'revoting for the finger that won't push the button', etc., etc.He'd been out campaigning most of the morning and seemed a bittired when we met him, but he welcomed Tim warmly, like an oldfriend, joking and fooling, and every now and again telling Timthat the Black Panther Party was really getting it together. Avery remarkable man, I thought. And on to Menlo Park just south of the city to meetKen Kesey, who I remembered from the early Harvard days, when hewas then known as the author of One Flew the Cuckoo's Nest,a brilliant novel about the goings-on inside a mental hospital.Now he was into his political bag, and had hopes of uniting thevarious hippie factions in the Bay Area into a coordinated party,something similar to the Panther organisation, but looser,without too many rules. Tim said that he was considering runningagainst Reagan as Governor of California: 'I'd strip the cops oftheir guns, double their salaries and encourage them to smokedope. I'd also introduce a "marijuana tax"—likethe annual automobile tax, only much higher, say, one thousandbucks a year. And then I'd distribute the revenue amongst theCalifornian middle-class. In that way, everyone would be happy.'There were immediate and voluble objections from Ken and theothers in the apartment, 'Man, one thousand bucks to smoke weed?You'd never get any of the heads to vote for that. Fifty bucks,maybe. But one thousand... man, do you know how much weed youcould buy for that? Enough to keep you stoned for months. Betterthink again "Uncle Tim" if you want to get my vote.' An hour or so chewing the breeze, and back to SanFrancisco again, to a small building across from the PanhandlePark where 'The Messiah' lived with his commune of followers, andthe headquarters of 'The Messiah's World Dope Crusade'. There wasno reply when we knocked on the door, but it wasn't locked so wewalked in. The house was silent. Tim then opened one of the doorsleading into a huge living-room where a group of perhaps sixbeautiful girls were seated in a circle on the floor holdinghands. They all seemed to be crying. No one looked up as weentered, and Tim immediately put on a serious expression andquietly joined this tearful circle. After a few minutes had passed, Tim asked after TheMessiah. 'He was busted this morning. The fuzz came roundand busted him for ten keys (kilograms) of grass. Man, like weneeded to raise bread on that for our new macro bakery.' 'Where is The Messiah now?' Tim gently asked. 'Down at the Precinct, I guess. They said they'dbeen watching him for weeks and that this time he'd go down for along time.' 'Why didn't he pay them off?' ' 'Cos we'd spent all our bread on this newconsignment and only had a couple of hundred bucks or so in thehouse.' 'Is there anything I can do?' 'Just pray. That's what we're doing.' On the way to Berkeley mention of the raid wasmade on the FM news. It seemed that The Messiah had told the desksergeant that unless he was released that afternoon he'd have totake 'drastic action'. He was reported as saying that he'd usehis telepathic powers to cause a two-hour traffic jam on the BayBridge during the evening traffic rush. He was released on anominal bail, a few hours later. Soon we were in Berkeley and Tim's house in Queen'sRoad, high in the hills overlooking the campus and the Bay. Wemade it just before the curfew—the Free Speech Movement wasrioting against the Vietnam war. There had been campus revoltsevery day for a week, and the police had introduced a curfewafter nightfall. Tim used to refer to his house as 'The Embassy'.There was a constant stream of visitors of all shapes, shades andsizes, each one involved at some level with the revolutionaryUnderground. And they would make their reports to Tim who'd thencomment or make suggestions or give them some LSD. I was thusable to get a picture very quickly of what was happening inCalifornia, mainly talk actually, though sometimes you'd meet aveteran of some campus riot or other. I think the only reallysensible and coherent person in the area was Jerry Garcia of 'TheGrateful Dead'. 'Acid,' he used to say, 'has changedconsciousness entirely. The US has changed in the last few yearsand it's because that whole first psychedelic thing meant"here's this new consciousness, this new freedom, and it'shere in yourself".' He was later to develop his thesis in a MelodyMaker interview... 'I think we're beginning to develop new capacities just in order to be able to save the world from our trips—you know, pollution, etc.—if for nothing else. Just for survival. The biological news is that in 100 years from now life on earth is finished, so what has to happen is this organism has to adapt real quick and develop new capacities to stem this flow, to maybe head it off somehow. In this scheme of things, politics and all those things belong to the past. They're meaningless, going down the drain.' After a couple of months in Berkeley, we moved toSouthern California, to a ranch in Idyllwild near the SanBernardino Forest and the headquarters of the Brotherhood ofEternal Love, a former Los Angeles motor-cycle gang who had takenacid and dropped out of crime and into dope-dealing. And Tim itwas who had become their leader/guru/teacher. The ranch was siteda couple of miles along a dirt road off the Palms-to-PinesHighway; the hills at the back overlooked Palm Springs and thedesert. It was a beautiful place, and there were some thirty ofus living there. Tim lived in a small bungalow with his wife,Rosemary, while I had a room in a smaller building adjacent. TheBrothers either lived in the ranch house or in smalloutbuildings. The ranch hadn't been lived in for over a year, sothere was a lot of work to be done. For my part, I built a saunahut, utilising a couple of old stoves for the purpose andinsulating the walls with sand. There was room inside for perhapshalf a dozen people, and we'd often retire there in the eveningswith a couple of cherry pipes filled with hashish, and sweat andsmoke until we'd either pass out or freak out in the heat. I alsoworked the huge caterpillar bulldozer in an attempt to smooth outsome of the bumps in the earth road leading to the ranch, but itkept breaking down or, perhaps due to my inexperience withheavy-duty machinery, it would sometimes swivel off the road andinto the ditch and it could take all of us a whole day to get itback on the road again. The summer passed gloriously, and apart from theoccasional police helicopter hovering overhead, we were nottroubled much by contact with the outside world. There was also alot of good acid available, and we would celebrate each Full Moonin the mountains, when the sessions would be run along the linesof the Indian Peyote ceremonies—that is, we'd all be seatedin a circle around a blazing fire chanting or shaking an Indianrattle to ward off evil spirits. There would also be drums andguitars, and sometimes one of the Brothers would dance around thefire shouting incoherently as though touched with the 'gift oftongues', though you'd hardly call us Pentecostal. We also triedto communicate with flying-saucers of which many had beenreported in the skies above the ranch. However, by the Fall, I was again restless, thistime for a more solitary refuge, somewhere where I could simplybe, and preferably alone. I had met too many people inCalifornia, heard too many things, maybe even taken too muchacid. Now I wanted out. And it was thus to Tonga in the SouthPacific that I went... Nine hours after leaving San Francisco, I caught myfirst glimpse of the tropical islands of the South Pacific as weflew low over Fiji. The richness of the landscape below wasoverwhelming everywhere. Perfect beauty abounded, in whichmeaning and expression are one. This peaceful island of lushjungle which blossoms like flowers was surrounded by dark greenhills and encircled by a rich blue sea, as still and as peacefulas a lake. And then Tonga! This Other Eden of palm treesshooting upwards to the sky, rich, luxuriant, yellow beaches andan exquisitely blue sea lapping against the shores. When Istepped off the plane I was so thrilled that I immediately setoff on a long walk, and when I returned, feeling weary, Ithought, as I reclined in a comfortable wicker chair on theshaded balcony of my tiny hotel: thou art in paradise. Hereshould I be; and be free from myself.... And as I looked outacross the garden over the tree tops, I saw hordes of monkeys whopursued, in a silent tight-rope dance, their fodder for theevening meal. How delightful it is to be in a world which wasfinally created on the fifth day! Here nothing has changed, hereeverything is simple and true. I was beginning to understand whymost truly great minds prefer 'nature to human society'. Thelatter limits, the former liberates. How harmonious the landscape in the light of thesunset. The sea reflects the last light of the sky. Thescreeching of the gulls high above the water and the shrillchirping of the cicadas fills my mind as no music ever could. Inthe narrow road opposite an old fisherman carries his nets; I canhear him singing to himself, softly, to the rhythm of thebreaking waves. He is faithful to himself and to the spirit ofnature; I could believe that this solitary wayfarer understandsthe doctrine of nirvana in the way in which an enlightened saintwishes to have it understood. Here there is no striving, foreverything happens of its own accord. One's volition wanesirresistibly. I feel in this hothouse air it is futile to work,to wish, to strive; it is not I who think, but nature thinks inme, it is not I who wish, but something wishes in me. For thisnative fisherman, Buddha's doctrine of cognition is a matter ofcourse, the result not of self-determination but of his ownpsychic process developing at one with nature; its truth issomething which the most cultured Westerner only veryexceptionally perceives. Here thought seems somehow superfluous;here nothingness is the background of semblance; the intellectturns away, as it were, from its possible content; it becomesmore and more empty, till at last no thought remains. The mind isas bland and as blank as a bank of snow. Such simplicity of mindsignifies a form of existence which proceeds without effort. Andeverything happens naturally, without conscious effort andwithout the direction of the will; indeed, in the tropics thewill is so small that the wish fails to become father to thethought. Life is thus essentially a mindless involvement withnature, with mediocrity as the purest form of normality. Here itis possible to achieve everything by doing nothing. Tonga itself is a collection of perhaps 150 smallislands, mostly uninhabited. It is Blessed, for it was dedicatedto Heaven at Pouono by King George Tupoul, and there is a strongsense of the religious amongst its peoples, their faith is firmlyrooted in the worship of Christ. I spent the first week in Nukalofa, the capital,resembling in appearance a sort of shanty town you normallyassociate with the ghetto districts of Georgia orAlabama—lots of corrugated iron and shed-like dwellings,semi-derelict store fronts and flaked woodwork, but stillcharming for all that. But I longed for isolation, for I wasimpatient of humankind and wanted to live in the jungle where theonly sounds would be natural ones. After consulting a map I decided upon Vava'u, atiny speck of an island some 150 miles distant from the mainisland, and a two-day sail by steamer. I telephoned the Governorto ask his permission to stay on the island, explaining that Iwas a writer and needed the peace and quiet in order to write abook. He was most gracious and hospitable, and even offered tosend his Land Rover to pick me up at the pier. Perfect. Now Icould unwind; find there my final dwelling place, and forget allthe despairs of consequence which had plagued my life in theWest. Somehow, incredibly, I had escaped from the concretejungles of London and New York and San Francisco, and in atolerably good state. Now I could begin the slow work of salvage,become whole again, maybe even find that peace of head or heart Ihad sought through all these years of largely accidentalactivity. I had found an excuse for living. And I intended toplan my own death very, very, carefully, which alone can give themeaning to one's life. Vava'u was all that I had anticipated; indeed more,since it manifested itself in the form of the most delicatelysensuous natural beauty, especially in the morning, when the seaflows in golden waves towards the rising sun; the whole islandseemed to be divinely transfused: one feels inclined, like thepilgrims on the Ganges, to sink down every morning before thebeauty of the place in fervent gratitude. You can imagine my surprise, therefore, when, on mysecond morning—I had rented a bamboo and thatched hut acouple of miles from the tiny port on the edge of the bush—Iwas awakened by the sound of pop music. Nothing could have beenmore incongruous or unexpected, and I feared at first it was anauditory hallucination. But the noise persisted, and, quicklydressing, I followed the sound into the bush until I came to asmall hut. I knocked on the door. No answer. So I knocked again.This time a voice, an American, answered—'Who is it?''Friend,' I said. 'Enter, friend.' I pushed open the door and inside were three youngmen dressed in jeans and sweat shirts. The air was redolent ofmarijuana, and everyone appeared to be pretty stoned. I said I'dheard the music and, curious, had followed the sound. Did theymind if I sat down and joined them? 'Nope.' It turned out that they were members of the PeaceCorps, of which there were about 120 scattered about the islands,seven of whom were on Vava'u. The Tongalese called them'voluntary workers'. Some taught English in the schools, someworked as medical assistants for the Medical Department, and somewere working as farmers. These three seemed a nice bunch of guys.And the ice was quickly broken when I told them I was writing abook about psychedelics. 'Did you bring any acid with you?' oneof them asked. 'I did as a matter of fact—about 100 trips of"sunshine", which is about as pure as you can get. Haveany of you taken acid?' None of them had, but each said he'd liketo try some. 'How about some grass? Do you have any?' I asked.'Sure,' one of them said passing me the plastic bag filled withmarijuana. 'Roll yourself a joint. It's great weed. We grow itlocally. It's dynamite. ' The effect was excellent, and soon I was as stonedas they were. Jefferson Airplane were playing on the Sonycassette, loud and energetic, playing tight and clean, blowingour minds. You didn't have to listen to it with greatconcentration. You can just sorta drift with it. Then followedsome Grateful Dead—Anthem Of the Sun and Aoxomoxoa;very soulful and communicative, a liturgy of the hip. The musicwas creating good vibes all around, with everything becoming onemusic; or rather, everything inside becoming all music,which is what true pop music is all about, the obliteration ofthought for sensation. One of the Peace Corps guys was really uptightabout a recent debate in the Parliament. Apparently, a member ofthe Tongan Parliament had complained that they were startingtheir own private businesses by growing small gardens, sellingthe produce, and feeding chickens so as to sell the eggs. He saidthey were trying to change Tongan customs. 'Here, let me read you some of what this cat said—"Our women who used to wear a dress, the traditional tupenu and ta'ovala are now clothing themselves in one yard of cloth. Even the huge women use up only one yard, making it so tight that their sharp-shinned legs show and it makes them look thick on the right side and thin on the left." Crazy! Now dig this, "When they are walking in the streets, you can't tell if they are coming or going! This has come from the examples set by the voluntary workers. All the spiritual feelings I experience when I am in the church vanish when these voluntary workers enter the church building with the clothes they wear. Very often I feel like getting up and throwing them out. Therefore I ask the Premier that if a copra boat should come, let us pack them all in it and send them back to America. Soon they will be wearing only underwear to church." But he got no steam from the Premier, who also happens to be the king's brother, Prince Tu'ipelehake. He really took the wind out of the sails, telling this uptight cat, Tu'akoi' that instead of being critical he should be grateful.... "God made their visit possible. It is often a mystery that, without knowing or being acquainted with anyone, they are willing to sacrifice t o give such help. The sacrifice and usefulness have been proved today not only to the Government, but also to the people, the country and the church. Love is repaid with love, and the understanding and the willingness to help is the most important of all. We should consider such gratitude and sacrifice. I believe that if they have sacrificed for Tonga, not one of us here in this house could do more for Tonga. We should be grateful and we have given an oath to be rightful and loving in our work for His Majesty King Tupou IV and the country".' After a few days I had got to know the seven localPeace Corps quite well. We'd spend a lot of time rapping. Andthere was plenty of grass from their gardens. We also discussedhaving a 'sunshine' session together, on one of the smalluninhabited islands close by. We settled on one weekend, andtaking supplies of food and water for two days, we took themotor-boat to a small island of palm trees and golden beachesabout three miles from port. I had previously explained at somelength what sort of reaction to expect and how to overcome anyparanoia by fixing the mind on a natural object like a stone or acoconut, or by chanting the 'Vajra Guru Mantra'—OM AH HUMVAJRA GURU PADMA SIDDHI HUM—which represents the vitalessence of the 84,000 sections of the Dharma, 'and in this wayattain the siddhis of the wrathful deities'. The session began shortly after we landed. It was amorning of bright golden sunlight and a clear blue sky and sea,no sound from anywhere; a perfect setting. Soon the 'sunshine'began to take effect, and again I was transported into the heartof my intra-atomic self, that place of reconciliation and blissin which all life lives in the unity of the One. But I was unableto stay there for long; one of the group had begun to declarehimself as Jesus Christ and insisted that we were his disciples.And the force of his conviction, coupled with an increasedrapidity and volume of his speech, began to take over our headsso that soon we were lost in a maze of contradictory thoughts andfeelings, expressed variously in anger, laughter, dismay andfear. In vain I tried to get him to keep quiet, but he continuedto expatiate on the evil he saw in life and insisted that wefollow him on a crusade to save the world. Very soon the harmonyof the session was lost, and people either wandered off bythemselves or sat as if transfixed by this Christ figure,submerged under the non-stop repetitious flow of words. As therewas nothing now I could do to silence him, I too ambled off alongthe beach, just hopeful that our new Christ would talk himselfinto silence by the time I got back. OM AH HUM VAJRA GURU PADMASIDDHI HUM I intoned as I slowly walked along the shorelinestopping every now and again to pick up a shell or observe themiracle of the sand turtle or the vigorous motion of tinycrabs.... When I got back several hours later, everyone wasthere and seated around a small fire. Jesus was curiouslyobserving each face one after the other, as if seeking an answerto some private question, a sort of vacant look on his face, anexpression of disbelief; but he was mercifully silent. We slept on the beach that night, gazing at themillion sparkling stars, thinking, wondering, seeking answers toman's age-old question 'What is the secret of this universe inwhich we live?' until, exhausted, we finally fell asleep. We returned to Vava'u the next day. The boy Jesusseemed a little embarrassed by what he had said and done, butsoon we had him laughing at his own stupidity. He later told mehe had been a divinity school student for two years beforeswitching to social science, but after this 'trip' he wonderedthat perhaps he ought to have stayed on and become a minister. Itold him that he could be anything he wanted, this time around.Besides, he was probably serving God better by helping teachTongans how to run their social services than preaching his wordeach Sunday in church. I gave him my copy of the New JerusalemBible. But it was all too good to last. Already there wasgossip on the main island about the Peace Corps growing pot onVava'u, and now rumour had it that they were taking LSD. This wasconfirmed when I received a note from the British Consul sayingthat some questions were being asked about me and the purpose ofmy stay in Tonga. He was also in possession of a file from theForeign Office, and the local CIA had filled in a few moredetails. Would I care to visit him to discuss the matter? It wasexactly one month since I first arrived in Tonga when theMinister of Police and about a dozen detectives arrived on Vava'uand started searching for the marijuana beds. The Peace Corpswere clearly implicated, and a cable was sent to Washington tothis effect. By return came a cable from the Peace Corps Directorasking that they return to Washington immediately, when therewould be a hearing before the committee. As for myself, I decidedto leave before I was kicked out, and soon I was on the jet, thistime for New York, where at least it was still possible to smokepot without getting paranoid, as now even office girls weresmoking the stuff, which meant nearly everyone in the city was. And the fellows from the Peace Corps? It seemedthat they had not returned to Washington as instructed but haddecided to live in Fiji instead, turning on the local PeaceCorps, as well as their former colleagues on holiday from Tonga.Again and again I am surprised at the effect that LSD has onpeople's lives, how it seems to change their directions or goals,making it somehow impossible for them to exist in the formal,structured world so favoured by the Establishment. In this casewhat a few micrograms of LSD had done was to transform a bunch ofordinary, middle-class Americans with clear-cut expectations andachievement-motivations into missionaries of a new order, forthey were now possessed of a self, or of a self-conscious similarto that of the mystics, rishis, and saints. How was such achange accomplished? Only by the realisation of the God within,and by the willingness to accept the validity of this vision, andmoreover by the ability to re-create this insight as immediatelyin terms of a living manifestation: they have made of themselveswhatever art it is in the life of each one of them, unconcernedwith the trappings of outer forms or appearances: they liveaccording to an inner rhythm, not that of the metronome but ofmusic. They had recognised the Atman within themselves, and nowwanted to realise him in the world; they wanted to assist Brahma,whose partial expression they believed themselves to be. Chapter 10 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library WT01-B36-39IA087-000632-B033-146http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065928 text/html 93189HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:59:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:26:46 GMTContent-length: 92970 The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 10 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library CHAPTER TEN THE CAPITAL OF KINGDOM COME 1969 The anti-diluvian DC-9 swam through a sea of milkall the way from Delhi. It was only just before landing that theclouds cleared for an instant and I saw the magical city ofKathmandu cradled by the snowy ranges of the Himalaya—anon-euclidian landscape of terraced paddy fields surrounding adream form of pagoda-like temples and golden palaces, rising intoview and spinning from the horizon as the plane circled to land. I was thirty-eight, on my first visit to Asia withNew York left well behind, carrying a typewriter, somehand-baggage, a few hundred trips of Californian 'sunshine' acidwhich a friendly psychiatrist laid on me, and about $1000 leftfrom a colour video movie I made about tripping to the moon. Itwas July 16, 1969, and my pilgrimage was destined to begin at theprecise moment of the Apollo 11 blast-off for man's first landingon the moon. At a more ordinary level, it was, I gathered later,absolutely the wrong time to visit Kathmandu, as the monsoon wasimminent; the air was stifling with humidity and the bumpy taxiride from the airport made me sick; and I longed for someair-cooled Manhattan bar where a couple of iced lagers couldrevive a sorely tried spirit. Whatever expectations of romance Ihad nursed had been shrivelled in the heat by the time I reachedmy hotel. I had the insane urge at this point to drive straightback to the airport and continue to Bangkok, settle down to aroutine English-teaching job, get rid of my beard and long hair,become super-straight, like my friends Al Cohen and RichardAlpert, and maybe continue to Australia … but as the beautyof the valley began to exercise its subtle magic through thewindows of my room, I just knew that this was indeed the oneplace in or out of this world where I wanted to be. I took abath, changed into a Tibetan shirt and Indian dhoti—asort of bin cloth you wrap around yourself—smoked a coupleof chillums of good Afghani dope; and nearly fainted in dream ofdreams. The view through my window was brilliant with theafternoon sun. Amazement was the first element of my muteddelight at these bright green paddyfields between myself and thesnowcapped ranges still visible through the shimmering heat; andmystery, of what lay beyond them, unseen—the distanthalf-chartered ranges of Tibet, home of the fable-seekingimagination. The spell of the Himalayas was upon me. The beautyof my surroundings began to penetrate a hardened carapace, forthese mountains had begun to exercise a magic thraldom all theirown. And now I was part of it. In some way which I could notrationally explain, I just knew that I was gazing at themysterious container of the history of the world, the magicalamphitheatre in which Siva dances with Nataraja. I was a visitorin the ancient land of gods and abode of rhishis, tapaswis,sadhakars, saints and philosophers who come to meditate inglacial deserts to make their beings as pure as the snow whichcovers the tops of their sacred mountains and their minds asclear and transparent as the water of the holy lakes... theyoffered their adherents a way of life, a path to happiness: 'In the body as it is in reality are contained allworlds, mountains, continents and seas, the sun and the otherconstellations . . . ' says the Pretakalpa of Garuda-Purana.I also had a sense of what was meant in the passage from theHindu epic Ramayana: 'He who but thinks of the Himalayasdoes greater things than he who is destined to tarry in Benares'.And, by implication, he who tarries in Canterbury, Rome, SaltLake City, Belfast, and Jerusalem. I realised with an immediacy akin if not identicalwith revelation that I had travelled halfway across the world tofind in Kathmandu what I sought in vain throughout my wanderingsin the West. There were certain immediate needs, however, likescoring some local hashish, for which Nepal was rightly famed.And some more suitable clothes. It was still early, and even if it was like afurnace outside, I decided to venture forth into the maze ofdusty streets and alleyways, all somewhat reminiscent of theimaginary Baghdad of The Arabian Nights. The city is not very large and within a matter ofminutes I found myself in the central square. It was likesomething out of the Middle Ages, with street vendors sitting bytheir piles of cloth and vegetables and boxes of cheap ornamentalbeads, with enough activity going on to keep the eye fullyoccupied. A huge bull emerged suddenly from the crowd, sedate andreasonable, wandering with the scores of shoppers, evendefecating without so much as a pause, unnoticed, except, thatis, by myself. The houses were of red brick, all built in astrange pagoda style which eliminated straight lines, withlatticed windows and overhanging balconies, many with hangingpotted plants. There were temples and delicate stupas,huge sculptured statues, beautifully proportioned by someanonymous race of master artists. The faces of these deities seemself-absorbed in contemplation; sharp cheeks and supple chins inthe case of the male gods, and sweetly smiling lips, sensitivelysloping fleshy cheeks with elegant curves in the case of thefemales. Some of the faces had been almost worn away through thepassage of time, which gave them a special mystery. Yet eachone—and there were hundreds—was strangely complete initself and fostered the message of the divine. But what wasinteresting was to see how they were still objects of venerationand worship by the people. There was one in particular thatcaught my eye, a sculpture of the god Vishnu, the divine ruler ofthe Hindu Triad; the face looked serious, with just theright degree of rectitude and probity as befitted his position.He had ear ornaments hanging above his shoulders and had all thetraditional attributes or ayudas—the crown, thenecklace, the garland of flowers and the hip-belts, allexquisitely shaped; the upper garment, the sacred thread or yajnopavita,and the dhoti were emphasised with oblique lines throughthe chisel-marks. In front was a rounded platform, a stone, forrubbing and making chandana paste from sandalwood. It was a glimpse of this Other World, of somethingthat I had seen and read about but had never had directexperience of before. Here I could actually feel this something. I still had to score some hash and get a Tibetanshirt or two and a dhoti. I also wanted to discard myshoes. I remembered that someone had told me that Rana's teashopwas a good place to score so along I went. It was up a tinyalley, dustbin dirty and smelling of cow shit and urine. Outsidesat a small boy, a beggar, and I gave him a handful of rupeesbefore I went inside. Rana's was an extraordinary place. There was popmusic on twin speakers, very loud, and a few stone-topped tablesat which were gathered a group of perhaps fifteen youngWesterners, silent, smoking chillums, and oblivious. They weredressed in a gay medley of Indian, Tibetan and Nepalese costumes,bedecked with beads and beards. One of them looked up, smiled,and handed me a chillum, which I smoked. The effect wasinstantaneous—I almost passed out, and had to sit down. I don't know how long I remained seated at thetable, perhaps an hour, perhaps two. The hash was the strongestI'd ever had and completely immobilised me. Rana, the dapperyoung Nepalese owner of the place, would come over every now andthen and ask if there was anything more I wanted. 'Tea?' or'Porridge?' I merely shook my head and continued just sitting inmy utter stupor. Finally, I was able to stand up, and I indicated toRana that I'd like to buy some of his hashish. He brought out asimple handheld set of scales and weighed a tola—aboutone-third of an ounce—which cost me about four shillings.Then I split. I was still in somewhat of a daze when I got backto my hotel, and had to lie down again. It was dark when Iawakened. I decided to undress and go to bed. It was only eighto'clock, but there was really nothing I could or wanted to do. Iwas completely stoned. I awoke at daybreak. The bright yellow sun floodedthrough my windows and I felt wonderful. Today would be a goodday. And, as things turned out, it was. I made a telephone call to the Royal Palace to talkto Narayan Shrester, private secretary to the Crown Prince, who Ihad known in Cambridge, Massachusetts, about one year ago. Heseemed pleased to hear that I was in Kathmandu, and said he'ddrop by the hotel to see me. Narayan dropped by for lunch. He showered me withsmiles and greetings and love. And we had a great reunion,recalling our past meetings at Harvard and lots of questionsabout why I had come to Kathmandu. 'Why Kathmandu ? Surely theremust have been somewhere else?' was a characteristic question,for I'm sure his own dream fantasies of paradise cities weredirected towards Paris or even San Francisco. I told him I'd comein order to sort out 'my priorities', to gain a new amplitude, toenjoy the experience of living in a foreign country, things likethat. I told him that even in the short space of twenty-fourhours I could not only see but actually feel thatindigenous and elusive quality in Nepalese life. It was thatquality, which hitherto I had only been told about but couldnever really experience, which indeed has yet to be expressedoutside the occasional rare poem. He thought I should write abook about Nepal. Then we laughed. During the lunch I brought up the matters of myvisa. I had, I told him, about $1000, and lots of enthusiasmabout starting a poetry magazine in Kathmandu. I had even got thetitle—Flow. I reminded him that one of the things wehad chatted about in America was the phenomenon of hippies andhow I had taken him around the various colleges and to privatehomes so that he might better understand the new life-styles nowemerging in America and in Europe—many tied into orientalreligions. Narayan—who has a degree in English from LeedsUniversity had been tutor to the Crown Prince (now King Bihrendraof Nepal), and I had been anxious for the Crown Prince to alsoappreciate that, if these developments were to continue, newpossibilities for religious-minded Westerners would have to bedeveloped in India and Nepal, the two Asian countries which hadperhaps most to teach. Hippies were not long-haired layabouts inmost instances, but had chosen to spend some time in the Eastliving with and through the ordinary people, or in Ashramsor monasteries; they had come to learn, as seekers, not astourists with lots of dollars to spend. And I was one of them. He said that he'd discuss the matter of my staywith the Crown Prince, and that I would be hearing from him thenext day. He envisaged no difficulty. As it turned out, Ireceived a year's visa, extendable at any time should I wish tostay on in Nepal. It was something I had cause to be very, verygrateful for indeed, as visa formalities can and usually doinvolve a certain amount of hassle with the authorities, withsomething like six weeks considered to be about the averagelength of stay permitted at that time. Narayan had a little Volkswagen and offered to dropme somewhere. I said I'd like to see one of the museums, so hedrove me a mile or two outside the city to the National Museumnear SwayambhuNath, one of the Holy Buddhist Centres of Nepal. Hehimself had to get back to the Palace. He had given up his job asEnglish Lecturer at Tribhuvan University and was now privatesecretary to the Crown Prince—which meant he had to workthat much harder! The exterior of the museum was in the traditionalNepalese style of architecture and beautifully preserved. And asI walked around inside, gazing at the sculptured Hindu Gods, thebronze figures of the Goddess Curga, prayer necklaces of Rudraksabeads, incense burners shaped as the tree of life, and paintings,I was glimpsing into a past that was still very much a livingpresent, for here was a highly developed, sophisticated arttradition that had reached perfection when Nepal had been theflower of a great Asian civilisation. I looked at the statue ofVishnu, this one dating from the fifteenth or sixteenthcentury—it was very massive and majestic, standingcompletely erect on a bold-relief lotus-flower, and flanked oneither side by his two female consorts. The female deity at hisright hand held a chalara or 'fly-whisk' (I suppose that even themost powerful of Gods were not totally immune to the ubiquitousvalley mosquito) and a lotus flower. The female at his leftcarried a lyre in her hands pressed closely against the breastsand the belly. But the real beauty was in the faces and forms ofVishnu's consorts—their slender waists and exceptionallybeautiful and delicate breasts conveyed their profound femininefrailty.... At closing time I stepped out once more into adaytime present 'when the mountains were again the mountains; theclouds were again the clouds'. A car sped by on the tiny road infront of the museum. I suppose I could have been run over.For what I was still experiencing was this profound sense ofsomehow living the continuation of a glorious past in thepresent—which is something that no Western museum had everdone for me, being, for the most part, 'dead' places. I don'tthink I shall ever again experience anything more radiant than myvisions of that afternoon in my life. I just knew that I shouldno longer feel 'alone', which is to live in my own nakedspiritual reserves, that the body-mind was capable of beingfilled up again with the light through the simple process oflooking. How easy it all seemed. I ambled along the road like an old priest,stopping now and again to observe the view, the bloom of a wildrose, a particularly wondrous cloud structure. And since I waswalking in the direction of the Buddhist temples of Swayambhu, Idecided to proceed into the village. But first a stop at the chi or teashop.There was a group of heads sitting on a bench outside, chewingthe breeze, smoking the indigenous chillums, and several moreinside, in the cavernous half-light. No one was talking much; it was considered a'downer'—bad form—to use words, but communication wasno less intense for all that. The young Nepalese owner cameoutside with a mug of thick tea, dark brown and very sweet, andasked if I'd like anything. I shook my head. He smiled, anddisappeared into the dark interior of his teashop. The fellowsitting next to me passed me a joint. His eyes stared at mewidely, his mouth still hung open as if to keep the last word ofhis sentence in mid-air. Everyone here believes in all the magic,I thought. I took a couple of deep tokes. 'Good grass,' Isaid, handing him back his huge seven-skin joint. He looked at me. And I was reminded of a Frenchpoem I'd read somewhere … 'in the depths of a dilated pupilshines the lamp of the poor'. As I got up to leave, he asked whether I'd been tothe Bakery Ashram yet, and he pointed to a smallpassageway between two buildings. 'Just follow the path and takea left when you get to the temple. They've got a new soundsystem.' Since I was stoned anyway, and since I had nothingparticularly to do, I decided to follow the path to the Ashram. I heard the electronic music quite clearly throughthe natural sound of Buddhist chanting outside the temple, and,following the path, came suddenly upon a compound garden filledwith lots of young Western heads, all dressed in their dhotisand Tibetan shirts and Indian silks. The Ashram comprised two principlebuildings, one, a former factory of the now bankrupt SwayambhNathBakery concern, and the other, a long shed. And it was from theshed that the sounds came. Inside, seated quietly in a circle round a centralfireplace, were about twenty people, mostly male. There wereseveral chillums being passed around simultaneously. Room wasquietly made for me to join this charmed circle. The two five-feet Sony speakers made all verbalcommunication impossible. It was like sitting on stage with theStones. The sound of the music eclipsed all cognitive function.It was like a river into which you had been plunged. And all youneed do was float, float, F-l-o-a-t. Hours—maybe even days—passed in aninstant. Time ceased to exist for those of us who sat stoned inour mystical ring round the fire. And it was with this insightthat I was born into a new world. A new form of consciousness hadtaken over, that we were somehow all together because in somestrange way we had been brought here. It was as though agust of wind had come from another existence, and had plucked usfrom the streets of Rome and London and Detroit, and propelled usto this Himalayan valley; our new myth-mother. It had grown dark outside, and the people who hadbeen in the garden, now crowded inside the Ashram. Thesmell of food from the far-end, invisible through the haze ofwood-smoke and hashish reminded me that I had not eaten allafternoon. Soon there were people sitting around with plates ontheir laps eating rice and vegetables with chopsticks. I saw aline of people with empty plates in their hands, so I got up andjoined them. The Ashram provided one sensible meal a day,in the evening which cost one rupee to anyone who could affordit, otherwise it was free; tea was a few cents extra. After we had eaten dinner, the poet Kristof walkedacross to the record player and switched it off. He returned tohis place in the circle. There was a hush, a stillness, a senseof expectancy. Kristof announced that he was going to read a'love poem', which he had just finished writing. Everyone lookedup smiling when Kristof finished; he was assuredly one of theirverbal magicians. It was a strange place this salamandrine Ashramof glassy eyes staring from fiery lake beside the sound of musicthrough my leafy dreams … but soon the speakers were back onagain at full blast, so I decided to make my way back to thehotel. It was dark when I stepped outside, and it was withgreat difficulty that I found my way down and on to the roadagain. Swayambhu is about two miles from the city, and I walkedslowly, savouring the stillness; no sound from anywhere; even thedogs were quiet as I made my way through the maze of tiny streetsand alleyways. The city was almost deserted, yet it could nothave been much later than ten o'clock. It reminded me of the Cityof London at night or downtown New York, after the crowds ofoffice workers had long since gone, the same sort of eeriestillness. Back in my hotel room, I smoked a nocturnal chillumand then got into bed with a manuscript translation of some poemsby the Nepalese master poet, Bhanubhaka Archarya, which Narayanhad left with me. There was an interesting description ofKathmandu a century or so back which the poet compared with theCelestial City of Alaka (the god of wealth); he also noted itsresemblance to Lhasa, Lucknow and London. And it was withthese images in my mind that I fell asleep. I was awakened in the morning by a knock at thedoor. I stumbled out of bed and opened the door, expecting tofind a cleaning-woman. But, no, it was a young, handsome man whointroduced himself in perfect English as Madhusudan Thakur fromNorthern India, a Brahmin, and former English lecturer atTribhuvan University, Kathmandu, and a Sanskrit scholar. He hadbeen given my name by Narayan, who had suggested we might havemuch in common. I apologised for the state of my book-strewn roomand invited him in. Madhu, as he called himself, began to tell me a bitabout his life. He had studied English in Canada for three years,and was now into translating Nepalese poetry into English. He wasalso working on some Sanskrit translations. But what fascinatedhim most was the increasing number of young Westerners living inKathmandu, and their impact on the cultural life of this city.For Kathmandu was the 'third eye' of Asia, and the eye that getsin when reality gets out. It had a special place and played aspecial role in Asia. In fact, he had written an article on youngWestern visitors for the leading intellectual monthly magazine TheRising Nepal and wanted me to look over the manuscript. Itwas entitled 'Kathmandu: A Coincidence'. Would I like to hearbits of it ? Sure, I said He began to read: 'It happened only the other day by what is called in northeastern India a Samyoga, fair coincidence. At a public place in Kathmandu, two elderly gentlemen debated, and I overheard them in spite of myself. They were discussing whether the large group of young unkempt visitors from the West now in Kathmandu had any principles guiding their visit to the East. The gentleman whose tone of voice caught my attention first was saying "Iniharuko kehi pani siddhanta chhai na", meaning "These people have no principles at all, you know''. He seemed to be informing his friend, who, however, paid little attention to his companion's tone and presented his view of a whole ideology motivating and guiding these young people and their venture abroad. They were, he said, on a very important mission indeed. Life in the West had lost its meaning for them and they had come out here to seek and find new meanings, fresh perspectives, among the cultures of the East in art, religion, philosophy, in traditional, time-honoured ways of living, in forms of life and manner still untouched by the sick hurry and commercialism of modern Western civilisation: indeed, they were true seekers. 'A cross-section of the people under discussion sat close by, blissfully unconscious of the conversation that went on around them. I sat between them and wondered. 'In fact, I continue to wonder. Personally, my time in the West, my memories of looks and words after every talk I gave on religious texts, philosophical questions and so forth, convince me that the Western youth today is truly seeking. 'The scene in Kathmandu, despite our cynical gentlemen, remains positive and exciting. Potentially, here is a situation which is a counterpart of a movement to preserve and promote our ancient heritage such as the ideal of a new Sanskrit University. The readiness with which Western youth is willing to accept and undergo, even though temporarily, extreme physical hardship is simply amazing if one considers the conditions in which they have grown up. Living in a world without plumbing and central heating can indeed be for the group under discussion a "spiritual experience" in itself. It is hard to believe that the sacrifice this entails could be motivated simply by the desire for cheap travel around the world. The passionate interest in religious cultures not their own is a fact about young people today which should be given immediate recognition. A new faith is arising and demands, even in its present rudimentary forms, that we try and understand ourselves in terms of the traditions in which others have been nourished. The prejudices aroused by the long hair and beards notwithstanding, it is evident to those who look and listen that there are a certain number of genuine Sadhakas, seekers, among these people. 'Even if life in the West has not lost its point for some, one can see and feel what some of the major political events of the past few years must have done to the more sensitive and intelligent youth of the countries involved and responsible for these events. No one who has observed for himself the mass madness let loose by alcoholism and sexual licence in Western cities, all part of the vast and complex money game, can help looking at the psychedelic movement in a new light. 'I have no wish to saddle our friends with a "philosophy" not because I think there is no philosophy motivating them, but because the quest is still very much on. The gains of the last few years are still in the process of being recorded, the story is yet to be told. We might indeed be living right in "the middle of things", to use a Jamesian image, since Kathmandu promises to become, for some of the characters in the play, the capital of the new world.' I was very impressed, and said so. I told Madhuthat I thought we were all on some kind of sort of quest and hadfound in Kathmandu the perfect place to start. Kathmandu was acity of refugees, the new Jerusalem of the Sadhakas, whohad come to savour of the fruits of Paradise. We ordered dinner in our room, and were nowperfectly relaxed in each other's company. I liked him. He wasopen and honest and a man for whom the invisible world wasobviously visible. I told him that I was planning to bring out apoetry magazine, but needed more material, especially modernNepalese poetry. I proposed to include material from the Westdealing especially with the nature of the spiritual quest,including some essays by myself on the phenomenon LSD. I said itwould serve a two-fold purpose. First, it would introduceNepalese poetry to Western readers and second, it would enableNepalese readers to orient themselves to the psychology andbackground of their young visitors. I had a little money, andsince printing was cheap in Kathmandu, I already had enough tocover costs. Madhu said he'd be very interested indeed to help inany way, and that he was already working on the Englishtranslations of several poems. And thus began a partnership thatresulted in the publication of Flow One several monthslater. One thing led to another, and before long we hadalso agreed to start a centre for both Western and Easternseekers, especially those who wanted to learn Sanskrit. Madhuemphasised the importance of Sanskrit amongst the intellectualartistic circles as well as in the higher levels of Governmentand at the Palace. Sanskrit played the same role here as Latindid in the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages, it was a sort of linguafranca of any philosophical discussions. He said that Narayan would almost certainly beinterested in hearing about such a project, and maybe could evenget the Crown Prince as its patron. Could we draft an outlineproposal, since he would be seeing Narayan for dinner later thatevening, and would like to have him put it before the CrownPrince ? The sooner we acted, the sooner the project could getofficial sanction. I would also need permission from the PrimeMinister to publish, but he didn't foresee that there would beany problem. Madhu went downstairs to make a few telephonecalls, and I cleared the desk and prepared a chillum tofacilitate the creative processes. When Madhu returned, he looked very excited. Yes,Narayan would like to see the proposal this evening. And he hadhad some luck. He had called Balakrishna Sama, the Vice-Presidentof the Royal Nepalese Academy, who wanted us to come over to hishouse for afternoon tea and for a chat. Madhu said thatBalakrishna was one of the truly great poets of Nepal, andcertainly of international stature. The problem was thatBalakrishna wrote his poetry in Nepalese or Sanskrit, though ofcourse his English was perfect. As a result, he was virtuallyunknown outside his own country, a situation Madhu planned torectify by translating into English all his work written over thepast sixty years. He brought up a chair to the desk, and we began toformulate the proposal. Madhu didn't smoke hash himself, but hadno objection if anyone else did. After a couple of chillums andan hour's discussion, we had agreed upon the main details, andall that now remained was to write it. We addressed it to HisRoyal Highness, The Crown Prince of Nepal. When we finished, Madhu suggested that we should goround to see Balakrishna Sama who lived at the other end of town,not far from the Chinese Embassy. We took a taxi and within tenminutes were walking up the drive of his house; with Hindustatues in the garden and a huge Garuda bird painted onthe door. I was already impressed. The house itself was large,half-timbered like a medieval manor, two or three storeys high,and painted white. A servant let us in and ushered us into one of thedownstairs living rooms. He said his master would join us in amoment. The room was like a miniature museum with statuesof stone and bronze of the various Hindu pantheon, paintings andearly Nepalese iconography; books in Nepalese, Sanskrit, Englishand French, and, nicely laid out on a silver-topped table, aVictorian tea-service. We had to wait only a minute or two before the poetentered. He made a short bow and shook hands with us andapologised for keeping us waiting. His English, like so many ofthe cultured Nepalese, was almost entirely without accent, and hespoke it with feeling, spontaneously, and without affectation. Hewas perhaps seventy years of age, delicate and radiant withhealth, and had the face of a man who had obviously lived a lifeof the mind, very sensitive and aristocratic, as though his innerand outer worlds matched. He was dressed in shiny blue silk inthe traditional Nepalese dress, and I felt that I was in thecompany of an exceptional, rare person, perhaps even a saint butcertainly a wizard of some sort. He seemed very pleased to see us, especially Madhu,whom he embraced warmly as he beckoned us to the tea-table. Hisservant appeared with a silver tea-pot, and a plate of cakes andtoasted scones. Madhu then started to talk about the Himal Centreproject, and to read him bits of our afternoon's work.Balakrishna was most attentive and sympathetic and said that hewould certainly encourage a centre such as we had outlined. Theonly problem he thought was the financial one. He made a fewcalculations on a sheet of paper and said that for thescholarships alone we would need $595,000. Madhu said that although $500,000 might sound alike a lot of money, in reality it was not too much if oneconsidered the possibility of help from some of the largerAmerican Foundations, who were used to giving away much largersums for less realistic projects. I remained silent, though Inodded in agreement with Madhu's analysis. We then began to discuss the envisaged poetrymagazine, Flow, which Madhu briefly described. Nepal,being a country in which poetry was highly esteemed, had a lot tooffer, and it would make sense to make available some of the bestNepalese poetry in English, as well as make availablecontemporary Western poetry to Nepalese poetry lovers.Balakrishna then turned to me and asked in his quiet, pleasantway, what the editorial policy might be and whether I thoughtNepalese poetry was sufficiently good to warrant translation intoan international language like English. I was pretty stoned and my mind was already soaringinto giddy heights of inspiration. 'Flow is essentially amagazine of poetry, art and religion, and we should dedicate itto the man of tomorrow who has understood the burden of his dimpast, synthesised the heritage of his many cultures, solved thecrises of the present age and lives according to his genius!' Balakrishna smiled broadly, and said that Camus,the French Existentialist, had probably meant something similarwhen he had noted somewhere that 'Real generosity towards thefuture lies in giving all to the present'. I then asked the poet whether he would read some ofhis poems, but he demurred, saying his English was not reallygood enough to express his meaning, though Madhu could readsomething if he wished. Madhu pulled out a fistful of manuscripts from hisbriefcase. 'I think I'd like to read a verse from your most recent poem, which I have just finished translating—To Soma, which was, I believe, inspired by the recent Apollo 11 manned trip to the moon. But I think I ought to explain for the benefit of Michael here, that the word Soma in Sanskrit also means "moon" as it is also associated with the sacred elixir of the gods of Vedic times. It was the fruit from the mystical tree of knowledge which, when taken, loosened the "Tongue of the Way" and in this sense would correspond to the Greek ambrosia, the elixir of immortality from the stream of Castalia under the Temple of Diana. ' Madhu stood up, bowed graciously to the poet, whosat silent, his face grave and serious … 'Sweetly, O Soma, do I remember you again today, Over the last half-century have I been Drinking you in, drop by drop, unceasing, ecstatic! Once again, O Soma, I grind your vine, Grind it with my heart, filter it through my viens, Mingle it with my vision and my breath, To fill the amphora of my heart to the brim! O Soma, soaked am I to the very depths In the sweet shower of your beams Drawn deeply by your gravity, Exhilarated, breathless as I swing And go steadily gliding, gliding, I too fly upwards with Apollo Eleven! … ' It was a long poem followed by a long silence, andwe all looked as if something very special had happened, like theshock following upon a great discovery. Impatient or unwilling to remain silent, I finallybroke the spell by saying that it was one of the most incrediblepoems that I had ever heard, and that I wanted to put it into themagazine for the world to read. I also added, by way of acomment, that I had arrived in Kathmandu on the very same daythat Apollo 11 had blasted off for the moon. Balakrishna then said, looking at me straight inthe eyes, though centred in the middle of my forehead: 'A mostauspicious omen for you.' It was time to go, and we stood up, bowed andtook our leave. Madhu danced down the driveway, obviously pleasedby our reception. There were no taxis in sight and I told Madhuthat I'd really prefer to walk back to the hotel, which was finewith him. The evening breeze made the walk bearable, and Ifelt very good indeed. We talked a lot on the way about themagazine, the shape it should take, who might be able to print itin English, things like that. But my mind was strangelyelsewhere, as if the experience with Balakrishna Sama had beenmore than simply meeting a master poet. I felt very close to theman in some odd, unaccountable way. Perhaps in him I had at lastfound my 'guru'? We soon reached the centre of the city, and takingMadhu back into my confidence, I asked him whether he could findme a house to rent, somewhere nice, perhaps on the edge of thecity, and with many rooms. Madhu said he'd look into itimmediately. We said goodbye at Kanti Path, and I cut across thepark in the direction of my hotel. It was a beautiful evening, cool and pleasant inthe evening light, the mountains still visible as silhouettes inthe far distance. I again experienced that expansion of feeling,a new mental amplitude, difficult to describe but quite intense.It was my own self reborn out of the vibrations of this holycity; it was my own self which warms in the sun, refreshes in theevening breeze, glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees....In the distance I heard the sound of a temple flute and bell andthe song of the cicada as it sung itself … utterly …a-w-a-y. Why grasp so earnestly after hallucinations and flowersin the air when it was all here, at one's feet ? For as one'ssense of reality deepends, which it does with age, one's need tointegrate with the world is very great indeed. And I felt that atleast here, in this Paradise city, I should make myself yet onemore dwelling place. Back in my hotel room, after a light dinner of riceand vegetables, contentedly I prepared a chillum, and poured outsome fruit wine. How otherwise shall we take our pleasure here… and if ever I am asked again 'What for the future?' itwill be with a finger pointed to the moon that I shall reply. Three months later … The monsoon was over. The air was as clear andfresh as Vichy water. I had rented the lower two floors of alarge house called 'Shangri-La' in Bijuswari, a secluded suburbof Kathmandu close to Swayambhu. The house belonged to theNepalese Director of Tourism, Tirtha Raj Tuladhar, a Buddhist anda man of great personal charm and sensitivity, who had translatedmany of King Mahendra's poems into English. And from my window Ihad a clear view across the valley to the distant snow-cappedpeaks of the high Himalayan range. The house stood by itself in anarrow lane which was really a cul-de-sac and was thus unvisitedby motorised transport, except once in the morning and once inthe evening when a chauffeur-driven car came to pick up anddeliver the Tourist Director. It was a haven of stillness, andthe only sounds you heard were natural ones—of birds, oranimals or passing people. There was a large meadow extendingacross the lane; and a large well-kept garden immediately infront of the house, which seemed forever ablaze with flowers,especially roses, which the tourist director would tend for hoursat a time, removing by hand, bugs from the petals and leaves, oneat a time, never killing them, but putting them on a sheet ofpaper and every now and then blowing them off into the winds offate or fortune. A typically Buddhist gesture. An orchard of pearand apple trees flanked either side of the house and at the veryrear, beyond the back garden was a small stupa ofexquisite design. It was an ideal place to be. This was mylandscape, the one that absorbed me, with joy, into the hot bloodof myths and gods, back into the roots of total being in which,at times I could truly believe that there was no longer any 'I'or 'me' but that I was somehow the All. And in the mornings, with my rooms filled withbright sunlight and the sound of temple bells opening the well ofmy ears, I could feel that inexpressible peace … as: Unseen today In brightest sunlight, and yet Today how beautiful, Mother Nepal. I was learning that man is born in ignorance of hiselement, and must somehow find it, like the cygnet finds thewater. My mornings would usually start early, shortlyafter daybreak. I had a small paraffin burner on which I wouldmake my breakfast, usually a plate of porridge made fromwater-buffalo milk, and several cups of tea, followed by achillum. I usually took this in the garden. I'd then try to worka little on the magazine manuscripts before Madhu would arrive,usually at about ten o'clock. It was an idyllic existence. Kris, the poet, would usually join us for lunch,and after lunch we would be joined by five or six otherWesterners for some Sanskrit lessons, which Kris had arranged. Hehad a degree in Sanskrit from Oxford, and was a very patient,clever teacher, who used his skill to get us to learn thisamazing language. But mostly my time was taken up with the manifoldproblems of getting the magazine together. We had found threeprinters and had decided to parcel the material out as threeseparate sections, which we would then assemble into the finalmagazine. Already the shape of the magazine was discernible, ifin silhouette only, but the energy was there—my slightparanoia was that with the unlimited amount of hashish and LSD wehad, all this energy would dissipate before completion, for withpsychedelics the impetus to 'attend to business' is not alwayspresent! So it was something of an effort of will, for I wasdetermined to get the damn thing published, even if it killed me,which, as it turned out, it very nearly did through what youwould call over-indulgence in drugs (though other matters playedtheir part, like rising costs and two of the printers refusing toprint or return the manuscripts entrusted to them). The least of my difficulties, surprisingly enough,was obtaining official permission from the Prime Minister topublish the magazine. I had been told by various people,including the French Ambassador, that no foreigner had everreceived such permission, 'not even the Americans'. And theBritish Embassy was equally sure that I would be refused, thoughin every other way they were most encouraging. I needed, of course, someone who had access to thePrime Minister and who was also a poet. And I found my man in theperson of Soorya Bahadur Singh. He was an extraordinary gentlemanin his late thirties, who worked in the Singha Durba, theparliament building, and who wrote poetry in English. He cameround to see me one day with a pile of poems about one foot deep,which he wanted me to publish. Mr. Singh had connections inside theParliament—his brother was private secretary to the King. SoI asked him to arrange for me to see the Prime Minister. This hearranged in a matter of a few hours for the following day, whichdidn't leave me much time to find something suitable to wear. Mynormal dress was a Tibetan shirt and dhoti, a piece of colouredIndian cloth wrapped around my waist, and my shoes had long sincebeen given away to a Tibetan Buddhist priest, who had wanted themfor his Rimpoche (a High Lama) as a gift. Accordingly, as soon as Singh told me that I had tobe at the Singha Durba at eleven o'clock the next morning, I wentinto town to buy an outfit. I settled for what I was told was atraditional Nepalese costume for formal occasions. It was made ofsilver cloth and the trousers were right up to the knees andopened up at the top like jodhpurs, together with a long jacketnearly down to the middle of the thigh. The collar was tied bymeans of ribbons. I also got a pair of cheap Indian sandals. I spent most of the night preparing my brief, andfelt able to answer any questions the Prime Minister might put tome. Mr. Singh came with a taxi at 10.30 to take me to the SinghaDurba. He seemed to be almost as nervous as I was. I haddifficulty getting dressed in my new Nepalese clothes—thelegs were too tight, but I finally managed to get into them, andoff we set. The Singha Durba was an impressive building, hugeand in the style of architecture of the British Raj. The taxidropped us off at the main entrance. The entire building seemedto be a labyrinth of corridors, and we walked rapidly, movingthrough this maze, up stairways, down small corridors, along longones until we stopped before two huge polished mahogany doorswith a sparkling brass curved doorknob. Mr. Singh knocked, and weentered. This was the Secretary's office. The secretary was apleasant young man, who smiled broadly when he saw me, and saidthat the Prime Minister was expecting us. He disappeared for amoment through another set of huge doors, and then came out andindicated that we were to enter. The Prime Minister sat at a desk at the far end ofa palatial room. He was wearing a white open-necked shirt withthe sleeves rolled up. When he stood up to greet us, I noticedthat he was wearing ordinary Western-style navy blue trousers anda belt. It was quite a distance from the door to his desk, butalready I sensed a faux pas on my part. The Prime Ministerbegan to smile as we approached and the smile gradually broadenedinto a grin. By the time we reached his desk he was almostuncontrollably shaking with suppressed laughter. Of course I didn't know it then, but the costume Ihad bought ready-made from one of the tourist shops was from aperiod around about 1890—as though in the West I had gone tomeet an official dressed up in a Dickensian outfit. But the broad grin was infectious, and I, too, waslaughing when we shook hands. Tears streamed down the PrimeMinister's face as he took the form that Singh handed him andwhich he had to sign before we could officially go ahead with thepublication of Flow. He hardly glanced at it, and signing it witha flourish, managed to say between giggles, 'I hope you don'twrite anything bad about Nepal.' Mr. Singh then bowed and said that was all and thatwe now had permission to print. I said I thought the PrimeMinister was an exceptionally jolly fellow. And Singh merelynodded. He then asked me whether I'd like a tour of the building,to which I readily assented. We must have walked three or fourmiles through the endless lengths of corridors, and somehow endedup walking along a subterranean corridor, lit by light comingthrough tiny iron-barred windows. Singh said he had to seesomeone for a moment, and we went into an incredibly small roomthat seemed to be littered everywhere—on the shelves, on thefloor, on the desks, with bundles of envelopes. There was a veryold man sitting at one of the desks, who barely glanced up as weentered. 'This is the censor's office and this is the chiefcensor. I think I will show him the Prime Minister's signature onour document, just in case.' Singh said something to the Censorand gave him the signed piece of paper. The Censor removed thethin wire spectacles which he had been using to read the letters,and produced a magnifying glass, and read the paper Singh hadhanded him. He nodded, dug out a stamp from a drawer, and afterputting some ink on to the pad, stamped the document. 'Now it'scompletely official. We can publish anything we want.' I was glad to get out of the building with itsassociations of prison and other large institutions, and Iwelcomed Singh's suggestion that we should go somewhere andcelebrate, which for Singh meant getting very drunk. I called anAmerican teacher friend and asked him if he could let me have abottle of whisky, explaining the purpose, for it was still notyet noon. No problem. And by mid-afternoon we were both reelingabout the centre of Kathmandu singing songs and reciting poetry.Finally we got to Rana's teashop, and stumbled in. All the headsturned as we noisily entered. And on many of the bearded faceswas a look of disapproval. Rana's was a place for chillums andpop music, not a bar. Singh insisted on having the music turnedoff, then climbed on to the top of a table and, with tearsstreaming down his face, said that never in his entire life hadhe met such a great poet as Michael Hollingshead, and that it washis wish that everyone in the teashop should stand up and sing'God Save the Queen'. A few heads split immediately, sensing ascene. And Rana just stood there watching, not knowing quite whatto do. Finally, I managed to pull Singh off the table and outfrom the teashop into the yard. I then carried him to a taxi andpaid the driver to take him back to the Singha Durba to sleep itoff. And thus the days passed into weeks and theninto months. By now we had a lot of material ready for theprinters. I had also got a translation of one of the King'spoems, which I decided to print in red. It was called ASelf-Portrait … 'Like the dark night I am Whose moon has strayed away; Like the wild withered tree That all its leaves has lost. With rotten, hollowed roots, Ready I am to fall; A faded flower I With none to care for me. A blind man I who gropes Fumbling the stark mid-path; And such a burning fire That has no warmth to give. Ever am I in the mid-stream About to sink beneath the waves; I am a drowned soul, Whose shore lies far away.' It was a very fine poem, and modest, consideringthat King Mahendra was the supreme ruler of Nepal, and alsorecognised as an incarnation of the Hindu God Vishnu. I had also had quite a few acid sessions during thetime I had been there was a constant stream of visitors coming to'Shangri-la' to score some 'sunshine'. There was quite a bit ofacid in the city, mostly brought in by Californians or some ofthe bigger dealers, who would exchange acid for hashish. Ibelieve LSD was known by the few Nepalese who used it as 'Westernhash'. It was traditional to take LSD at full moon, andpeople would congregate at the Bakery Ashram, and drop itin the late evening so that they could listen to music during thenight, followed by a climb up to the Buddhist temples to join themonks for early morning service. It was very rare that anyoneever freaked out' or went berserk, though it could happen. Iremember a young Dutch boy who, when he got to the temple, tookoff all his clothes and began running amok, knocking over prayerbowls and trying to climb up on to the head of a huge bronzeBuddha. There was nothing we could do to quieten him down, and wefelt it had all gone a little too far. The monks, who had beenchanting during all of this had seemingly not paid any attention,that is until the statue began to sway and it looked as if itwould come crashing down. About six monks suddenly moved acrossto grab him, and gently they carried him back to the circle ofother monks. They then tied him up and gagged him and placed himin the centre, and continued their mantras as if nothinghad happened. But perhaps the thing that disturbed local peoplethe most was that, on average, one girl a month would flip out onacid and insist on walking through the centre of the citycompletely naked. I think the Nepalese were terribly shocked bythis, for often the girl would be extremely beautiful. I thinkthe syndrome, as far as one can say anything about humanbehaviour, is connected with the notion of total freedom, thefreedom to walk naked being merely a manifestation of this wish.Throwing off your clothes is an act of liberation. Or so someoneonce told the young Californian girl whom I saw briefly justbefore she was put on the plane to India, having been found by apoliceman wandering naked through the main street. I think therewas also a great fear on the part of the authorities that one dayKing Mahendra might see such a spectacle, and that would create amajor incident, for the king had a habit of cruising the streetsat odd hours behind the wheel of his Ferrari. In fact, although I was not held directlyresponsible in the case of the American girl, it had not escapedthe notice of the authorities that I was somehow involved withthe LSD-cult, as they called it. At first it had seemed innocentenough, merely another religious group, who used somethingsimilar if not identical to hashish, which had a place in certainforms of Eastern worship. But this thing about girls taking offtheir clothes every now and then had them worried. Consequently,I was approached by one of the editors of the English languagedaily, The Rising Nepal, who asked whether I would writean article for the paper about what young Westerners were doingin Kathmandu. 'It would help relations with the public very muchindeed; yes, really, very, very much. Thank you.' I did so, and called the article 'The DivineMutants' which was sufficiently obscure I thought, with still aslight religious or spiritual bias. 'THE DIVINE MUTANTS 'The term, "hippy", if a recent journalist can be believed was invented by the media so that ordinary people would have something to pray for salvation from. If so, and if the phenomenon "hippy" is the unholy invention if sub-editors and people with mass circulation magazines to sell, we ought to be able to look at the matter more objectively and see what myths and legends have sprung up around this strange creature. 'One thing is certain, however, there is an increasing acceleration of young people "dropping out" of our Western sort of society, who prefer to "stand on their own two feet" rather than have their lives directed from without, by the system (economic-political-social). This group, variously estimated (Time magazine) to be between seven and ten million under the age of twenty-six, has claimed new areas for its own. It has developed a new life-style or an existential mode of being which, if still lacking proper articulation, seems nonetheless to be an attraction for some of the most gifted and sensitive minds of our modern generation; there is something vital and energetic and intelligent about what these young people are doing. In the words of their "High Priest'', Timothy Leary, who also coined their slogan Turn On (to your own nervous system) Tune in (to the energy within your own mind) Drop out (of the socioeconomic system): "The generation born after 1945 is perhaps the wisest and holiest generation that the human race has ever seen … and, by God, instead of lamenting derogating, and imprisoning them, we should support them, all turn on with them." 'Yet for those so identified by Leary, the "dropping out" foreshadows social developments which are bound to take place in Western society as a whole, for as automation increases and when only a small percentage of the people will do most of the work, leisure will be the problem or, rather, too much leisure, for the old ethic of work and salvation cannot survive in a society where perhaps only five per cent of the top executive and administration do all of the work- indeed, within the foreseeable future, the big reward in life will be to be allowed to work. 'Meanwhile, we are living in a strange confusing period of transition from one life-style to another quite different one. From the philosopher's point of view, I think, we are seeing a change in the nature of Western man due to a shift of emphasis away from a theological revelation to an ontologist mysticism, that is, authority of a Divine Person to the more individually "free" belief in absolute Nature. In either approach to God, we are reminded that we are summoned to a deeper spiritual awareness, far beyond the level of subject-object. One of the attractions of Central Asia for some of the young seekers is that the religions here see man's unity with God in an ontological and natural principle in which all beings are metaphysically one. Here there is unity in Absolute Being (Atman) or in the Void (Sunyata). 'It is one way that still remains for Western man to save himself from becoming Reality's dupe, that is, the slave of some external control (which we see as an inevitable result of television, which keeps millions of minds literally imprisoned by invisible lines of pull and force, and soon there will be more sophisticated hardware, such as 3-D holography, where images will literally appear to be actually present within you inside your living-room. If you want to see an elephant, plug in the tape marked "elephant"and one will appear, hovering in your drawing-room and safe too. And it won't leave any mess to have to clear up afterwards. For such people, the cinematic world of labour-saving devices and the good health that goes with it is probably the best place to be.) "A lifetime of freedom! Why, no man alive could stand it; it would turn his life on earth into a complete hell", says Bernard Shaw. And for the older, conservative members of society this is a fair observation. Freedom is too difficult for most people to bear, and for those who have lived a lifetime of conformity and spiritual neglect, freedom is impossible, that is, short of mystical revelation. The young man or woman is aware that as the political inhumanity of this century increases (with a corresponding erosion of certain liberal and humanist values) so too will the illegality of our various legal actions that seek to keep bodies of men pressing down on other bodies of men, and all for so little reason. Society, to such a young educated thinking person seems to be growing infertile, devoid of a living culture, no longer productive of any personal form, abstract, lifeless in the face of machine-made interpretations about the self, the world, and the other people in it. No wonder, then, if modern man sees himself as nothing but a cipher on the face of a moral and spiritual void. And as the knowledge of his own disorientation cannot be handled quantitatively, he turns more and more to his brave world of machines. And through the power of his machines he acts out the uncomprehended tragedy of his inner disruption. He is therefore cut off from any reality except that of his own processes, which he cannot understand, and his machines, which he can understand, but which cannot provide answers or even directions which would enable him to regain the former lost paradise of close contact with nature and the world of living things, including himself. As the Ancient Chinese sage, Shuang Tzu, discovered some 2500 years ago, dependence even on a simple kind of machine causes man to become uncertain of his own inner impulses, and he may even forget how to master his own world. Naturally, the advance of science and technology during the past 150 years is irreversible, and modern man now has come to terms with himself in his new situation. Yet he cannot do so, it seems to many modern thinkers, if he builds an irrational and unscientific faith on the absolute and final objectivity of a scientific knowledge of nature. For the study of man is also concerned with the core of the unknowable at the heart of man which cannot by its nature become the subject of finite analysis like a plant or animal species but is an area of human experience accessible through the intervention of a sacrament, which is whatever it is that helps make God present in man. (A sacrament is something that engenders in those who use it certain spiritual resonances which defy exact analysis and cannot be accurately described to one who does not experience authentically in himself.) 'And perhaps the start of any process of the personality towards independence, self-direction, and control must start with question and the search for an answer; with the question which again and again implies a calling in question the destruction of accepted ideas and stereotyped world-pictures and rote-learning and imprints—in a word, revolution; the question that both cost Socrates his life and made it of such value. 'So perhaps we ought to look more kindly on the youthful pioneers who see our future world as one in which there is none but one, and each person owns nothing but the whole. And the phenomenon of so many young people who think this way is all the more significant if you take Kathmandu as an allegory of the possibility of conformity, not merely of one young growing person to one particular communal place or social development, but of a whole generation to a complete, if at times imperfect, greater society.' The editor seemed very pleased with the article andasked whether I'd like to write more for them. I then wrote aseries on Tantra called 'Old Art in the Hands of New Artists(Notes on the relevance of Tantra to Modern Western ArtMovement)' which they wanted to serialise over twelve issues. Tantra, in fact, had interested me a lot during mystay in the East, and I had consulted both Lhasa-trained Buddhisttantrikas as well as Hindu masters. There was also aWestern Hindu monk called Bhagawan Dass, from California, whopractised Tibetan Tantra vitally and who had a lot to tell meabout its left-handed aspect. It was also Bhagawan Dass who firsttook Richard Alpert to his guru in India, Neem Karolli Baba.Richard was converted into orthodox Hinduism and given the name BabaRam Dass, or 'servant of God'. He claims to be able tomaintain a 'forty per cent hashish high' without the useof drugs or sex, which is admirable. My talks with both Bhagawan Dass and Baba Ram Dasconfirmed that their guru had used LSD: in fact, the first timehe did so was when Bhagawan introduced him to Ram Dass. The storyof what happened is now part of LSD lore, but is worth repeating,even so. The guru asked about LSD, and Ram Dass said that it didsomething equivalent to what he had read about in the writings ofthe mystics, both Eastern and Western. The guru asked Richard, ashe then was, if he had any. Richard said he had six'whitelightning' pills left, and that they were very powerfulindeed. The guru asked Richard to give them to him. And promptlyswallowed them. Richard sat silent watching for any sign. An hourpassed. Finally, Richard asked the Baba what effects he wasexperiencing. 'None', exclaimed the guru. And Richard wasimmediately impressed and declared his allegiance to the guru,and gave him his Land Rover. There was very little interest in LSD amongst theNepalese, however, with one notable exception, Rama PrasadManandhar, who had been the Nepalese Ambassador in London forseven years (he had once entertained Queen Elizabeth to dinner athis London Embassy). Rama Prasad was a tantrika, a poet, and aphilosopher, a man of wide learning and culture, who lived in oneof the oldest and most beautiful houses in the city. He came round to visit me one day, and a friendshipsprang up. One thing led to another and finally he asked me oneday whether he could try some LSD. We arranged a session at'Shangri-la', and I told him the strength or dosage, and heselected a dose of about 300 gamma, which was quite a lot for afirst trip. The session was very quiet, meditative, andserious. Rama Prasad did not talk very much. I remained totallysilent. About midway through the session, Rama Prasad complainedabout being indoors, and said that he would like to go into thegarden. We walked into the garden together. It was a beautifulafternoon of bright sunlight, and everything looked absolutelyradiant and perfect. Rama walked over to one of the roses uponwhich a gorgeous butterfly had just alighted. And exclaimed: 'Wemust try to expand the "moment" into infiniteduration!' He asked for a pen and paper and then wrote a poem,which I reproduce exactly as he wrote it and as I published itlater in Flow One. It is called The Moment and TheOne-Ment. 'THE MOMENT' and 'THE ONE-MENT' Rama Prasad Manandhar At the crest of Time I stood: On one side, as far as eye could reach And beyond In the dim-most stretch of history Was the Past— A never-ending chain of events. On the other side, Looking towards things yet to come. Yet to become, Creatures waiting to be born, Deeds waiting to be done, History waiting to be made, Actions and reactions, Causations and fruitions, Was the Future— A never-ceasing chain of events. In between, I stood: At the summit of Time, At the MOMENT— When the obverse and the reverse, The depths of the Past And the obtrusions of the Future Were perfectly united in the Moment— The Moment which knew no dimensions, But which contained all the dimensions Of the Past as of the Future. The Butterfly had just scarcely alighted On the tip of the rose-petal, The rose a-bloom at the topmost zenith of its glory, Just the fraction of a second before it would show The very first sign of wilting—all too soon; In the perch of the butterfly There was still the heat of the coming, Also already apparent was the rush of the going away; But at the Moment, For a Moment, The coming and the going stood transfixed in the hush of the stillness. In the kiss of the lovers At the climax of the touch, There lay implicit the fulfilments of the Past And the expectancies of the Future Inextricably built together Into the one undivided jointure— In the present Moment. The deep-mouthed bay of the hound As it barked he the garden At the Moment, Oh! How exquisite it was! As if the whole of the world s past history Had been but a preparation for that perfect sound. The Present Moment— How beautiful, how sublime, how full! Full with the blending of all the joys of the Past and the Future— How ugly, how horrid, how full! Full with all the sorrows beaten, fused together Like an unsplit hair, Like the yang and the yin, The positive and the negative, The sweetness and the sourness, That champagne-most-ness, Indissolubly unified Like salt in the sea-water, Like the meaning to the word, Like Gouri to Shiva— This is more than full: This is the Perfect, the Absolute. The undifferentiated, The uncreated, God without diffuseness, God, the All-Knowing, the All-Enjoying, Reality without name and form, Beyond duration and beyond occupation, The Real Permanent: The Real Truth, The Real Strength, The Real Bliss—THE 'ONE-MENT'. It was shortly after the Ambassador's session thatRama Prasad came round to see me about arranging a meeting withthe celebrated Buddhist monk and saint, His Holiness—GyalwaKarmapa, who was visiting Kathmandu and staying with the monks atSwayambhNath. Rama knew Karmapa quite well, and had evenentertained him once at a reception in his town house. I wasnaturally very interested in having an audience with Karmapa, forI had heard and read much about him. He was the head of theKagyudpa Order of Tibetan Mahayana Buddhism, and recognised asthe sixteenth Karmapa incarnation. The audience was arranged for dawn on the followingmorning, and Rama Prasad said he'd pick me up at my house in hiscar. I stayed up all that night, preparing myself forthe temple meeting, and performing chillum and acid Sadhana. WhenRama Prasad collected me, I was very stoned indeed, and couldhardly find my way out of the garden into the Mercedes. Then wesped off into the blackness and reached the top of Swayambhu justas the first light of dawn appeared through the gaps between thesurrounding mountains. It was a glorious sight. And I felt a veryspecial sense of reverence; there was a holiness about the place,more intense than I had ever experienced there before; my headand heart were open to anything. We were taken up some stairs to the top floor andshown into an antechamber where a monk tied a piece of orangecloth around my neck. He then indicated that I should follow him,and he led me from the chamber into a huge sal brilliantwith tankas, and murals, and statues. At the far end,seated on a throne, sat Karmapa; and next to him, seated on acushion in the full lotus position, was Rama Prasad. I approached Karmapa slowly, my eyes to the floor,with short bows every few steps. When I reached the throne, Ilooked up and saw a beam of bright light issuing from the centreof his silver crown or it may have been a beam of sunlightcatching a reflection through the lattice-work windows. But theeffect was quite startling. It really could seem that he wasemitting light from his 'third eye' in the centre of hisforehead. I recovered from this startling hallucination,sufficiently anyhow to hand him the white silk scarf I hadbrought as a present. Karmapa then spoke to me through aninterpreter: 'According to the tradition since the Buddha, it hasbeen customary to preserve the record of gifts, as a token ofone's inner sense of benevolence. This is so that it may serve asa historical record of the Dharma too. Your name willtherefore be added to the names of people contributing to thistradition.' I was then asked to say anything I wished toKarmapa. What I wished to say was for the future: to seemany of the Lamas and families of the esoteric Dharma moveto the West. And, how this work could be furthered by the lamasopening a dialogue with the Chiefs and Elders of the NorthAmerican Indian Tribe called the Hopi whose villages I hadonce visited in Arizona. The lands of the North American Indiansstretch from parts of Canada down to the Mexican border andcomprise some of the most beautiful countryside in the world,parts of which are remarkably similar to Tibet, particularly inColorado and New Mexico. But these lands are now under siegeagain, for, as the indigenous Indian population is encouraged toleave the reservations and accept an alien whiteculture—which is happening in the case of the young Indiansat a truly frightening rate—these holy lands will be takenover in a few years by the U.S. Government, and then by thebuilders. Yet potentially they could provide a sort of 'spiritualbackbone' for a future, more spiritualized America. Karmapa remained silent throughout all this. When Ihad finished, he beckoned me closer and, as I bent my head, hishands touched the centre of my head, and suddenly, unaccountably,like a bolt, I experienced Samadhi one of the mostextraordinary moments of consciousness of which man is capable.And I felt utterly and completely cleansed, as though the divinethunderbolt had gone through me like a million volt charge. Itwas a feeling that was to remain with me for quite some days. The memory of this great Initiation persists. Ibelieve that on that special morning when I met Karmapa my lifewas changed and in ways that I am only now beginning tounderstand, which I have yet to assimilate, and, in time, expressoutwardly and through my being. For if ever there were a livinggod, Karmapa is it: of this I am utterly convinced. Ninety-five per cent of all Buddhists, from Ladakhto NEFA (North Assam) belong to the Kargyudpa esotericsect, of which Karmapa is the spiritual leader. Like all the other Karmapa incarnations, HisHoliness is famous for his erudite scholarship, integrity ofcharacter, and excellence in yogic practices. The embodiment ofcompassion, in human form, Karmapa cares for and loves all humanbeings, and takes pains for their spiritual salvation. He is equally well-honoured and followed by Kings,Lamas and laymen, in Tibet, China, Mongolia, India, Nepal,Sikkim, Bhutan, as also throughout south-east Asia, Japan,Ceylon, Burma, Thailand, Canada, Great Britain, U.S.A., Sweden,Denmark, Spain, etc., etc. And daily now Karmapa prays for the world …'May all spiritual leaders enjoy long lives and prosperity. Maythe Singha multiply and fulfill their duties. May theblessings of the Dharma liberate all departed souls. Inthe world may sickness, poverty, wars and all evil influences becut at the root and destroyed. May all things of the Kali Yuga(Black Age) be dispersed.' Finally, of course, the first number of Flowappeared, minus about half the material, which two of theprinters had kept after I refused to pay increased printingcosts, which I considered to be very unfair. And the dedication read: TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE CROWN PRINCE OF NEPAL AND HER ROYAL HIGHNESS ON THE OCCASION OF THEIR MARRIAGE KATHMANDU FEBRUARY 27, 1970 The days drifted lazily. I had made a number offriends in Kathmandu, both Nepali and Western, and would oftenspend pleasant afternoons walking around the city, occasionallyventuring forth to BoudhiNath, a small Tibetan settlement justoutside Kathmandu, with a characteristic huge stupa ortemple in the centre of the village, with three large eyespainted on the top, which were visible from afar—one of thesilent sentinels of Kathmandu Valley. It was a colourfulplace—the old Tibetan women slowly circumnavigating thetemple, spinning the eternal prayer-wheels, the men hangingaround in change shops, a few Easterners buying Tibetan ornamentsand clothes in the inevitable string of tourist shops. One of thelarge houses around the stupa belonged to the Chini Lama,and, having heard that the stupa had been recently struck bylightning, I decided to pay him a visit one afternoon, for theChini Lama was like the unofficial mayor of BoudhiNath and theguardian of the stupa, which he generously endowed. According to local gossip the Chini Lama had beendoing a good trade moving tankas, Tibetan rugs, andhashish and the lightning thunderbolt had struck the stupaas art obvious warning from above. The Lama received me hospitably with thetraditional salt-and-butter tea, brought in by a lovely girl. Aswe sat and talked, I was impressed by his incredible outfit,which included orange-red robes in various silks, a fur hat, fromunderneath which his smiling eyes looked at me with a penetratingcuriosity. I finally asked him about the lightning matter,whereupon he told me that it was indeed an auspicious omen as hehad found a Garuda egg embedded in the stupa justafterwards. I beheld in my stoned mind's eye a vision of amythical bird, for the Garuda is a familiar creature tothe readers of Hindu mythology, not unlike the phoenix inappearance, whose wings are made of gold studded with diamonds;so I suggested that I could arrange for an incubator to be sentout to the stupa, if there were any real possibility ofhatching such an unusual bird as the Garuda. The ChiniLama looked at me wistfully for what seemed like a long time andfinally said: 'I am afraid it is too late. I have already soldthe egg to a Hong Kong businessman. The shell is famed throughoutChina as a great aphrodisiac. ' We parted on the best of terms and he suggestedthat I visit the monastery of Ogmin Chang Chub Choling,established by a former Miami beauty Queen, Princess Zinaide deRachevski, who had been ordained into the Tantric Buddhist Orderby His Holiness, the Dalai Lama, who had also shaved off her headof hair; and it was rumoured she was the first incarnation ofMadame Blavatski… It was a two-mile walk from the village, and I madethe ascent of the hill with some difficulty; the path was fairlysteep and narrow and I had to avoid occasional flocks ofdescending goats and the occasional water-buffalo led by tinyNepalese children. The hill levelled out and soon I was insidethe gates of the monastery. The Abbess was sitting on the lawn ina circle of beautiful girls with the occasional male sadhuseated quietly within their midst. I sat down next to Zina, as she liked to be knownby old friends (we had known each other briefly in New York, inthe mid-sixties, during her time there as a stunning East Sidesocialite), and she told me many interesting things about thetraining people received at the monastery, the essence oftransmission being telepathy or more exactly darshan—akind of 'flash' or vibration that is transmitted in the guru-gelarelationship. One of the resident Lamas, who had received histraining in Lhasa, now spoke a little English, and during thecourse of the conversation I asked him about the Chinese invasioninto Tibet. The Lama gave me a curious answer: From one point ofview the invasion had been an historical tragedy, certainly forthe Tibetan people who were now scattered as refugees throughoutthe Indian continent. Yet from another vantage point, the'cosmic' one, this was all somehow necessary in order to spreadthe dharma and make of this planet earth a Heaven for allliving creatures. 'The seven seals of silence were broken and anew epoch would come.' Now my time in this tiny Himalayan Kingdom had cometo an end. I had lived in Kathmandu for one year and had seen andexperienced many new things, and much had been given, more,indeed, than I could ever hope to repay. But some innerrestlessness was calling me back to the West, and I decided tofollow its prompting. Thus it was on one sun-drenched morning inAugust that I boarded the tiny DC-9 to Calcutta and thence byconnecting jet to London, arriving back in the metropolis thenext day as though in a foreign city, lost, and not a little sadfor what I saw… . What had I really learned in my decade ofbizarre psychedelic trips? That it takes a great deal of acid toproduce even a little elevation of consciousness? That there aretimes we can know more than we can tell? That reality must stillcount for something? That it is impossible to become what one isnever not? That the future lies in a Tantric vision of cosmicsexuality combined with a cult of ecstasy? That we can make ofthe planet earth a Holy Land yet? Or is it with a finger pointedto the moon that I should reply? But one thing is certain: thatthere is no need to mean by a 'culture of humanity' anything morethan the liberation of the higher faculties. Whoever has anyexperience in this matter will know how right Cato was when hesaid: … 'Never is he more active than when he does nothing,never is he less alone than when he is by himself.' What at last is left for the psychedelic theorist ?Must he honour the extreme doctrine of individualism and concedethat, after the elimination of radical evil and the provision ofmaterial abundance, people must be left alone, simply to be anddo what they want ? Our mind craves dreams, those magical realms, forever present between somewhere and nowhere, which beguile us witha thraldom all their own and help keep our sense of wonder alive.And if the new 'matter-of-factness' encroaches on our brain to noother end than to make of our life a thing and not, as it longsto be, an instrument of self-transcendence, we feel distressed byour inability to dream as once we did; and all delight is gone,our life somehow diminished, which is the cause of most of the angstin the self- the knowledge that what is most human in our life isbeing determined not by our 'true' needs, which are divined fromthe centre of our being, opening like the petals of the lotus andare beyond thought, beyond intellect, 'beyond striving', but areon the contrary, determined entirely by external forces, throughno choice of ours. We are at once the victims and the beneficiaries ofmodern technological advances. Reality is now the new myth-makingsubstance. We are manipulated by man-made dreams which developartificial wants: frozen and tasteless foods, bland, homogenisedlives; clich�-ridden beliefs and standardised rituals;conspicuous consumption; the 'pooled self-esteem' our Westernforms of nationalism make possible; mechanical gadgets; devotionto science and the 'preality-principle'; and the abandonment ofany religious revelation, so that even our religious leaders andintellectuals do not use words like 'spiritual' and 'idealistic'at all freely, for they are themselves quite happy with theirmaterial comforts and the labour-saving world of gadgets and goodhealth that goes with them, and would consider those who preachedthat the happiness people want should be sought for in any kindof nirvana, mystic ecstasy, theoria, transcendence, ascertainly other-worldly. What the spread of technological culture has doneis to push the boundaries of the literal miracle, the'other-world', the magical far outside the range of ordinaryeveryday human happiness. Miracles, our politicians tell us, donot originate in some supernatural religious state but must berealised in this world and have their basis in the familiar factsof technological progress, in communication, education,transportation, public health, etc., etc. But those who havefound a source of happiness in a life of the spirit are of theopinion that there has been a retrogression in our aim for a trueculture of humanity. While we are busily pouring ever-increasingintellectual efforts into improving our means, we have forgottenthe ends they are intended to achieve. Do we really know what wewant ? This question is more likely to be answered in theAlternative literature of protest, the theme of vagabondage, andthe exploration of individual human consciousness via drugs, ZenBuddhism, Yoga, esotericism, Buddha, the Hermetic arts, alchemy,visionary experience, Tantra, hesychast methods,hypostatic union of Christ and man, and all the charismas of thespirit. Those who affirm that the real truth and source of allhuman joy and happiness lies wholly 'within' must try, withwhatever means they can get, to break the hold of that view oflife which has replaced the potentialities of the human mind withthe perspective of its mechanical extensions, the extensions oftransportation and social planning and mass conditioning whichare now turning on the body and strangling it as the serpents didat Laocoon. Modern society is growing infertile, devoid of aliving culture, no longer productive of any personal form, anabstract, lifeless, cinematic world of machine-madeinterpretations about the self. It is not surprising therefore ifwe tell ourselves that all revelatory experience is foolishness,so much so that man sees himself increasingly as nothing but an'energy slave' or a cipher on the face of a moral and spiritualvoid. And as the knowledge of his own disorientation cannot behandled within the framework of so-called normality, he turnsmore and more to his brave world of machines. And through thepower of his machines he acts out the uncomprehended tragedy ofman's inner disruption. Yet it was the Ancient Chinese Sage,Huang Tzu, who proposed some 2500 years ago that dependence evenon a simple kind of machine causes man to become uncertain of hisown inner impulses; and further, the result may lead him toforget how to master his own world. So we have learned instead how to master ourmachines, because machines do not serve us unless we servicethem, but in the process we have had to adjust our humanorganization to our equipment. We tend to get what the machinecan best give us rather than what is most desirable. For the rest … I have tried to write this bookas an inwardly conceived and inwardly coherent work of fictionthat isn't exactly fiction, and only those who read it as a novelwill discover its real meaning. I hope that those who areprepared to read the book in this spirit will catch a glimpse,not so much of a utopia possible in theory, but rather of anattitude of mind capable of attainment in practice, in which allproblems of modern technological existence will appear to besolved, that irreconcilable contradictions will pass away, and anewer and fuller significance of individual human existence willbe revealed. In this connection, I can do no better than to referthe reader to Aldous Huxley's last novel, Island (1962),which is a very imaginative effort to protect a way of life basedin nature, that is lived organically as a flowing growingprocess. According to his brother, Sir Julian Huxley, Aldoustook LSD eleven times, gaining thereby 'new extensions of hisperception of beauty and transcendence'. Huxley believed thatfrom LSD the individual could achieve what the poet Cowper called'a closer walk with God'. For myself, I believe I have investigated thephenomenon LSD—these words!—as much towards this samespiritual end as my intelligence and faculties permitted me togo. And perhaps the long, arduous, oppressive decade I passedthrough came to benefit at least one creative effort. And how do I now think of LSD et al.?—ascertain truths about the nature of my inner self came to bemanifest in my conscious mind, my interest in psychedelics beganto wane proportionately, so that today I do not believe that LSDcan help me towards self-realisation. It had never been more thanpreliminary, one may say, a pretext to me to explore inwardnessand unfamiliar mental states for whatever they might reveal. ButLSD has nothing more to give me. And I am therefore determined toreturn to the world, and in time, to integrate myself with it. Inrelation to any religious beliefs I now hold, I am a confessedFranciscan, though I freely admit that I have a very long way togo before I shall be able to express this outwardly—with myentire being—the love Saint Francis of Assisi showed was forall living creatures, and in respect to love of this kind, I mustto this extent be regarded as clumsy. Yet in Saint Francisevolved Love of the very highest order for his delicate andfeminine sensibility offered Love a unique possibility ofmanifestation. And thus, in the light of this knowledge, I can nolonger take my psychedelic trips seriously. I know that manyreaders, and by no means the worst among them, would disapproveof such measures as taking LSD; one should be strong enough, theysay, to exist by faith without the aid of drugs. Yes! One shouldbe, but what if one is too weak? And the impulse which now drives me back into theworld is precisely the same as that which drives so many intomonasteries or to keep the offices of prayer—the desire forself-realisation. St. Mary at the Cross, Glasshampton, Worcester. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-40IA030-000641-B027-188http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/inglis14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141311 text/html 36840HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:12:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:18:19 GMTContent-length: 36621 The Forbidden Game - Chapter 14 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic Library 14 Psychopharmacology IN THE WESTERN WORLD, THEN, BY THE 1970s, THERE COULD NO longerbe any doubt that the attempt to control drugs through the crimino-legalsystem had failed; and though there was great reluctance to admitas much, there was more of an inclination to explore alternativepossibilities. And science was at last beginning to help, by beginningto investigate the social effects of drugs. d'Abernon: the effects of alcohol The first tentative exploration of this territory was made inthe First World War, when the d'Abernon Committee was set up toadvise the Government on the effects of drink on the war effort.Drink taken during the day, Lloyd George believed, made workersslower and clumsier; and drink taken in the evening was apt tocause absenteeism 'the morning after'. To what extent, the d'AbernonCommittee were asked to estimate, was the war effort thereby disrupted? In their report, the Committee had to admit defeat. It was notmerely that scientists had not provided them with the answers;scientists had not even asked the relevant questions. They hadconducted a great deal of research into alcohol in the laboratory,but none into alcohol in the pub, the factory, or the home. Didthe drunkenness caused by beer or wine differ from that causedby spirits? Did mixing drinks tend to produce drunkenness? Howfar did the dilution of a drink—whiskey with soda, say—modifyits action? What was the effect of taking food in conjunctionwith alcohol? Did fatigue alter the effect of alcohol on performanceof skilled movements? Was alcohol more injurious in dry than inmoist climates? To what extent was alcoholism caused by physiologicaldisturbances? And did the psychological effects of alcohol—cheerfulnessfor example—improve resistance to adverse physical circumstancessuch as cold? None of these questions had been put. Nor, the report continued, had there been research into an aspectof drug-taking about which a misconception was firmly rooted inthe public mind. It was widely assumed that alcohol, like otherdrugs, caused addiction. Yet the great majority of drinkers didnot become addicts. There must, presumably, be something in anindividual which predisposed him to addiction; but what? Again,the scientists had evaded the question. As a result there was'an almost entire absence of reliable data regarding the psychologyof the drunkard, though adequate information on this point isobviously essential in devising rational methods of treatmentof the inebriate. Little is known of the progress of the drinkerfrom occasional excess to chronic alcoholism. Are the occasionaldrinker and the habitual drunkard two distinct types, or is theformer an early stage of the latter?' The reason scientists had neglected applied research, the Committeesuggested, was partly that they were reluctant to involve themselvesin social, as distinct from academic, issues (sociology was notyet accepted as an academic discipline); and partly that theydid not care to venture into unexplored territory—the choiceof subjects for investigation had 'often been determined by theease with which they could be put to the test, or by their bearingon some theoretical controversy, rather than their intrinsic andpractical importance'. This was a shrewd criticism; and the guidelineswhich the Committee offered for the future were also sensible—thatresearchers should now begin to concentrate on finding out whypeople took drugs, and what effects the drugs had on the peoplewho took them and on the community in general. But the Committeesuffered from a limitation. Although it lacked the necessary evidence,there were some assumptions which, it felt, could safely be made.Most of them were little more than pious aspirations: 'the ordinaryuse of alcohol', its report advised, 'should not only be moderate,but should also be limited to the consumption of beverages ofadequate dilution, taken at sufficient intervals of time to preventa deleterious action on the tissues'. But one assertion, 'thatalcohol is narcotic rather than stimulant in action', revealedthat the Committee shared the orthodox view of the time that itwas possible to categorise drugs as either narcotics or stimulants.And it based its classification not on everyday experience, buton research into the effects of alcohol on the body and the nervoussystem. Asked to examine alcohol's social effects, the Committeehad castigated scientists for their reluctance to venture outof the laboratory. Yet its own diagnosis was derived from thelab, rather than the pub. Louis Lewin: Phantastica The most influential pharmacologist of the time, Louis Lewin,suffered from the same limitation. He was anxious to show thatdrugs had been one of the most important of man's discoveries,and could be one of the most valuable of man's allies, and hedid his best to popularise mescaline—without success, thoughexperiments by Rouhier in France and Beringer in Germany boreout his claims. In his Phantastica, published in 1924,he set out his creed. If human consciousness is the most wonderful thing on earth, theattempt to fathom the depths of the psychological action of narcoticand stimulating drugs makes this wonder seem greater still, forwith their help man is enabled to transfer the emotions of everydaylife, as well as his will and intellect, to unknown regions; heis enabled to attain degrees of emotional intensity and durationwhich are otherwise unknown . . . By the exercise of their powerson the brain, they release marvellous stores of latent energy.They relieve the mentally tortured, massage the racking painsof the sick, inspire with hope those doomed to death, endow theoverworked with new vitality and vigour such as no strength ofwill could attain, and replace for an hour the exhaustion andlanguor of the overworked by mental comfort and content. Lewin was also well aware of the prevailing weakness of pharmacology;and he mocked those whose contribution had been simply to produceimpressive-sounding terminology. 'Even today,' he wrote, 'we frequentlymeet with interpretations of the action of medicinal and poisonoussubstances which are merely pseudoscientific descriptions of theireffects.' They reminded him of the scene in Moliere's MaladeImaginaire when the examination candidate, asked the reasonfor opium's soporific action, replies 'because it is endowed withnarcotic and soporific properties'—which so delights his examinersthat they immediately pass him. But Lewin then proceeded to followthe same course himself. He had not received the formal academicrecognition which his abilities as a researcher and a teachermerited—perhaps because he was a Jew, and not given to disguisinghis contempt for those rash enough to disagree with him. The easiestway in which he could obtain it, in his own time, was to providethe classification of drugs according to their pharmacologicalproperties which had eluded earlier researchers. He decided thatthere were five categories: 1 Euphorica—'sedatives of mental activity, these substancesdiminish or even suspend the functions of emotion and perception'. 2 Phantastica—hallucinating substances. 3 Inebriantia—causing cerebral excitation followed bydepression. 4 Hypnotica—sleep producing agents. 5 Excitantia—mental stimulants. The trouble began when Lewin tried to squeeze all known drugsinto the separate categories. His Euphorica were opiumand its derivatives, and cocaine. Indian Hemp, however, was classifiedwith the Phantastica, along with peyote the fly agaric,henbane, datura and caapi. In the Inebriantia section,alcohol was accompanied by chloroform, ether and benzine. TheHypnotica included chloral, veronal, paraldehyde, potassiumbromide and—remarkably, in view of the results of his own researchinto it—kava. And the Excitantia had to provide roomfor all the rest—a weird miscellany; including camphor, betel,kat, coffee, tea, kola, mate, coca, tobacco, arsenic, and mercury. Lewin was not unaware of the inconsistencies, which he did hisbest to iron out by tortuous rationalizations. Some Hypnotica,he admitted, were capable of being Excitantia; the reasonwas that 'like all toxins, they act on the brain', producing aeuphoric state. The fact that the American Indians used tobacconot as Excitantia, but as Phantastica, to producevisions, proved more troublesome to explain. The best he coulddo was suggest that the hallucinatory effects must have been dueto the carbon monoxide which they inhaled, together with the tobaccofumes, whenever they lit their pipes. The book had other limitations. Well-versed though he was in thepharmacological literature, Lewin's reading outside it was lessthan comprehensive; he quoted Surgeon Crombie's statistics aboutthe insanity caused by hemp drugs, unaware that they had beendemolished in the report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission.But this was of little importance compared with the decision totry to classify drugs according to their effects. Not that hiscategories were accepted; but they gave rise to further futileattempts along the same lines. The basic premise remained, thatit ought to be possible to think in terms of the chemicalaction of a drug, rather than of the reaction of the people whotake it; leading to such pontifications as the argument that theSt. Bernard dogs who found lost travellers in the snow ought notto have carried brandy in their little barrels, because brandyis a depressant. Largely as a result of this fixation, pharmacologists could notcome to grips with the most serious problem which drugs presented:addiction. They could not even accept the traditional premise,that addiction represented a failure of will power, because willpower was not quantifiable. A favourite proposition in the 1920s,as Evelyn Waugh recalled in Brideshead Revisited, was 'it'ssomething chemical in him'; applied to alcoholics, it became 'thecant phrase of the time, derived from heaven knows what misapplicationof popular science'. The available research funds were channelledinto the search for metabolic disfunction, or defects in the endocrinesystem. And although by the 1930s there was more of a dispositionto admit the explanation might be psychological, research in thatarea continued to be hampered by lack of resources, and by thedivisions among the psychologists themselves. The Freudians lookedfor the causes of addiction in unconscious conflicts; the Pavlovianspreferred to regard it as another conditioned reflex—similarto that which B. F. Skinner induced in rats, so that when theyexperienced the joy of a certain type of electric shock, theywould return to it again and again, sacrificing food, fightingand sex for the chosen form of stimulation. Auto-suggestion The break-through to a better understanding of the effect of drugscan be traced to an experiment undertaken in 1933—though itwas to be many years before its significance was appreciated.In the Quarterly Journal of Medicine in 1933 two Londoncardiologists, William Evans and C. Hoyle, described how theyhad given out pills which their patients, suffering from angina,assumed were pain-killing, but which were actually made from bicarbonateof soda. Over a third of the patients reported that their painhad been satisfactorily relieved. It had long been known that people could be fooled by the fairgroundquack's coloured water, and come back for more. But it had beentaken for granted they must be gullible souls, who only imaginedthey were better, or who perhaps had only imagined they were ill.This could hardly account for so high a proportion of angina patientsreacting to a placebo, as if it had been the real thing. And bythis time, there was a widely-publicised alternative explanation.From his experience as a chemist in Troyes, Emile Coue had becomeconvinced that what cured many of his customers was not his medicines,but their belief in them; a conviction which he was able to testby giving them placeboes. At the time, Evans and Hoyle's paper aroused only mild curiosity;and Coue's fame, though world-wide, turned out to be transitory.The imagination could be stimulated, he had suggested, with theaid of a simple formula; 'every day, in every way, I get betterand better'. It was a reversion to ritual; and in a ritual-starvedcivilisation it caught on, throughout Europe and America, as wellas in France, with people intoning it in the bath or on the bus.But his basic proposition, that the formula's function was simplyto help bring the imagination into play—just as a drug might—wasnot grasped. It was assumed that he was calling for an exerciseof the will. The ritual became a music-hall joke and, like manyanother craze of the twenties, Coueism soon became only a mildlyabsurd memory. After the Second World War, however, research began at last tobroaden its base. The psychologists did not compose their differences,but they managed to establish a measure of common ground, leadingto acceptance of the proposition that there are addiction-proneindividuals—or, rather, that some people are more addiction-pronethan others, and are therefore more likely to become addicts ifnudged in that direction by any of a variety of forces. At first sight this was not far removed from the earlier ideathat addicts lacked will power. But there was one essential difference.It had been believed that the addict could extricate himself ifhe really wanted to, by an effort of will. The new theory camecloser to regarding addiction as a neurosis. There was no pointin telling an addict to pull himself together, because the facthe had become an addict itself revealed that he was incapableof such self-discipline. The reasons why one individual was more addiction-prone than hisneighbour proved difficult to pin down. It was easy enough toshow with the help of statistics that the Italians, in proportionto the amount of wine they drank, were far less likely to becomealcoholics than the French; not so easy to determine why. Long-termmonitoring projects began to turn up clues; they revealed, forexample, that alcoholics were more likely to come from homes wherethere had been parental conflict. But there were scores of similarenvironmental possibilities to be considered, as well as interactionsbetween them. All that could be claimed with assurance was that—asHoward Jones put it, in his study of alcoholism—addiction wasnot 'the invariable result of particular kinds of personalityconstellation', but 'the solution found when problems of adjustmentarise because certain types of personality are confronted by certaintypes of environmental stress'. This research therefore, though it contributed to a better understandingof the drug problem, did little to assist either prevention orcure. For a time it was hoped that new institutions, specialisingin the treatment of drug addicts, would be the answer. Even hardlinerslike Anslinger approved, because they wanted it to be demonstratedthat addicts could learn, or be taught, self-control. The firstsuch establishment was opened in Lexington, Kentucky, in 1935,subjecting heroin addicts to a rigorous course designed to drythem out and refit them for society; and by 1953, Anslinger wasable to boast that of the 18,000 patients who had been throughit, two-thirds had not returned. This should, he felt, give everyoneconfidence that the system worked. That confidence was soon shattered.Follow-up studies of those two-thirds, to find how they were faring,revealed that the great majority had relapsed. Lexington s successrate, it was estimated, was only around three per cent. Otherinstitutions, more sympathetic in their approach, were to do alittle better; but not much. As Brecher sadly noted in his Licitand Illicit Drugs, 'no effective cure for heroin addictionhas been found'. One reason for the failure of institutional treatment emergedwhen a few doctors began to study placebo effect in its own right.They found that the pharmacological content of a drug was notnecessarily the determining factor in the patient's reaction toit For example, when Dr. Stewart Wolf—one of the pioneers ofsuch studies in America—gave a woman an emetic, telling herit was a medicine designed to stop her feeling sick, not merelydid she stop feeling sick, but her stomach juices, which werebeing monitored reacted as if they were dealing with an anti-emetic—inother words, to her mental picture of what the drug's effectsshould be, rather than to the drug. In his Drugs and Human Relations, published in 1970, Dr.Gordon Claridge set out the evidence which had been accumulatingto show the extent to which it is not the drug, but the expectationof the drug taker, which determines reactions. In a trial whereone group took barbiturates, while a matched group were givenplaceboes, the barbiturates proved to be more effective sedativesonly when the members of the group which was taking them wereexpecting sedation. Where they did not know what to expect fromthe pills, the reaction was the same whether they took the placeboor the drug. An experiment which Claridge himself undertook onbehalf of the British army in 1961, to find out how the tranquillisermeprobamate affected soldiers' reactions, had a similar result.Although there was no significant difference between the reactionsof those who took the drug, and those who took the placebo, bothperformed their set laboratory tasks less well than a third groupwho had not been given pills at all. The fact of taking pills,in other words, led to a deterioration in performance 'Althoughnone of the subjects was told what to expect'; Claridge observed,'most of them clearly associated drug taking with "beingdrugged", or being made less efficient in some way'. It was not simply the lay public who could be deceived by placeboes.Doctors had been inclined to think they would not be good subjectsin such tests, because they would know from training and experiencehow to recognise a drug's effects. But when in the late 1960sthe members of the staff of the Department of Psychological Medicinein Glasgow University who had volunteered for tests were givenpills which might be either amphetamines or placeboes, and wereinvited to guess which they had taken, their replies were scarcelymore accurate than if they had decided by spinning a coin. Onepsychiatrist of several years' standing recognised his symptomsas coming from dexamphetamine. According to Claridge, 'duringthe next few hours he became more "high", and the followingmorning announced that participation in the experiment had considerablyenhanced his enjoyment of a party the previous evening'. It hadthen to be broken to him that he had taken a placebo. Other membersof the staff, equally convinced that they had taken placeboes,found that they had in fact taken amphetamines. In search of reality At first sight, such evidence may seem hard to reconcile withthe accounts of the effects of the vision-inducing drugs. It isconceivable that Huxley knew enough about mescaline, when he tookit, for his imagination to take over; but not that Hofmann couldhave known what was going to happen when he took LSD. Anotherexperiment described by Claridge provides a clue. In it, one ofthe subjects who thought he had taken LSD described what he saw: . . . a lot of strange shapes and brilliant colour, after images,as if I looked through pebble finished glass, particularly thismorning. Especially this morning colours were more brilliant thanI have ever experienced. Voices were at times somewhat in thedistance, along with a feeling of being in a real situation, adream kind of state, time is distorted, goes rather slowly, andan hour is only 10 to 15 minutes when I look at my watch . . . 'A perfect description of the LSD state!', Claridge commented—butthe subject had in fact had a placebo. The mind, in other words,is capable of duplicating any drug experience; but this is notthe same as saying that the drug is irrelevant. LSD is obviouslya highly potent substance, capable of inducing striking changesin perception. What it cannot do is produce more than is alreadywithin the mind's own capability. The drug is essentially thetrigger mechanism. That is why at different times, or in differentcultures, reactions to the same drug have been so very different.Take, for instance the passage Shivering I rose from my seat, incapable of rest, when that heavenlyand harp-like voice sang its own victorious welcome . . . a chorusof elaborate harmony displayed before me as in a piece of arras-work,the whole of my past life—not as if recalled by an act of memorybut as if present and incarnated in the music; no longer painfulto dwell upon, but the details of its incidents removed, or blendedin some hazy abstraction, and its passion exalted, spiritualized,and sublimed This, too, might have been written about an LSD 'trip'; it isin fact, de Quincey's description of the effects of laudanum.Jean Cocteau reacted similarly to opium. All of us, he claimed,carry something folded up within us like those Japanese flowersmade of wood which unfold in water opium plays the same role as the water. None of us carries thesame kind of flower. It is possible that a person who does notsmoke may never know the kind of flower that opium might haveunfolded within him. On other writers, however, the opiates have had the opposite effect.For William Burroughs, they diminished awareness so that theycould only, he felt, be a hindrance to the artist; whereas cannabisgave him what he needed: 'unquestionably this drug is very usefulto the artist, activating trains of association that would otherwisebe inaccessible'. Others, again, have derived their inspirationfrom tobacco, about whose effects J. M. Barrie wrote in termsordinarily applied only to a loved one. An attempt to account for these variations was made by WilliamJames in his Varieties of Religious Experience, where herecalled the effect ether had had on him. He had found no reason,he wrote, to change the impression he had formed at the time. It is that our normal waking consciousness, rational consciousnessas we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilstall about it, parted from it by the flimsiest of screens, therelie potential forms of consciousness entirely different. We maygo through life without suspecting their existence; but applythe requisite stimulus, and at a touch they are there in all theircompleteness . . . How to regard them is the question—for theyare so discontinuous with ordinary consciousness. Yet they maydetermine attitudes though they cannot furnish formulas, and opena region though they fail to give a map. At any rate, they forbida premature closing of our accounts with reality. The function of the drug is to provide the stimulus: and any drugmay serve, if it happens to suit the individual concerned. Etherhad suited James; peyotl had made him sick—perhaps because heliterally could not stomach it, perhaps because the circumstancesin which he took it had been unfavourable. But how does a drug, any drug, liberate the mind? Huxley believedthe explanation must be sought in a theory advanced by Henri Bergson,and later elaborated by the Cambridge philosopher, Professor C.D. Broad. The original function of the brain, Broad thought, wasbasically not productive, but eliminative. It was designed 'toprotect us from being overwhelmed and confused by the mass oflargely useless and irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out mostof what we should otherwise perceive or remember at any moment,and leaving only that very small and special selection which islikely to be practically useful'. This, Huxley decided, wouldexplain what had happened to him, and to others who had had similardrug experiences. Ordinarily we get only a 'measly trickle' fromthe mind's vast resources. But a few individuals have a by-passmechanism, enabling them to open the doors of perception; othersconstruct one with the help of spiritual exercises; and otherscan utilise drugs. On this hypothesis, the vision-inducing drug could be describedas a password to open doors which, for most people, are ordinarilyclosed. There is no single password; each individual may havehis own—or none. Only one drug in common use has rarely beenemployed for the purpose: alcohol. Alcohol and the hallucinogens,Humphrey Osmond has argued, are actually antithetical; alcohol produces a downward transcendence, peyotl an upward one—thedifference between levelling up and levelling down. Alcohol allowsone to relate to others by being more sure of one's self. This,in small doses, is much better than not being able to relate atall, but it is a very precarious business, and selfishness maysoon end in brawling and ill-temper. Peyotl acts not by emphasisingone's own self but by expanding it into the selves of others,with a deepening empathy or in-feeling. The self is dissolved,and, in being dissolved, enriched . . . Anthropological field workers, too, have reported that the shamanwho takes a drink loses his powers of divination. It remains possible,therefore, that the pharmacological action of alcohol will eventuallybe shown to be qualitatively different from that of other drugs,so that the doors which it opens do not expand awareness but instead—asMalcolm Lowry suggested in Under the Volcano—facilitatethe emergence of a second self, ordinarily kept hidden. Even this, though, is uncertain. Alcohol may have the effectsit does because in some as yet unexplained way our minds are programmedto react to it—as a shaman's is programmed to react to tobaccoas a vision-inducer. The most likely hypothesis is that although a measured quantityof a specific drug can, other things being equal, have statisticallypredictable effects within a culture, its effects can vary greatlywith different cultures, as well as with different individuals,or with the same individual at different times—as Oliver Sacks'experiences treating patients with 'L Dopa', described in hisAwakenings so strikingly illustrated. The reactions tothe drug, he found appeared to be dictated not just by the personalitiesof the patients, but by fragmented elements of those personalities,too. In ordinary circumstances, however, expectation is the most potentforce in determining a drug's effects. When Dr. Walter Pahnketested a psilocybin mushroom derivative on theology students atHarvard, he found that the visions the students reported wereindistinguishable from the visions they would have expected toget from a mystical experience. And from his study of the peyotlcult among the Huichol Indians of Mexico, Peter Furst concludedthat beyond any sensations which could be attributed to the chemistryof the plant, 'there are powerful cultural factors at work thatinfluence, if they do not actually determine, both content andinterpretation of the drug experience'. Drugs and drink Scientists, then, have at last begun to ask relevant questionsabout drugs, and are beginning to get some answers. But the answershave been largely ignored, or rejected, because they do not fitin with society's preconceptions about drugs. One of the commonestassumptions, for example, is that alcohol has in some measurebeen tamed, and consequently can safely be put in a differentcategory from other drugs. But a research project undertaken byDr. Harris Isbell and his associates at Lexington has revealedthat almost all the reactions of subjects who were given barbituratesin the experiment, from mild tipsiness to delirium tremens, duplicatedthose of alcohol—so closely, Brecher thought, that 'the barbituratesmight be labelled a "solid alcohol" and alcohol classedas a "liquid barbiturate".' The differences betweenthem were chiefly the consequence of the barbiturates being availablein more concentrated form. Otherwise, the evidence suggested,there was no logical reason why the barbiturates and alcohol shouldnot be placed on the same legal footing. Yet in practice, as Brecherput it, society takes a very different stance with respect to the twindrugs. Alcohol is treated as a non-drug; it is on sale in multidosebottles at 40,000 liquor stores and in countless other outletsas well; it is freely sold to those 'of age' in saloons, taverns,cocktail lounges, nightclubs, roadhouses, and even ordinary familyrestaurants; and more than $250 m a year is spent on advertisingalcohol. The barbiturates, by contrast, are legally saleable onlyon prescription in pharmacies; other sales are severely punishablecriminal offenses.. It is a curious fact, indeed that Americanstoday are bombarded with advertising urging them to buy a liquidthat, if secured without a prescription in tablet or capsule form,could lead to imprisonment for both seller and buyer. In clinical terms, Isbell's experiments have also showed thatthe effects of alcohol and the barbiturates on health are moreserious than those of the opiates. If its social side effectsare taken into consideration, alcoholism emerges as by far themost serious of the Western World's drug problems. According toan estimate published early in 1972 by the National Instituteon Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism in America, nearly ten per centof the nation's drinkers at that time were alcoholics, doing incalculabledamage to their health, wrecking their families' lives, costing$15 billion annually in damage to property, loss of working time,and welfare payments, and causing havoc on the roads. In the sameyear, Lord Rosenheim, Chairman of the Medical Council on Alcoholismin Britain, warned that the number of alcoholics was much higherthan doctors realised—there were 350,000 in Britain, he estimatedbut there might be as many as half a million—and that alcoholcaused far more actual illness, as well as misery, than all theother drugs such as cannabis, heroin and LSD put together. In both countries, too, the number of alcoholics has been rising—sorapidly, in Britain an international conference on the subjectin London was told in 1973, that they would top the million markby 1980. Many other countries in different parts of the worldhave reported the same trend. Zambia, Kenneth Kaunda complainedthat winter, was becoming a nation of drunkards; and he threatenedto resign if they did not learn to control their excessive drinkinghabits. Yet the World Health Organisation, faced with such reportsfrom all over the world, could do little more than file them.'So far as I am concerned', Dr. Dale Cameron, head of WHO's DrugDependency Unit, said in 1971, 'alcohol is probably the king ofthe mountain,' but so far as the U.N. was concerned the king coulddo no wrong, because by tacit consent alcohol had not been includedin drug conventions. In logic, or sense, such an omission wasimpossible to justify—as the Shafer Committee recognised. Americanlaws, its report noted, had made alcohol the preferred socialdrug, but 'that historical fact should not prevent further evaluationof this preference'. On the Committee's own evaluation, alcoholdependence was 'without question the most serious drug problemin this country today'. This is not, of course, to suggest that a campaign to wean peopleaway from alcohol could blithely stress the relative safety of,say, cannabis as an alternative. Indeed the latest reports oncannabis, published by the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on InternalSecurity, strongly suggest that the drug carries greater dangers,mental and physical, than has earlier been recognised. This discoveryappears to be partly due to more, and more sophisticated, researchprojects; partly to the recent development of stronger, more dangerousforms of the drug; partly to some as yet unexplained psychologicalreaction among users (perhaps more people are taking it not fora 'lift', but as a narcotic). The evidence provides a salutary reminder that any drug, and alldrugs, can have adverse effects. To judge from the introductionto the published volume of evidence, by Senator James Eastland,though, the lesson that banning a drug is the certain way massivelyto increase the sales of it has not been learned. He is awarethat ten times as much cannabis gets into the country as is seized('a fairly conservative estimate'). He is also aware that in thepast five years seizures of marihuana have increased tenfold,and of hashish, twenty-five-fold. But it still has not got throughto him why. Dr. Henry Smith Williams's 1938 prophecy has cometrue; prohibition of cannabis has brought a five billion dollarracket in its train. Postscript Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Psychedelic LibraryWT01-B36-41IA088-000636-B014-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/plea.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101654 text/html 16017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:28 GMTContent-length: 15799 A Plea for Sanity ... Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy A Plea for Sanity ... � Michael Booth 1996 The thirty years or so since illicit drug use emerged as amodern social phenomenon have been marked by inquiry afterinquiry and report after report. Every one of these inquiries andreports has come to basically the same conclusion, that ourcurrent policy of prohibiting some drugs is not working, and,more to the point, that it cannot work. This week still moreAustralian politicians are about to consider another proposalthat has the potential to start us down a path that might well beable to circumvent the considerable costs that our current drugspolicies have burdened us with. The Ministerial Council on Drug Strategies, which is made upof Health and Police Ministers from every Parliament in Australiawill meet later this week in Hobart in order to consider aproposal put by the ACT government after four years of detailedresearch, a proposal for a trial with the aim of investigatingthe controlled supply of heroin as a treatment for dependentheroin users. This latest excursion by governments into the field of drugpolicy reform comes just after the failure of the VictorianPremier's Drug Advisory Council, or the Pennington Report, whichrecommended wholesale changes to marijuana laws. In fact the bulkof Pennington's report, which was drafted without any policeserving on the Advisory Council, was fairly innocuous. The reportmade eight general and some seventy two specific recommendationsthat address: sustained local and statewide action; lawenforcement; legislative change; support and treatment; andinformation and education. Most of these recommendations wereuncontroversial motherhood type statements which did not attractmuch comment at all, let alone any criticism. The conservative thinkers and anti-drug warriors who arestanding in the way of meaningful reform of drugs policy musthave had apoplexy when they read recommendation 7 of thePennington Report. This particular recommendation called on theVictorian government to amend the 1981 Drugs Poisons andControlled Substances Act must have given the anti-drug warriorsapoplexy. The twelve specific recommendations that detail theamendments to the Controlled Substances Act calls for the use andpossession of less than 25 grams of marijuana to no longer be anoffence, the cultivation of up to five plants per household nolonger be an offence, the trafficking of marijuana to an adult bedealt with by a caution, while trafficking to a minor continuesto be subject to heavy penalties. Local governments be given thepower to regulate offensive behaviour under the influence ofmarijuana under the Summary Offences Act 1966. All convictionsfor possession and use of small amounts of marijuana to beexpunged. The initial penalty for the use and possession of smallquantities of hard drugs to be a police caution and referral to adrug assessment and treatment service, with escalating penaltiesfor subsequent offences. Imprisonment should be used as a lastresort penalty for drug users. Drug trafficking offences shouldremain on the books, and be augmented by new penalties againstdriving under the influence of drugs. Despite the all too public focus on marijuana, the AdvisoryCouncil was originally established in the wake of a flood ofheroin onto the streets of Victoria, and a subsequent spate ofoverdose deaths. The Advisory Council noted the connectionbetween marijuana and heroin - they are both illegal - and basedtheir recommendations on the desirability of removing the mostwidely used illicit drug - marijuana - from the same channels ofdistribution and supply that also bring one of the least widelyused, but nevertheless destructive drugs - heroin - to youngAustralians. Sadly the Pennington report fell on largely deaf ears. TheVictorian Police Commissioner weighed into the debate, sayingthat to implement the findings of the Advisory Council reportwould be to "raise the white flag of surrender" in thewar on drugs. Disparaging remarks about the thrust of the report,and the general unwillingness of politicians to provide anyleadership on drugs policy saw Premier Kennett, despite hisreputation as a "can-do" leader who is not afraid totackle the hard questions, back pedal from his public commitmentto implement the findings of the report. Now there are more politicians considering a different aspectof reform to drug policy - the proposal to investigate theusefulness of heroin in the treatment of opiate dependent drugusers. No laws have to be changed, no international treatiesrepudiated. There is no proposal to make heroin freely availablethrough supermarkets. There is instead an extremely modest andconservative proposition before the Ministers to committhemselves to a research project. It says much for the politicsof drug policy reform that even the ACT heroin trial is likely tobe knocked back. In the last few years heroin use has emerged from the hiddendepths of the sub-culture that it has inhabited since KeithRichards and Lou Reed made it trendy and fashionable in the early1970s. The last six months or so have seen articles about heroinin publications like JUICE, Rolling Stone, the Sydney MorningHerald, as well as more conservative magazines like Marie Claireand Cosmopolitan, the latter with a lingerie clad model injectingherself. The films Pulp Fiction and Trainspotting has put thespotlight squarely on heroin use, and there is also the threepart documentary series currently being shown on ABC television,Dealing With The Demon. All of this public scrutiny of heroin has led somecommentators to argue that it is the attention paid to and thecoverage of heroin in popular culture that is responsible for theupswing in heroin use. Given the essentially conservative natureof our mass media it is much more likely that all the coverage ofheroin is a reflection of heroin use, and not a promotion of it.Regardless, Australia is indeed experiencing something of a surgein the use of heroin, and there is thus increased pressure onmany parties to do something about it. For most in society, "doing something about the drugproblem" has meant increased penalties for use andtrafficking, as well as associated legislation that canconfiscate any assets from accused drug dealers, the reporting ofcash transactions, increased police powers of surveillance anddetention, and so forth. Indeed, the Royal Commission into theNSW Police Service has heard evidence from one disgraced policeofficer after another that it was their ineffectiveness atkeeping drugs off the streets that led them to set themselves upas judge, jury, and executioner, and plant drugs on suspects,forge and falsify confessions, and finally, go into businessthemselves on the grounds that someone was always going to selldrugs, and it might as well be them. The report of the Victorian Premiers Drug Advisory Council isnot without flaws. It has a somewhat mechanical view of drugs anddrug use that overlooks the fact that drugs are first andforemost a phenomenon of culture and lifestyle, and that drugtaking behaviour is learned behaviour. Despite its defects,however, the report does implicitly recognise the futility oftrying to control drugs by placing an outright ban on them,arguing instead that in order to alter the impact of drugs onsociety we have to alter the circumstances in which people areintroduced to drugs, and the circumstances in which peoplepurchase and consume drugs. The vote later this week on the ACT heroin trial, as was thecase with the Pennington Report, has given a number ofopportunities to address much of the harm done by drugs insociety, the more so given that all that the politiciansconcerned have to do is to concur with the admittedly difficultdecisions and recommendations that have resulted from theindependent and scholarly inquiries that have examined drugspolicies. Those arguing for drugs policy reform will probably bedisappointed, though, as these latest carefully researched andthought out recommendations finish up following the findings andrecommendations of every other major inquiry into drug policies,findings and recommendations which have also recognised the sheerimpossibility of using a policy of prohibition to minimise thedamage done to our society by the use of drugs. Herein lies the real tragedy. The politics of drug law reformwill ensure the triumph of the irrational and illogical views ofthose like the Victorian Police Commissioner, who argued thatproposed new laws that permitted households to grow fivemarijuana plants for personal consumption were simplyunenforceable. The irony lies with the inability of theCommissioner to see that current drug laws that totally prohibitthe growing, possession and use of marijuana are similarlyunenforceable. The anti-drug warriors who are manning the barricades toprotect society against the flow of illicit drugs are somewhatlike the French generals who placed their faith in the MaginotLine to stop the German army. While the police and other socialconservatives are trying to argue that reforming the laws willopen up Australia to illicit drugs they are overlooking the factthat, like the Maginot Line, their own line in the "war ondrugs" has been breached in so many places as to bepractically and symbolically useless. Drugs are widespread insociety. There is no way that law reform can possibly make drugsany more widespread than they currently are now. Those opposing drug law reform might argue that changing thelaws will send the "wrong message to society, but they mustalso stop and consider what sort of message is sent to society bythe blind and stubborn refusal to even examine the evidence ondrug use, and to consider alternatives to a set of policies thathave manifestly failed, and must manifestly fail, in achievingtheir aims and objectives. No better argument against law enforcement can be imaginedthan to consider what might happen if the forces of prohibitionand law enforcement were to become stunningly successful. Imaginethat every drug dealer and drug user in Australia were to comeforward and line up outside Police Headquarters one morning, eachwith a bag of dope in one hand and a signed confession in theother. It sounds like a law enforcement officer's dream cometrue, they wouldn't even have to go to all the trouble oftracking down the drug users and dealers, all they would have todo would be to process the self confessed offenders, and punishthem according to the law. Drug problem solved. In fact such a scenario is the stuff of nightmares forAustralian Police Forces. During 1995 nearly forty per cent ofall Australian males admitted to having used illicit drugs, asdid nearly thirty per cent of females. State and Commonwealthlegal systems would collapse under the weight of a strategy thatactually detected and prosecuted all the millions of thoseAustralians, most of whom must be otherwise law abiding and taxpaying citizens. Assuming that the those arguing against drugpolicy reform are not asking Australians to write a blank chequeto detect and prosecute drug offences, they should be able to sayto what extent the law can, and should be enforceable. Even acursory examination of the figures will show that the lawsagainst drugs are not, and can never be enforceable. Even if theVictorian Police Commissioner wanted to argue that the policeconcentrate on those drugs that are demonstrably more dangerousthan marijuana, drugs like amphetamines, heroin, cocaine, andecstasy, he will still have to acknowledge that the policy he issupporting is trying to regulate the behaviour of an enormousnumber of Victorians, a number that would overwhelm his policeforce and the court system should his preferred strategy of lawenforcement actually be successful. Our current drug laws and policies are the result of amish-mash of historical accident, racial prejudice, internationalgeopolitics, outdated morals, misleading ideas about medicine andhealth, and the natural conservatism of Australian society andthe politicians who have resolutely refused to display anyleadership. It might be argued that our current laws andpolicies, given their origins, are just too hard to change. Itmight also be argued that it doesn't matter much anyway. Thosewho want drugs can get them, and the rest of us can hide behindthe ineffectual remnants of the Maginot Line in the war on drugs,secure in the knowledge that we are not sending the "wrongmessage", whatever that may be. It does matter, though. Hundreds of young Australians aresuffering and dying as a result of these laws, laws that cannotprevent a flood of impure heroin that is leading to increasednumbers of overdoses, and increased levels of hepatitis throughneedle sharing, laws that make marijuana the most profitable cashcrop in the country and ensure that the profits go to criminalfigures and corrupt cops, laws that ensure that some of thepeople who use a particular drug are punished and marginalised,while other users get off scot free, and users of other drugsaltogether are given the protection of the law and the assistanceof society. Isn't it time for a change. John Howard climbed ontop of thirty five dead Australians to introduce a politicallydifficult decision to ban semi-automatic weapons. Surely it isn'tasking too much of him to listen to the experts, and climb on topof the thousands and thousands casualties of the drug laws toargue for another politically difficult decision? finis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy WT01-B36-42IA087-000625-B009-277http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/other.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040623 text/html 5070HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:06:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:01:51 GMTContent-length: 4855 Other Publications of Interest Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Other Items of Interest Sentencing Project Reports The Collected Writings ofJoseph McNamara Joseph McNamara is a former police chief in Kansas City, Mo. and San Jose, Ca.. He holds a doctorate in public administration and is presently a research fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution. This collection includes his published articles over the last few years. A Plea for Sanity by Michael Booth,1996. Comments on the current situation in Australia. Black Judges on Justice - Bookreview. Study: Teen Drug Use Rises - Dec.15, 1995 -- News Article Abraham Bill Passes Friday Night AsSenate Rejects Sentencing Commission's Lighter Sentences 9-29-95PRNewswire Prisons-R-Us Article on the AmericanCorrectional Association "prisonfest" held 9-95 inCincinnati, Ohio. Netherlands Revises Drug Policy - NewsArticle 9-15-95 ACCLAIMED TEACHER ARRESTED ONMARIJUANA CHARGES Dallas Morning News 10-13-95 Ruling aids grower of"medicinal" pot BY CAROL M. OSTROM Seattle Timesstaff reporter 10-3-95 Kids Drink, Use Drugs to Cope -Summary of survey Prepared Statement of Steven Wisotsky,Professor of Law, Nova University Law Center, before the selectcommittee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House ofRepresentatives, Concerning: A New Beginning in U.S. Drug Policy,September 29th, 1988, pp.410-454. ThePathology of Drug Abuse - The Internet Pathology Laboratoryfor Medical Education. Like all pathological material, it showssome rather extreme and plainly disgusting effects of drug abuse.It is good to remember that not all casual wine drinkers wind upwith the awful effects described on this page. Sources of Informationfor further research. Partnership for a Drug FreeAmerica -- Sources of Funding from 1988-91 How Americans Die - Thispage contains some miscellaneous stats on how Americans die, andother subjects. The Dollar Cost ofPunishment - miscellaneous notes and references regarding thecosts of punishing people for drug offenses. Drug Laws in South America Activist Books - A listof recommended reading for political activists. Criteria for Addiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT01-B36-43IA087-000625-B010-310http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/sp/sp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122041013 text/html 2894HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:10:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:13:56 GMTContent-length: 2677 Sentencing Project Reports Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy Sentencing Project Reports Testimony of Marc Mauer, AssistantDirector, The Sentencing Project, Before the Subcommittee onLegislation and National Security, Subcommittee on GovernmentInformation, Justice and Agriculture, of the House GovernmentOperations Committee, May 2, 1990 Americans Behind Bars: The InternationalUse of Incarceration, 1992-1993 By Marc Mauer, AssistantDirector, The Sentencing Project September 1994 Drug and Alcohol Treatment OptionsBy Sharon Caulum, Client Service Director, Wisconsin State PublicDefender What's Wrong With The Drug Plan,Briefing Sheet, August, 1989 Facts About Prisons and Prisoners Young Black Men and the Criminal JusticeSystem: A Growing National Problem, By Marc Mauer, AssistantDirector, The Sentencing Project, February 1990 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policyWT01-B36-44IA088-000636-B014-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/mcn/mcntoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101641 text/html 3115HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:00:21 GMTContent-length: 2900 The Joseph McNamara Collection Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drugpolicy The Joseph McNamara Collection Joseph McNamara is a former police chief in Kansas City, Mo.and San Jose, Ca.. He holds a doctorate in public administrationand is presently a research fellow at Stanford University'sHoover Institution. Stop the War - A Former Police Chiefs Pleato the New Drug Czar America's Plague of Bad Cops Anguish in Blue Needn't Become Deadly Bombs and the Bill of Rights Cops on the Dole Cop's View of the Drug War End the War by Anthony Lewis Has the Drug War Created an Officer Liar'sClub? Reinventing the LAPD The National Guard is Not a Police Force Code of Silence Must Come to an End Holding the Line Between Pursuit andPunishment Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drugpolicyWT01-B36-45IA088-000636-B014-277http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/blkjudg.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101704 text/html 7162HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:49 GMTContent-length: 6945 Black Judges Speak Out On Racism Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy BLACK JUDGES SPEAK OUT ON RACISM New Book Exposes Flaws in Justice System Book Review Black judges criticize America's most popular anti-crimepolicies as racist and proven failures during candid interviewsabout the nation's system in the new book "Black Judges on Justice." Mandatory sentencing is very popular with politicians whoposture themselves as "tough on crime," but these harshimprisonment polices have "not been effective in cuttingcrime," states Los Angeles Municipal Court Judge Veronica S.McBeth. McBeth is one of three female jurists included in the 14judges interviewed in this book that has been described by onereviewer as a "seminal work." The incarceration of huge numbers of young black malesnationwide, resulting largely from mandatory sentencing laws, istermed "a quiet kind of genocide" by Joseph Brown ofMemphis, a trial court judge who trims his black judicial robesin African kente cloth. "Black Judges on Justice" is the first book topresent the views of leading African-American jurists serving onthe nation's federal and state benches. The black juristsinterviewed include: Famed federal jurist A. Leon Higginbotham, who authored thefamous letter attacking the anti-black attitudes of now U.S.Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas; Bruce Wright, the feistyNew York City jurist who has won acclaim for his decades longfight against racism in the judiciary, and Constance BakerMotley, the first African-American female federal judge. The jurists forthrightly discuss the inequities of race andclass which too often stack the deck of the justice systemagainst blacks. For example, the subtle but pervasive prejudicesof judges and prosecutors, which impact on decisions like whogets probation and who goes to prison, are examined by TheodoreA. McKee, a Philadelphia judge who now sits on the federal ThirdCircuit Court of Appeals. The jurists in "Black Judges" provide rare insightsinto the judicial decision making process, exposing how thislife-impacting process is often arbitrary and wholly unrelated tolaws. Further, the jurists present intriguing autobiographicalsketches of their accomplishments, often in the face oftremendous adversity. The jurists were interviewed byPhiladelphia journalist (and STRONG advocate for Mumia!) LinnWashington, Jr., a graduate of the Yale Law Journalism Fellowshipprogram. "Black Judges on Justice," published by theNew Press, exposes many myths. It is widely believed in thissociety that Black leadership is soft on crime. But Washington,D.C. judge Reggie B. Walton served as President Bush's AssistantDrug Czar and Senior White House Advisor on Crime. Walton saysone of his major frustrations working for the Bush Administrationwas his inability to convince administration officials of thefact that fighting crime is ineffective without attacking socialcauses of crime. Abigail R. Rogers, a family court judge in South Carolina andthe first black female jurist in that state, reveals how she hasbeen victimized by racism and sexism from whites and blacksalike. The author of "Black Judges on Justice," LinnWashington, is an award-winning investigative reporter andeditorial writer. A graduate of Temple University who holds amasters degree from the Yale Law School, Washington has spentmuch of his 20-plus years in journalism specializing in issuesinvolving race and matters related to the justice system.Washington is a former assistant to the Chief Justice of theSupreme Court of Pennsylvania and former executive editor of"The Philadelphia Tribune." "Black Judges on Justice" is receiving favorablereviews. "The Quarterly Black Review" describes thebook as an "illuminating work ... that should be requiredreading for anyone interested in the relationship between blacksand the law." The magazine "Booklist" describesthe book as "well-written and insightful" while"Publisher's Weekly" termed the book"thoughtful." "Black Judges on Justice" is onthe recommended reading lists of "Essence" and"Emerge" magazines. Derrick Bell, the distinguished law professor and expert onracism in American law, has stated, "Beleagueredracial-equality forces will applaud Linn Washington's searinglycandid interviews with these courageous men and women who striveboth to alleviate unfairness in their courtrooms and to urgereforms that, if adopted, would move courts toward justice andaway from the cynicism, racism, and moral bankruptcy in whichthey are now mired." Submitted by: Sis. Marpessa From: The Jamal Journal, Issue #5, Autumn, 1995 Published by the International Concerned Family and Friends of Mumia Abu-Jamal, P.O. Box 19709, Philadelphia, PA 19143 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B36-46IA088-000636-B014-305http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/teenuse.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101712 text/html 6694HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:17:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:31 GMTContent-length: 6477 Study: Teen Drug Use Rises Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy Study: Teen Drug Use Rises Dec. 15, 1995 WASHINGTON (AP) -- After declining for almost a decade,teen-age drug use is on the rise in the 1990s. Among the possiblereasons: Many of today's parents tried illegal drugs themselvesand may feel awkward warning their children away from them. An annual survey released Friday found that teen-age drug usehas risen steadily since 1992, raising fears that the dramaticdrop in drug use in the 1980s will eventually be wiped out. Marijuana use among eighth-graders has nearly doubled since1991, with 20 percent saying they have used it at least once.That's up from 17 percent just one year earlier. More than 48 percent of high school seniors in the class of1995 had used some type of illegal drug at least once, up almost3 percentage points from 1994. Seniors' drug use hit its lowestlevel in the 21-year-old survey in 1992, when under 41 percentsaid they had ever tried an illegal drug. Despite the upwardtrend, today's high school students remain much less likely totry illegal drugs than people who were in school during the 1970sor 1980s, said a director of the ``Monitoring the Future'' study. In an era when so many parents -- including even PresidentClinton -- have tried marijuana, some may feel awkward givingtheir children strong anti-drug lectures, said Lloyd D. Johnston,principal investigator for the University of Michigan study. Mostof them ``do not want their children involved in drugs, marijuanaor otherwise, but many have fallen silent on the issues becausethey feel quite conflicted about it,'' Johnston said.Nevertheless, he said, it's critical that these parents warntheir children of the hazards. What should they say? Johnston said they can make severalpoints: When they were young, less was known about the dangers ofdrugs. Many children and teens now begin using drugs at a youngerage, which carries more risks. And drugs widely available todayare stronger and more addictive. Also, the threats of AIDS and violent crime make drug use anddrinking more dangerous, said Donna Shalala, secretary of theDepartment of Health and Human Services. Another explanation for the increase, Johnston said, is adecline in news coverage and public service advertisements toeducate teens about the dangers of drugs since the end of NancyReagan's ``Just Say No'' campaign and President Bush's ``war ondrugs.'' Johnston also accused rock and rap songs of promotingdrug use. Shalala called for ``a broad national effort,'' includingparents, teachers, coaches, clergy and the government, to teachyoung people about the hazards of drugs. ``Or else,'' she said, ``in a few years, we're going to findourselves right back where we were in the old days, when childrenand teen-agers viewed drug, alcohol and tobacco use as perfectlynormal and acceptable behavior.'' She noted that more than 64 percent of high school seniorssaid they had smoked a cigarette, up more than 2 percentagepoints from the year before. Both the Clinton administration and Republican congressionalleaders blamed the opposition's policies for making the problemworse. The Senate Judiciary Committee chairman, Orrin Hatch, R-Utah,criticized the administration's ``ineffectual leadership andfailed federal policies.'' Shalala blasted the Republicans for cutting spending onfederal drug treatment and prevention efforts and on aschool-based anti-drug program. Drug use among teen-agers peaked around 1980, when about 65percent of high school seniors said they had used an illegaldrug, Johnston said. More than 50,000 students were surveyed last spring for the21st annual national study. It has a margin of error of plus orminus 2 percentage points. Other findings: --Nearly one in 20 high school seniors uses marijuana daily. --Among eighth-graders, 21 percent said they had used anillegal drug during the 12 months before the survey. --The percentage of high school seniors who have tried LSDincreased from 6.9 percent last year to 8.4 percent. For drug prevention information from the government, parentscan call 1-800-729-6686. This is the NEW RELEASE of the ClariNet e.News! If you noticeany problems with the new edition, please mail us ateditor@clari.net and let us know. Thanks! More information can be found on our website at http://www.clari.net/ or in clari.net.announce. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policyWT01-B36-47IA088-000636-B014-335http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/abrah1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101722 text/html 5369HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:17:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:13:16 GMTContent-length: 5152 Abraham Bill Passes Friday Night As Senate RejectsSentencing Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy Abraham Bill Passes Friday Night As Senate Rejects SentencingCommission's Lighter Sentences WASHINGTON, Sept. 29 /PRNewswire/ -- U.S. Senator SpencerAbraham (R-Michigan) won a big victory over the drug pushers asthe Senate passed his bill which blocks new sentencing guidelineslowering crack cocaine offenses. The Abraham Amendment passed byunanimous consent late Friday evening. "Drug pushers all across America were cheering at theSentencing Commission's proposal to lower prison sentences forcrack offenses," Abraham said. "As hard as it is tobelieve, there are some policy makers in Washington who actuallywant to lower prison sentences for drug pushers who target ourchildren. But tonight the Senate put an end to the drug dealers'celebration, and our children and neighborhoods are a littlesafer." "This is no way to be waging the war on drugs, and theSenate did the right thing by rejecting the proposal to lowerthese drug sentences," Abraham said. "The purpose ofthe bill is simple: to block implementation of proposals by theSentencing Commission that would lower sentences for crackdealers." On May 1, the Sentencing Commission, an independent agencyappointed by the President, proposed changes to the SentencingGuidelines that would lower crack distribution sentences tobetween 1/2 and 1/6 of their present length. This would mean thatsome crack dealers who under current law would get substantialsentences could end up serving no jail time at all. "I think this sends entirely the wrong message: that inthe war against crack, society blinked," Abraham said."That is not what we should be telling the crack dealers.And that is not what we should be telling the brave law abidingmembers of communities under attack by the crack dealers who arefighting back." Abraham's bill will stop those Sentencing Commission proposalswhich automatically go into effect on November 1 -- and make surethat any other guidelines which lower drug sentences don't getimplemented. The House must now take up similar action to defeatthe guidelines. The Sentencing Commission cited the reason for their proposalwas out of concern that because a majority of crack distributorssentenced are African-Americans, the higher crack sentencescreates a perception of unfairness. The Commission based theirconcern on the fact that sentences for powder cocaine sentencesare lower than crack sentences. "I agree with part of the Commission's concern, but theanswer is not to lower the crack sentences, but to toughen thepowder sentences," Abraham said. "That is why I hopeCongress will act soon on the bill I've introduced to raise thesentences for powder distribution by making the triggers formandatory minimums 100 grams for 5 years and 1000 grams for tenyears, rather than 500 and 5000 as they are now." "The Sentencing Commission's solution -- to address this'unfairness' by lowering the crack sentences -- is a trulyterrible idea. It is not fair to the vast majority of peopleliving in communities, like Detroit, under attack by the crackdealers and trying to defend them -- many of whom areAfrican-Americans. And I am sure it is the last thing in theworld that many of them would want," Abraham said. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policyWT01-B36-48IA088-000636-B014-358http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/prisons.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101730 text/html 8087HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:17:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:41 GMTContent-length: 7870 Prisons-R-Us Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy Prisons-R-Us The following is a summary of an article entitled,"Prisons-R-Us" on the American Correctional Association"prisonfest" held last month in Cincinnati, Ohio. Thearticle appeared in The Dayton Voice on September 20 and waswritten by Alan Prendergast, a Denver based free-lance writer. Copies of this issue of The Voice (Vol. 3, No. 38) can beobtained by sending $1.00 to: The Dayton Voice, 915 Salem Ave.,Dayton, OH 45406. Here's the summary: Sponsored by the American Correctional Association (ACA), thisCongress is the world's largest gathering of correctionsprofessionals -- roughly 5,000 prison guards and administrators,educators, halfway house operators, and probation and paroleofficers. It's also a flag-waving, back-patting, glad-handingtribute to the growing power and prestige of the booming prisonindustry. U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno, the keynote speaker,gushed, "You see the meanest, most vicious among us, and youprotect us from them...Well, I'm here today to tell you how muchthis nation owes you." And just how much does this nation owe the prison industry?Plenty, judging from the hordes of exhibitors who descend on theCongress every year, hoping to cash in on the prison boom. Evenas Reno spoke, more than 500 vendors were setting up shop in thecity's convention center, hawking everything from razor wire andfancy restaint beds to inmate phone services and modular cellsthat could be assembled like Lego blocks. "Business is great," reported Cathy Perry, anaccount manager with Access Catalog of St. Louis, that sellsapproved TVs, clothing, stereos and other personal items toinmates by mail order, raking in roughly $5 million in sales lastyear... Thanks to stiffer drug laws, tougher parole requirements,mandatory minimum sentences, "three strikes" laws andother legislation, the American prison population has tripledsince 1980...The growth has been particularly dramatic -- andpainful in Ohio, which now competes with California for thedubious honor of having the most overcrowded prison system in thecountry. Niki Schwartz, the Cleveland attorney who helpednegociate an end to the Lucasville riot, is fond of pointing outthat Ohio's prison budget was 1/6 of its higher education budgetin 1982; as of 1993, it has risen to 1/3. "Soon we'll bespending more on corrections than on higher education, and that'scrazy," Schartz declares. Punishment, not rehabilitation, is the name of the game... Atthe 125th congress there was no shortage of speeches denouncingthe current prison binge, an indication of the growing anxietyamong corrections professionals over swollen budgets, crowdedprisons, and increasing punitive legislation that is making thoseprisons harder to manage. Jim Gondles, the soft-spoken, genial executive director of theACA, says the biggest task facing the ACA is"educatingpeople who don't work in corrections" about the industriesgrowing professionalism and changing needs. One of the ACA's principal sources of revenue is theCommission on Accreditation for Corrections, which promotesprofessional standards and "audits" prisons as part ofthe accreditation process. Accreditation is no guarantee thatconditions within a prison are constitutional or even safe, butthe operators or more than 1,200 jails and prisons have investedmillions in training and renovation in an effort to meet ACAstandards. Gondles urged "a balanced" approach to corrections,meaning more of everything: more halfway houses, more rehabprograms, more boot camps, more prisons. And that's an agenda thecorrections' industry boosters can live with -- espeacilly itsgung-ho private sector constituency, which has expanded rapidlyas public monies invested in corrections have soared. Although private prisons are still a rarity, virtually everyaspect of corrections now involves some degree of public-privatepartnership. Some aspects of privitazation involve lucrative kickbacks tocorrections agencies, at the expense of prisoners and theirfamilies. Phone companies bid agressively for the right toprovide costly, hi-tech phone services to prisoners...thecompanies offer a commission on billing revenues to the prisonthat range as high as 35%. Inmate collect calls are a sore pointwith Charles Sullivan, director of CURE (Citizens United forRehabilitation of Errants), a national prison reform lobbyinggroup. The cost of an inmate phone call can vary widely from systemto system, depending on what the phone companies can slide pastthe regulators. "We don't think that kind of gouging isright," Sullivan says, "Why should prisons be makingmoney from families on inmate phone calls?" Even the building of prisons is not as straightforward as itonce was. Typically, the state corrections system will "lease"a new prison from a state authority, which issues bonds throughprivate underwriters such as Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, andPrudential. The investors receive a significantly higher rate ofinterest than that paid by general obligation bonds. "Prisonbonds are a good investment," reports Brad Sprague, aninvestment banker with Columbus office of A.G. Edwards Co."I put my kid's money in them. You get individual investors,bank trust departments, mutual funds, insurance companies -- theyall know the state of Ohio isn't going to go out of the prisonbusiness anytime soon." But Gondles senses that public concern about prison costs andconditions is rising. "We are going to see more citizensinterested in jails and prisons, "he predicts, "Therate of incarceration is becoming so high that we are going toreach a point where everyone knows someone who is in jail orprison." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policyWT01-B36-49IA088-000636-B014-384http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/neth1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101737 text/html 3912HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:17:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:18 GMTContent-length: 3695 Netherlands Revises Drug Policy Netherlands Revises Drug Policy THE HAGUE, Sept 15 (Reuter) - The Netherlands, whichtolerates the use of soft drugs like cannabis, on Fridaysignalled a tougher approach to hard drugs. Acknowledging that drug-related offences and links withorganised crime are on the increase, the government said itplanned to build more jail cells and step up existing mandatorydrug rehabilitation programmes. But it made clear it will continue to tolerate its famouscoffee shops, where marijuana and cannabis are sold openly, andthe growing of home-grown cannabis. The proposals will moderate a 20-year social experiment thatinvolved tolerating soft drugs and viewing hard-drug users aspeople needing help rather than as criminals. It turned Amsterdam into a mecca for Europe's drug-seekingyouth while critics said it allowed organised crime to flourish. It angered neighbouring countries and France threatened toblock the Schengen agreement on open borders because of the flowof drugs from the Netherlands. ``The cabinet rejects legalisation of soft and hard drugs,''the Dutch government said in a review of its drugs policy. ``Tracking and prosecuting drug traffickers, particularlythose with cross-border operations, will continue to be given toppriority by the Dutch police and the judiciary,'' it said. It signalled a tougher stand against so-called drug touristswho flock in to buy cheap, readily available heroin and cocaine.The cabinet insisted, however, that it would continue to treataddicts as people who need help rather than as criminals and willalso maintain distinct policies on hard and soft drugs. The proposals recommend providing free heroin to chronicaddicts under a trial scheme to be launched in Rotterdam. Justice Minister Winnie Sorgdrager told Dutch television:``None of us advocates the use of drugs, nor tobacco or alcohol,but we know that they are used.'' ``Bona fide coffee shops have proved their worth,'' thegovernment said, but it added that the amount of cannabis theseshops would be allowed to sell for personal use would be cut tofive grammes per transaction from 30 grammes. ``Provided the strictest conditions are met, the police andjudiciary will not take active action against the small-scalegrowing of Dutch-grown cannabis,'' the government said. Lovers of home-grown Dutch grass -- known as Nederweed or``skunk'' on the streets -- have claimed this will help keeporganised crime out of the soft drugs business. ``We have 675,000 regular soft drug users in The Netherlands,but even so there are only 25,000 hard drugs addicts,'' HealthMinister Els Borst said. ``These figures confirm our view that if one keeps the twomarkets separate it becomes possible that people use soft drugs,sometimes experimenting with them for years -- and then stop.'' ``Stopping (using soft drugs) is also easier because nophysical dependency is created. (Soft drug users) may do thiswithout stepping up to hard drugs,'' she said. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B36-50IA088-000636-B015-8http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/teach1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101743 text/html 1539HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:17:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:05 GMTContent-length: 1322 Acclaimed Teacher Arrested on Marijuana Charges ACCLAIMED TEACHER ARRESTED ON MARIJUANA CHARGES Dallas Morning News 10-13-95 Slidell, La.-- A former teacher of the year in St. TammanyParish and her husband were arrested Thursday after deputiesfound 10 marijuana plants growing in their home. Laurie WilderMaschek, 32, a fifth-grade teacher at Abney Elementary School,and James Maschek, 34, face charges of marijuana cultivation andpossession with intent to distribute. Deputies said that theplants, which were about 7-8 feet tall, were growing in speciallytreated soil in individual plastic containers inside a room witha 1,000-watt light bulb used to provide maximum growingconditioins. Mrs. Maschek's plaque for being 1992 parish teacherof the year was hanging behind the plants. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B36-51IA088-000636-B015-51http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/seatt.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101832 text/html 3373HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:18:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:08 GMTContent-length: 3156 Ruling aids grower of "medicinal" pot Ruling aids grower of "medicinal" pot BY CAROL M. OSTROM Seattle Times staff reporter 10-3-95 There is good news and bad news for Joanna McKee and herGreen Cross Patient Co-op, busted earlier this year on Bainbridgelsland for supplying what McKee says is "medicinalmarijuana" to people she describes as patients. The good news is that Kitsap County Superior Court JudgeLeonard Kruse threw out the search warrant used in a May raidwhen police seized 162 marijuana plants from McKee's home. "lf the warrant's no good, then all the evidence is out.If the evidence is out, then we have no case to prosecute,"said Deputy Prosecutor Kevin Kelly. The bad news for McKee is that it doesn't look like thecounty plans to return her marijuana, estimated bydrug-enforcement officials to be worth about $300,000. "You can't give contraband back. The police would thenbe guilty of delivery," said Kelly. "You can't giveillegal drugs back to people." McKee--the first medicinal-marijuana supplier in the countryto be busted, according to the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws-- said she's going to take Kitsap Countyto court. About 70 patients with AIDS, multiple sclerosis, cancer andother illnesses who had depended on The Green Cross for marijuanahave been on "basic rations" since the bust, she said. "We are going after the county for damages and for allof our stuff back," she said."We were not convicted ofa crime, and they have no right to take our edicine away. Theysaid they took $300,000 worth of medicine away from us. thinkthey owe us $300,000." She said she would sue for an additional $200,000 for"pain and suffering ... and spending three days in jail withno medication for my back." The judge ruled that the search warrant was invalid becauseit didn't limit the discretion of the officers, and didn't saywhich items were to be seized. Marijuana was never mentioned inthe warrant, and no specific crime was alleged. In addition toMcKee, other defendants included Ronald "Stitch" Millerand John Devin, who lived in the same household. "We're thrilled," said Andrew Subin, McKee'sattorney. "We knew there were problems with the searchwarrant; we're glad the judge saw those problems." Kelly said his office had not decided whether to appeal theruling. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B36-52IA088-000636-B015-81http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/kiddrnk.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101850 text/html 10011HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:18:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:22 GMTContent-length: 9794 Kids Drink, Use Drugs to Cope Kids Drink, Use Drugs to Cope Peer Pressure Actually Less of a Factor in Teen DrinkingThan Parents Think MINNEAPOLIS, Oct. 18, 1995 /PRNewswire/ -- Parents oftenbelieve that teenagers take most of their cues from theirfriends. But new statistics show that peer pressure isn't asimportant a factor in leading teens to drink alcohol as parentsmay believe. Instead, teens feel that alcohol helps them forgetabout their problems, according to a recent national surveyreleased today by the Minnesota-based Hazelden Foundation. According to the survey statistics, parents are much morelikely to believe that peer pressure plays an important role ininfluencing teens to drink or use drugs. Survey results show that87 percent of parents said teens drink or use drugs because"everybody else is doing it." Seventy-nine percent ofparents also pointed to the fact that "other kids will thinkthey're weird if they don't" as an important factor in whyteens drink. On the other hand, 79 percent of teens pointed to"the feeling of being drunk or high" as their topreason for drinking or using drugs. Teens (66.7 percent) alsosaid that drugs and alcohol "help them forget theirproblems." "The adolescent years are difficult for kids toexperience," says Cathy Seward, executive director ofHazelden's Center for Youth and Families (HCYF). "Parentsshouldn't rule out the possibility that their children could betempted to turn to alcohol and drugs to cope." HCYF is oneof the nation's only adolescent and young adult centersspecializing in alcoholism and chemical dependency treatment andeducation for youth ages 14-25. Last year, more than 550 youngadults from throughout the United States benefited from HCYFprograms and services. TEENS MORE REALISTIC ABOUT SUBSTANCE ABUSE According to HCYF professionals, alcohol abuse is a moreserious problem among youth today, and teens appear to agree.Fifty percent of the teens said alcohol is the most seriousproblem among youth today. Parents were more evenly divided, withonly 36.4 percent rating alcohol as the most serious and 38.5percent rating drugs to be a more serious problem. Twenty-four percent of parents rated both alcohol and drugs aserious problem in contrast to only six percent of teens. "Parents today seem to be most concerned about theeffect of hard drugs, such as marijuana and cocaine, on the livesof their kids," says Seward. "In reality, alcohol isstill overwhelmingly the primary drug of choice among teens. Kidswho start off experimenting with alcohol are often more likely toget hooked and turn to harder drugs to get the 'high' feelingsthat originally attracted them to drinking." PARENTS LIMIT DRUG USE MORE THAN ALCOHOL When asked to describe the kind of "ground rules"families had about drug and alcohol use, survey results showparents set more rigid guidelines for their kids when it comes todrug use. Both parents and teens agreed at a margin of two to onethat drug use isn't tolerated in the family. When it comes to outlining specific family rules aboutalcohol and drug consumption, parents are much more lenienttoward alcohol -- allowing their teenagers to see them drinkingalcohol and admitting their teens can drink alcohol in a varietyof settings. Specifically: 21.8 percent of the parents said alcoholconsumption is all right for parents but not teens; 8.3 percentof parents allow their kids to drink alcohol at home; and 4.7percent of parents said they allow their teens to drink alcoholat parties as long as he/she doesn't drive home. According to survey results, none of these "groundrules" is allowed when it comes to drug use. COMMUNICATION GAP EXISTS BETWEEN PARENTS AND TEENS Even when parents say they have discussed alcohol and druguse with their teens, survey results show that such discussionsmay not have the effect that the parents hoped for. According tothe survey statistics, nearly all of the parents (95.6 percent)said they have talked to their teenagers about alcohol use. Only84 percent of the teens surveyed agreed. While fewer parents -- 92.5 percent -- have discussed druguse with their teens, the discrepancy with teens is even higher-- with only 78.5 percent of the youth remembering a discussionabout drug use. "When talking with kids about alcohol and drug use,parents need to be extremely clear about the consequences andpotential dangers that can affect their teens," says Seward."It's best to sit down with your child and use real lifeexamples to illustrate some of the harm that comes to teens whocontinue to experiment with drugs." OTHER FINDINGS IN THE HAZELDEN SURVEY: -- When asked how they would react if they found out thattheir teen was drinking or using drugs, twice as many parents (87percent) said they would "sit down and talk it out" ascompared to other options such as grounding their teenager (44percent) or forbidding their teenager from "hanging aroundwith the friends who got him/her started in the firstplace," (41 percent). -- Despite the fact that almost 40 percent (38.1 percent) ofteens surveyed admit they have friends or classmates who bothdrink alcohol and use drugs, approximately one third (30 percent)of parents said they are unsure about whether their teenager hasfriends or classmates who use alcohol. An almost equal number ofparents -- an additional 28 percent -- said their teens havefriends who both drink alcohol and use drugs. -- Parents (36 percent) and teens (40 percent) agreed thatteens at school plan activities that revolve around alcohol anddrugs on a weekly basis. Yet 20 percent of the teens surveyedadmit that teens plan activities that revolve around alcohol ordrugs even more often -- on a daily basis. -- When asked to rank behaviors that would make them think afriend had a drug or alcohol problem, teens listed the following:personality changes (80.4 percent); pressuring others to use(75.6 percent); giving up favorite activities (69.3 percent);lying about things (68.5 percent); receiving falling grades (65.6percent) or avoiding friends (44.8 percent). -- When asked what they felt would be the top results ofongoing drug use, teenagers pointed to getting hooked (89.3percent); death (82.6 percent); and a car crash (81.1 percent) asprimary concerns. Teens ranked unprotected sex (58 percent) asthe least likely result of ongoing drug or alcohol use. TEENS COMFORTABLE TALKING ABOUT CHEMICAL USE BUT AVOID TOPIC When asked hypothetically about their comfort level intalking with friends about drinking or drug use, more thanthree-fourths (77 percent) of the teens said they felt very orsomewhat confident and comfortable discussing the topic. Yet inreality, less than half of the teens surveyed who know friends orclassmates who used alcohol and/or drugs (44 percent) have evertalked with them about their drug or alcohol use and tried tooffer help. Fifty-five percent of the teens surveyed said theyhad never broached the subject with their friends. "Teenagers tend to listen to the opinions of theirfriends more than their parents," says Seward. "Thismakes it very important that friends take any opportunities totalk to each other about worries associated with drug and alcoholabuse." HAZELDEN OFFERS HELP IN DISCUSSING DRUG USE To help parents and teens discuss the topic of alcohol anddrug use, Hazelden's Responsibility of Friendship program hasdeveloped "A Guide For Teens," a free booklet designedto help teens assist a friend who has a problem with alcohol orother related drugs. To get a copy of Hazelden's "A Guide For Teens,"call Hazelden's toll-free helpline, 800-I-DO-CARE. The helplinewas created by Hazelden in 1992 in response to a widespread needfor information. ABOUT THE SURVEY The telephone survey, conducted for the Minnesota-basedHazelden Center for Youth and Families and the HazeldenFoundation by Market Facts, Inc., polled a nationallyrepresentative sample of more than 300 parents and 270 teenagersto learn their opinions about drug and alcohol use and whether ornot kids ever talk to friends about usage. (The margin of errorfor the sample is plus or minus 6 percentage points). HCYF is a program of the Hazelden Foundation, aninternationally recognized nonprofit organization providinglow-cost, quality rehabilitation, education, prevention andprofessional services in chemical dependency and relatedaddictive disorders. CONTACT: Jeff Moravec of Hazelden Foundation, 612-213-4228,or Trish Scorpio of Mona Meyer McGrath & Gavin/Shandwick,612-832-5000. Date: 10/17/95 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B36-53IA088-000636-B015-112http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/wisotsky.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101901 text/html 82190HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:18:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:02:08 GMTContent-length: 81974 Prepared Statment of Steven Wisotsky, Professor of Law, Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy Prepared Statement of Steven Wisotsky, Professor of Law, Nova University Law Center, before the selectcommittee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House ofRepresentatives, Concerning: A New Beginning in U.S. Drug Policy,September 29th, 1988, pp.410-454. [T]he history of the narcotics legislation in the country"reveals the determination of congress to turn the screw ofthe criminal machinery -- detection, prosecution and punishment-- tighter and tighter." The U.S. Supreme Court in _Albernaz v. United States_, 450U.S. 333, 343 (1981) The chief cause of problems is solutions -- Eric Sevareid Mr. Chairman, I would like to express my appreciation to theCommittee for inviting me to participate in this importanthearing on U.S. Drug Policy. This hearing could be and should bethe start of a new beginning in the conception and execution ofour drug laws. Indeed, if there is one over-riding theme in myprepared statement, it is just that: more than anything else --more than revised laws or the commitment of new resources -- weneed a careful, comprehensive study of the costs and benefits ofpresent drug policy, followed by a clear articulation of thefundamental goals sought to be achieved by our drug policy. First, let me identify myself for the record. I am both alawyer and a law professor. I have been a full-time member of thelaw faculty of the Nova University Law Center since 1975. One of my primary areas of specialization is the criminaljustice system. Since the late 1970s, I have followeddevelopments in U.S. drug law. With the aid of a grant from theNova Law Center in 1982, I published what is to my knowledge thefirst critique of the U.S. War on Drugs, the substance of whichis clearly indicated by its title, 'Exposing the War on Cocaine:The Futility and Destructiveness of Prohibition', 1983 _WisconsinLaw Review_ 1305. (1) My published work in this field has been cited widely by thepress, being summarized, for example, in the _Atlantic Monthly_cover story on cocaine, of January 1986. I am most widely knownas the author of _Breaking the Impasse in the War on Drugs_,reviewed in the _New York Times_ Book Review Section in December1986. I have spoken on drug law and policy at many panels andconferences in the United States and in Europe. My prepared statement for this hearing addresses threefundamental questions. What is the state of the War on Drugs? Howdid we get there? Where should we go from here? The current 'War on Drugs' began on October 2nd, 1982, with aradio address by President Reagan to the Nation: "The moodtowards drugs is changing in this country and the momentum iswith us. We are making no excuses for drugs hard, soft, orotherwise. Drugs are bad and we are going after them".(2)Twelve days later, in a speech delivered at the Department ofJustice, the President followed with an "unshakable"commitment "to do what is necessary to end the drugmenace" and "to cripple the power of the mob inAmerica."(3) He cited the "unqualified success" ofthe Miami Task Force on Crime and Drugs as a model to buildon.(4) It is important to note that President Reagan was not thefirst to declare war on drugs. President Nixon had done the samein 1971. In a message to Congress he had described drug abuse asa "national emergency", denounced drugs as "publicenemy number one" and called for a "totaloffensive".(5) First Drug War or not, the President'sstatement about the mood of the country seemed accurate. At thetime of his October 1982 speeches, some 3,000 parents groups hadalready organized nationwide under the umbrella of the NationalFederation of Parents for Drug Free Youth.(6) Within thegovernment, the House Select Committee(7) and the attorneygeneral's Task Force on Violent Crime(8) had urged the Presidentto declare War on Drugs. The President's October 14th speech called for and got more ofnearly everything:(9) 1.more personnel -- 1,020 law enforcementagents for the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), Federal Bureau ofInvestigation (FBI), and other agencies, 200 Assistant UnitedStates Attorneys, and 340 clerical staff; 2.more aggressive lawenforcement -- creating 12 (later 13) regional prosecutorial taskforces across the nation "to identify, investigate, andprosecute members of high-level drug trafficking enterprises, andto destroy the operations of those organizations"; 3.moremoney -- $127.5 million in additional funding and a substantialreallocation of the existing budget from prevention, treatment,and research programs to law enforcement programs; 4.more prisonbed space -- the addition of 1,260 beds at eleven federal prisonsto accommodate the increase in drug offenders to be incarcerated;5.more stringent laws -- a "legislative offensive designedto win approval of reforms" with respect to bail,sentencing, criminal forfeiture, and the exclusionary rule;6.better interagency coordination -- bringing together allfederal law enforcement agencies in "a comprehensive attackon drug trafficking and organized crime" under aCabinet-level committee chaired by the attorney general; and7.improved federal-state co-ordination, including federalassistance to state agencies by training their agents. Energized by the hardening attitude toward illegal drugs, theadministration acted aggressively, mobilizing an impressive arrayof federal bureaucracies and resources in a co-ordinated,although largely futile, attack on the supply of illegal drugs --principally cocaine, marijuana, and heroin. The administrationhired hundreds of drug agents and cut through bureaucraticrivalries with greater vigor than any administration before it.It acted to streamline operations and compel more co-operationamong enforcement agencies. It placed the FBI in charge of DEAand gave it major drug enforcement responsibility for the firsttime in its history.(10) And, as the centerpiece of itsprosecutorial strategy, it fielded a network of Organized CrimeDrug Enforcement Task Forces in 13 'core' cities across thenation.(11) To stop drugs from entering the country, the Administrationattempted to erect a contemporary anti-drug version of theMaginot Line: the National Narcotics Border Interdiction System(NNBIS), an intelligence network designed to co-ordinate radarsurveillance and interdiction efforts along the entire96,000-mile border of the United States. As part of thatinitiative, NNBIS floated radar balloons in the skies over Miami,the Florida Keys, and even the Bahamas to protect the nation'sperimeter against drug-smuggling incursions.(12) The CIA joined the war effort by supplying intelligence aboutforeign drug sources, and NASA assisted with satellite-basedsurveillance of coca and marijuana crops under cultivation.(13) The administration also initiated financial investigations,aided by computerized data banks and staffed by Treasury agentsspecially trained to trace money-laundering operations.(14) TheState Department pressured foreign governments to eradicateillegal coca and marijuana plants and financed pilot programs toprovide peasant farmers with alternative cash crops.(15) It alsonegotiated Mutual Assistance Treaties to expose 'dirty' moneysecreted in tax-haven nations and to extradite defendants accusedof drug conspiracies against the laws of the United States.(16) The government also literally militarized what had previouslybeen only a rhetorical war, deploying the armed forces of theUnited States to "assist" drug enforcement operations.The Department of Defense provided pursuit planes, helicopters,and other equipment to federal civilian enforcement agencies,while Navy E-2C 'Hawkeye' radar planes patrolled the coastalskies in search of smuggling aircraft and ships.(17) The CoastGuard, receiving new cutters and more personnel, intensified itscustomary task of interdicting drug-carrying vessels at sea. 1981 amendments to the Posse Comitatus Act relaxed thecentury-old ban on military enforcement of criminal laws andpermitted Coast Guard boarding parties to sail on Naval warshipsserving as 'platforms' for Coast Guard interdictions.(18)Finally, for the first time in American history, Navy vessels,including a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, began directly tointerdict -- and in one case fired upon -- drug smuggling shipsin international waters.(19) On a purely technical level, theAdministration could rightly claim some success in focusing theresources of the federal government in a historically large andsingle-minded attack on the drug supply. What were the results of this extraordinary enforcementprogram? It set new records in every category of measurement --drug seizures, investigations, indictments, arrests, convictions,and asset forfeitures. For example, DEA, FBI and Customs seizednearly one-half billion dollars in drug-related assets in1986.(20) DEA arrested twice as many drug offenders in 1986(12,819) as in 1982, and the percentage of arrestees constitutinghigh-level traffickers also rose from roughly one-third toone-half.(21) DEA, FBI, and other federal agencies seized over100,000 lbs. Of cocaine in 1986.(22) From the end of 1980 to June30, 1987, the prison population (counting felonies only) soaredfrom 329,021 to 570,519. Roughly 40 percent of new prison inmatesnow go in for drug offenses. In recognition of this boom, the1989 budget submission of the President seeks a 48 percentincrease for the U.S. Bureau of Prisons in order to accommodatean anticipated increase in prisoners from 44,000 today to 72,000by 1995. Despite the Administration's accumulation of impressivestatistics, domestic marijuana cultivation took off and the blackmarket in cocaine grew to record size. In 1980, the supply ofcocaine to the U.S. was estimated at 40 metric tons; by 1986 ithad risen to 140 tons. As a result of this abundant supply and amore-or-less stable pool of buyers, prices fell dramatically. In1980, a kilo of cocaine cost $50,000 - $55,000 delivered inMiami; by 1986, it had fallen to the range of $12,000 - $20,000;$14,000 was typical for much of 1988. In 1980-81, a gram ofcocaine cost $ 100 and averaged 12 percent purity at streetlevel. By 1986, the price had fallen to as low as $80 ($50 inMiami), and the purity had risen to more than 50 percent.(23)Around the nation, crack was marketed in $5 and $10 vials toreach the youth and low-income markets.(24) More than 22 millionAmericans report having tried cocaine; and roughly 5.8 millionreport having used it during the month preceding the 1985National Household Survey.(25) Cocaine-related hospitalemergencies rose from 4,277 in 1982 to 9,946 in 1985, and then tomore than 26,000 in 987.(26) As if to mock the aggressive efforts of the War on Drugs, thisrapid market growth occurred in the face of President Reagan'sdoubling and redoubling of the federal anti-drug enforcementbudget from $645 million in fiscal year 1981 to over $4 billionin fiscal year 1987.(27) Resources specifically devoted tointerdiction rose from $399 million to $ 1.3 billion, one thirdof the current budget; and military assistance rose from $5million to $405 million,(28) including the provision of (theservices of) Air Force AWAC'S and Navy E-2C radar planes; ArmyBlack Hawk helicopters used in Customs pursuit missions; and theCustoms Service's own purchases of P-3 radar planes, Citation jetinterceptors, and Blue Thunder interceptor boats. DEA personnelrose from 1,940 in 1981 to 2,875 special agents in 1988, withmore on request for 1989, along with a 47-position air wing forDEA. This budgetary expansion seems all the more remarkable whencompared to the 1969 anti-drug budget of $73.5 million.(29)Commenting specifically upon the interdiction budget, the Officeof Technology Assessment concluded: Despite a doubling of Federal expenditures on interdictionover the past five years, the quantity of drugs smuggled into theUnited States is greater than ever.... There is no clearcorrelation between the level of expenditures or effort devotedto interdiction and the long- term availability ofillegally-imported drugs in the domestic market.(30) The social 'return' on the extra billions spent during thattime has been a drug abuse problem of historic magnitude,accompanied by a drug trafficking parasite of internationaldimensions. This latter point is crucial. It is not simply that the War onDrugs has failed to work; it has in many respects made thingsworse. It has spun a spider's web of black market pathologies,including roughly 25 percent of all urban homicides, widespreadcorruption of police and other public officials, street crime byaddicts, and subversive 'narcoterrorist' alliances between LatinAmerican guerrillas and drug traffickers.(31) In the streets ofthe nation's major cities, violent gangs of young drug thugsengage in turf wars and open shoot-outs with automaticrifles.(32) Innocent bystanders are often shot. Corruptionpervades local police departments and foreign governments. SomeLatin American and Caribbean nations have been effectivelycaptured by drug traffickers.(33 ) Where capture is incomplete,intimidation reigns: one third of the Clombian supreme court wasassassinated in a (suspected) narco-terrorist raid. An estimated60 Colombian justices have been murdered in a recent five-yearperiod.(34) Of course, these pathologies were foreseeable. They are afunction of money. Drug law yields to a higher law: the law ofthe marketplace, the law of supply and demand. The naive attackon the drug supply through an aggressive program of enforcementat each step -- interdiction, arrest, prosecution, and punishment-- results in what Stanford Law School Professor Herbert Packerhas called a "crime tariff'.(35) The crime tariff is whatthe seller must charge the buyer in order to monetize the risk hetakes in breaking the law. It is in short a premium for takingrisks. The criminal law thereby maintains hyper-inflated pricesfor illegal drugs in the black market. For example, an ounce of pure pharmaceutical cocaine atroughly $80, just under $3.00 per gram, becomes worth about$4,480 if sold in the black market at $80 per diluted gram (at50% purity). The crime tariff is thus $4,400 per ounce. This typeof law enforcement succeeds to some unknown extent in makingdrugs less available -- to the extent (probably slight) thatdemand is elastic or sensitive to price. But because the crimetariff is paid to lawbreakers rather than the Government, itpumps vast sums of money into the black market, more than $100billion per year by government estimate.(36) The flow of theseillegal billions through the underground economy finances orsupplies the incentives for the pathologies described above:homicides, street crime, public corruption and internationalnarcoterrorism. If these phenomena were properly costed out, onemight well conclude that the War on Drugs makes a net negativecontribution to the safety, well-being and national securityinterests of the American people. Confronted by these threatening developments, both the publicand the politicians predictably react in fear and anger. Thespecter of uncontrolled and seemingly uncontrollable drug abuseand black marketeering leads to frustrated reaction against thedrug trade. The zeal to "turn the screw of the criminalmachinery -- detection, prosecution, and punishment -- tighterand tighter"(37) leads directly to the adoption ofrepressive and punitive measures that aggrandize governmentalpowers at the expense of individual rights. This reactive, almost reflexive growth of governmental powerand the correlative squelching of personal liberty occur as twoclosely related, if not inseparable, phenomena: 1.thegovernment's sustained attack, motivated by the perceivedimperatives of drug enforcement, on traditional protectionsafforded to criminal defendants under the Bill of Rights, and2.the gradual but perceptible rise of 'Big Brotherism' againstthe public at large in the form of drug testing, investigativedetention, eavesdropping, surveillance, monitoring, and otherintrusive enforcement methods. It may be difficult for those not familiar with criminal lawand procedure to understand the degree to which the War on Drugshas disempowered the criminal defendant, especially in drugcases. Perhaps by focusing on a few of the most important of themany restrictions that have been imposed, one may begin toappreciate the severity of the crackdown on the rights of thoseaccused of crime. First, let us consider pre-trial detention. It is important tounderstand that in the U.S. the law has always favored pre-trialrelease to reinforce the presumption of innocence and to allow adefendant to aid counsel in his defense. The Eighth Amendment tothe United States Constitution prohibits excessive bail; andwhile the cases do not establish a 'right' to bail, the law hasevolved as if there were a presumptive right to pre-trial releaseon bail (or other conditions) except in capital cases where"the proof is evident or the presumption great". Thiswas changed radically by the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of1984,(38) which not only authorized pre-trial detention butcreated a statutory _presumption_ in favor of it in any case inwhich, _inter alia_, the defendant is charged with a drug offensepunishable by ten years or more in prison.(39) Although thepresumption is rebuttable, in the first seven months under theact, the government won 704 motions for pre-trial detention whiledefendants won only 185.(40) Pre-trial detention is a severe blowto the morale of a defendant and to his ability to assist in thepreparation of his defense.(41) Another major erosion in the rights of defendants is the morepermissive use of illegally seized evidence. Since 1914, theFourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution has been interpreted toexclude from use in court evidence obtained by federal lawenforcement authorities in an illegal search and seizure.(42)Many states voluntarily adhered to that ruling, and in 1961 theremaining states were required to do so by the decision of theSupreme Court in _Mapp v. Ohio_.(43) But under the relentlesspressure of drug prosecutions and the frequent attempts ofCongress to repeal or restrict the exclusionary rule, the Courtshave whittled away at the protections afforded to individualprivacy. Notwithstanding the independence of the judicial branch, theCourts have in effect joined the war on drugs. Most notably, theU.S. Supreme Court gave its approval to just about everychallenged drug enforcement technique. For example, the Courtupheld the power of drug agents to use the airport drug courierprofile to stop, detain and question citizens without probablecause;(44) to subject a traveller's luggage to a sniffingexamination by drug-detector dogs without probable cause;(45) tomake warrantless searches of automobiles and closed containerstherein;(46) to conduct surveillance of suspects by placingtransmitters or beepers in containers in vehicles;(47) to searchat will without cause ships in inland waterways;(48) and toobtain a search warrant based on an undisclosed informant'stip.(49) The Supreme Court also adopted a 'good-faith exception'to the exclusionary rule for evidence seized in searches madepursuant to defective warrants.(50) It authorized warrantlesssearches of open fields and barns adjacent to a residence.(51) Itsignificantly enlarged the powers of police to stop, question,and detain drivers of vehicles on the highways on suspicion lessthan probable cause(52) or with no suspicion at all at fixedcheckpoints or road blocks.(53) The Court also validatedwarrantless aerial surveillance, that is airplane overflights ofprivate property,(54) the warrantless search of a motor homeoccupied as a residence,(55) and the warrantless search of thepurse of a public school student.(56) In the realm of search andseizure, there is hardly a drug case that the government failedto win. Indeed, the Supreme Court in _Albernaz_ apparently placedits imprimatur on the turn-the-screw approach of the U.S.Congress. Thus, the crackdown mentality prevails not only in thepolitical realm but, to use Madison's phrase, in "the leastdangerous branch" as well. One further example of the crackdown atmosphere prevailing inthe U.S. comes from the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986,(57) in whichCongress not only created new crimes but added to the penaltieswhich already existed. The effect of the Act is that drug crimesnow rank among the most seriously punished offenses in the UnitedStates Criminal Code. For example, the Act provides mandatoryminimum penalties of five and ten years in prison depending upondrug and weight involved; in the case of possession with intentto distribute five kilograms of cocaine, the penalty is a minimumof ten years up to a maximum of life imprisonment. Even as littleas five grams of cocaine base require not less than five years inprison and a maximum of 40 years. In both cases, the range ofpenalties rises to a minimum of 20 years and a maximum of life ifdeath or serious bodily injury results from the use of suchsubstances. It should be emphasized that these penalties apply to_first-time_ drug offenders; those with a prior state or federaldrug conviction must receive a _mandatory life term_ under thesecircumstances. The fact that these penalties are so severe, more stringent infact than sentences typically meted out to robbers orrapists,(58) illustrates one of the themes of this statement:people in the U.S. are so fearful and angry about their inabilityto contain drug trafficking that they are resorting to extremist,desperation measures. More than one public official has proposedsimply shooting suspected drug-carrying planes out of the sky.The atmosphere is perhaps best conveyed by the judicial opinionof a respected federal judge in Miami who, in an order denyingbail pending appeal, condemned drug dealers as "merchants ofmisery, destruction, and death" whose greed has wrought"hideous evil" and "unimaginable sorrow" uponthe nation. Their crimes, he wrote, are "unforgivable".(59) Andif drug crimes are literally "unforgivable",traditional constitutional and statutory protections forindividual rights can be discounted or discarded. One congressmanin fact complained about the extent to which legal protectionsinterfered with the prosecution of drug cases: "[I]n the Waron Narcotics we have met the enemy and he is the U.S. code. Ihave never seen such a maze of laws and hangups..."(60) Inthat spirit, and in the spirit of the angry judge just quoted,the punitive measures I have described, along with dozens ofothers, such as forfeiture of defense attorney's fees,(61) havebecome 'logical' measures in an endless cycle of crackdowns andfailures. Perhaps if these repressive laws applied only to drugdefendants, who could be dismissed as an alien 'them', few wouldcare and fewer still would protest. But this kind of reactionaryforce cannot be contained, cannot apply only to those accused ofdrug crime. In fact, the tentacles of drug enforcement havealready spread out to reach into the lives of ordinary people,not just to those involved in the drug underworld. Theseintrusions into the lives of civilian society take many forms.One of the most obvious is the rapid proliferation of mandatorydrug testing of employees and job applicants in the U.S. CivilService,(62) state and local civil services, and in the privatesector as well. Some 40 percent of Fortune 500 companies nowsubject their applicants or employees to urinalysis.(63)Government surveillance is on the increase in the form ofwiretaps and the maintenance of 1.5 million or more names inNADDIS, a drug investigative data bank. On a more prosaic level,the War on Drugs hampers the mobility of travellers, who aresubjected to road blocks, detained for questioning at airports,and whose luggage can be diverted for sniffing by drug-detectordogs. One of the latest repressive anti-drug initiatives to emergefrom Washington is called 'zero tolerance', begun by the CustomsService on March 21st. It means, in a nutshell, punishing drugusers to promote 'user accountability' and to reduce 'the demandside of the equation'. One manifestation of this policy occurs inthe effort to promote federal criminal prosecution of personsfound in possession of small amounts of drugs for which theyformerly would have escaped prosecution or been referred to localauthorities for prosecution. On March 30th, 1988 Attorney GeneralMeese sent a memorandum to all United States Attorneysencouraging the selective prosecution of "middle and upperclass users" in order to "send the message that thereis no such thing as 'recreational' drug use..." More widely known is the seizure and forfeiture of cars,planes, or boats of persons found in possession of even traceamounts of illegal drugs; these forfeited assets in effect imposemassive fines far greater than would ordinarily be imposed upon acriminal conviction for drug possession; but as civil forfeitureis in _rem_, no conviction or prosecution is required at all. Some examples: On April 30th, the Coast Guard boarded andseized the motor yacht _Ark Royal_, valued at $25 million,because 10 marijuana _seeds_ and two stems were found aboard.Public criticism prompted a return of the boat upon payment of $1,600 in fines and fees by the owner. The 52-foot _Mindy_ wasimpounded for a week because of cocaine dust in a rolled-updollar bill. The $80 million oceanographic research vessel_Atlantis II_ was seized in San Diego whent he Coast Guard found0.01 ounce of marijuana in a crewman's shaving kit. It wasreturned also. But a Michigan couple returning from a Canadianvacation lost the wife's 1987 Cougar when Customs agents foundtwo marijuana cigarettes in the pocket of her husband. No chargeswere filed, but the car was kept by the government. In Key West,Florida, David Phelps, a shrimp fisherman, lost his 73-footshrimper to the coast guard who found three grams of cannabisseeds and stems aboard. Under the law, the boat is forfeitablewhether or not Phelps had any responsibility for the drugs. Threeweeks later, the boat had not been returned. There are many otherways, too numerous to mention in this statement, that the War onDrugs has choked off civil liberties in the U.S. In 1987, the United States celebrated the bicentennial of itsConstitution. The framers of the Constitution were animated bythe spirit of William Pitt's dictum that "unlimited power isapt to corrupt the minds of those who possess it."(64) Theytherefore created a constitutional structure in whichgovernmental power was limited in the first instance andconstrained in the second by the system of checks and balances.The Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution,were added in 1791 to further secure personal freedom fromgovernmental oppression. The War on Drugs has substantially undermined the Americantradition of limited government and personal autonomy. Since theearly 1980s, the prevailing attitude, both within Government andin the broader society, has been that the crackdown on drugs isso imperative that extraordinary measures are justified. The endhas come to justify the means. The result is that Americans havesignificantly less freedom than they did only five or six yearsago. DEVELOPMENTS IN 1988: POLARIZATION Election year politics continues to ratchet the War on Drugsmachinery tighter and tighter. In June the Administrationdeclared its goal of a "drug-free America".(65) Duringthe month of April, the Senate voted 93 to 0 to adopt theAnti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, creating a $2.6 billion specialreserve fund for anti-drug programs over and above the regularannual budget of three-plus billion dollars. (As noted above, theregular budget represents a manifold increase in the level offunding that prevailed when the war on drugs was declared.) Thefrustration of Congress with drug-producing nations of LatinAmerica, crystallized by the stalemate with General Noriega inPanama, has produced a number of controversial proposalsinvolving the threat of sanctions(66) and the use of militaryforce to destroy coca crops or to capture fugitives from U.S.drug charges. Secretary Carlucci's opposition to arrest powersfor the military services may tone down the final bill, but anexpanded military surveillance role seems likely. At the statelevel, the National Guard has already been deployed on anti-drugsearch and destroy missions. The President on April 19th "call[ed] upon the House andSenate to vote promptly on my bill providing for capitalpunishment when a death results from drug dealing, and when a...law enforcement officer is murdered." In the latest piece offundamentalist-style anti-drug zealotry, the House on September22nd voted 375-30 to adopt capital punishment, for a drugexception to the exclusionary rule, to deny college student loansto anyone convicted of possessing drugs, to impose without trialup to $10,000 in "civil fines" for a person caught inpossession of drugs, and to impose a mandatory five-year prisonsentence on anyone convicted of possession of crack cocaine.Other "zero tolerance" style bills abound. A HouseRepublican Task force has introduced a bill calling forconfiscation of 25 percent of the adjusted gross income and netassets of anyone caught possessing illegal substances. It wouldalso cut off federal highway funds to states that do not suspenddrivers' licenses of persons convicted of using drugs.(67) As weget closer to the November election, one can predict withconfidence that more of these proposals will surface and thattheir extremist nature will increase. But at the same time there is movement in the oppositedirection. Respected journalists and other opinion leaders havebegun to break ranks with the War on Drugs, in some casessuggesting that it be abandoned altogether. Here are some notableexamples. David Boaz, Vice President for public policy atlibertarian-oriented Cato Institute, wrote an op-ed piece for the_New York Times_ (March 17th) "Let's Quit the DrugWar". In it he denounced the war on drugs as"unwinnable" and destructive to other values such ascivil liberties and advocated a "withdrawal" from thewar. Edwin M. Yoder Jr. of the _Washington Post_ Writers Groupcalled the war on drugs "dumb" and compared it to theprohibition of alcohol for "encouraging and enrichingmobsters" (March 4th, 1988). On March 10th, 1988, RichardCohen of the _Los Angeles Times_ Syndicate published a pieceendorsing the idea of a plan for the government distribution ofdrugs in order to "recognize the drug problem is with us tostay -- a social and medical problem, but not necessarily alaw-enforcement one. We've been making war on drugs long enough.It's time we started making sense instead." By May and June,articles of this type became a staple item in newspapers all overthe country as editors hopped aboard the "legalization"bandwagon. This sample of articles shows the emergence of a significantbody of opinion opposed to the war on drugs. What is perhaps evenmore significant is that the opposition transcends theliberal/conservative split. Traditionally, conservatives haveadvocated strict law enforcement and liberals have beenidentified with a permissive approach to the drug issue. Nowhighly respected conservative spokesmen have also begun todissent from the War on Drugs. Even before the recent spate of articles described above,prominent conservative columnist William F . Buckley Jr. hadreversed his position and advocated the legalization of drugs asthe only effective course of governmental action. NobelPrize-winning economist Milton Friedman has made publicstatements advocating more market-oriented approaches to theregulation of drugs. _National Review_, the most prominent organof conservative opinion, through its editor Richard Vigilante,published a piece (December 5th, 1986) exposing the Anti DrugAbuse Act of 1986 as a manifestation of public panic andcriticizing the intrusiveness of drug testing and otherenforcement measures. He also rejected the war on drugs asintolerant and politically unwise: "Embracing the drughysteria requires a rejection of essential conservativeprinciples." In the same issue of NR is an article byRichard C. Cowan, entitled 'How the Narcs Created Crack', arguingas follows: "Any realistic approach to the drug problem mustbegin with the legalization of small scale cultivation and saleof marijuana so that it is separated from the other, moredangerous drugs.... We need not fear that if we stop the lyingand hypocrisy, the American people are going to destroythemselves with drugs." This debate has captured the attention of the mainstreammedia.(69) Clearly, the challenge to the monopoly status of theWar on Drugs is gaining ground. Nothing approaching this level ofdissent has been seen or heard since the War on Drugs started. The dissent has also begun to spill over to the politicalsector. For example, the _ABA Journal_ (January l st, l 988)reported that the New York County Lawyers Association Committeeon Law Reform published a report advocating the decriminalizationof heroin, cocaine, and marijuana. New York State Senator JosephL. Galiber, from a district in the drug-ravaged Bronx, introducedon April 18th a bill in the New York State legislature todecriminalize the possession, distribution, sale, and use of allforms of controlled substances under the aegis of aState-Controlled Substance Authority. At a speech at the NationalConference of Mayors and again on a May 10th, 1988, broadcast ofABC's 'Nightline', the Mayor of Baltimore called forcongressional hearings to study the issue. Other mayors and a fewcongressmen supported him. And, surprisingly, Congressman CharlesRangel, Chairman of the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuseand Control, scheduled a one-day hearing for September 29th,1988, clearly inadequate for the task at hand, yet perhaps aharbinger of the future. Even if nothing constructive can emergeamidst election year maneuvering, at least the genie of change isout of the bottle. There are also pressures beginning to come from abroad. Forexample, the attorney general of Colombia said in a telephoneinterview with the _Miami Herald_ (February 23rd, 1988) thatColombia's battles against drug-trafficking rings have been afailure, calling them "useless". He suggested thatlegalizing the drug trade is something that the government"may have to consider" in the future. _The Economist_magazine ran a cover story (April 2-8) called 'Getting GangstersOut of Drugs', advocating the legalized and taxed distribution ofcontrolled substances. It followed up with similar commentarieson May 21st and June 4th. _El Pais_, the most influential Spanishnewspaper, also recommended "La legalizacion de ladroga" in an editorial (May 22nd, 1988).What accounts forthis trend? Negative experience with the War on Drugs certainlyplays a role. In the _Structure of Scientific Revolutions_,Thomas S. Kuhn argued that "the process by which a newcandidate for paradigm replaces its predecessors" occurs"only after persistent failure to solve a noteworthy puzzlehas given rise to crisis" (pp.144-45). There is little doubtthat the perception that the War on Drugs is a failure atcontrolling drug supply has spread significantly. Uncritical acceptance of the War on Drugs is no longerpossible. And the perception that it has negative side effects,breeding crime, violence and corruption, has spread even to thecomic pages of the daily newspapers.(69) In a more serious vein,Ted Koppel's "Nightline" broadcast a special three-hour"National Town Forum" on the subject of legalization.Perhaps we have already reached Kuhn's stage of "persistentfailure and crisis", in which the war on drugs has beendislodged as the only conceivable paradigm for the control ofdrugs in the U.S. What now should be done? (1) My more recent publications are: 'Crackdown: The Emerging"Drug Exception" to the Bill of Rights', 38 _HastingsLaw Journal_, 889 (1987); Wisotsky (ed.), 'The War on Drugs: InSearch of a Breakthrough' (Symposium), 11 _Nova Law Journal_ 891(1987); Wisotsky, 'The Ideology of Drug Testing,' 11 _Nova LawJournal_, 763 (1987) (2) President's Radio Address to the Nation, 18 Weekly Comp.Pres. Doc. 1249 (October 2, 1982) [hereinafter Radio Address]. (3) President's Message Announcing Federal lnitiatives AgainstDrug Trafficking and Organized Crime, 18 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc.1311, 1313-14 (October 14th, 1982). (4) _New York Times_, October 15th, 1982, p. A20 (5) E. Epstein, _Agency of Fear_ , pp. 173, 179 (1977) Nixonconsolidated agencies and created DEA as the lead agency in drugenforcement. (6) Gonzales, 'The War on Drugs: A Special Report', _Playboy_,April 1982, p. 134. (7) House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control,H.R. Rep. No. 418, pp. 1-2, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 50 (1982). (8) Attorney General's Task Force on Violent Crime, FinalReport 28 (1981). (9) The call for the buildup in the size and scope of thefederal drug enforcement bureaucracy also occurred under theNixon Administration. At the end of June 1968, the Bureau ofNarcoucs and Dangerous Drugs had 615 agents. By June 1970, thisnumber had increased to over 900, with authorization for at least300 more agents during 1971. See H.R. Rep. No. 1444, 91st Cong.,2d Sess. 18 reprinted in 1970 U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News4566, 4584. (10) See 28 C.F.R. [Sections] 0.85(a), 0.102 (1986). Authorityfor federal drug law enforcement is distributed among severalagencies, including the DEA, the Customs Service, the CoastGuard, the FBI, and the IRS. Supporting roles are played by theImmigration and Naturalization Service, the CIA, and theDepartment of Defense. See National Drug Enforcement PolicyBoard, _National and International Drug Law Enforcement Strategy_(January 1987). (11) See 'Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces: Goalsand Objectives', 11 _Drug Enforcement_, 6 (1984); Maitland,'President Gives Plan to Combat Drug Networks', _New York Times_,October 15th, 1982 [section] A, p. 1. (12) See Gibson, 'Anti-Smuggling System Would Have CIA Links',_Ft. Lauderdale News & Sun-Sentinel_, June 18th, 1983,[Section] A, p. 1. See also Office of Technology Assessment, U.S.Congress, 'The Border War on Drugs', pp. 33-39 (1987)[hereinafter 'Border War']. (13) See Coates and DeLama, 'Satellite Spying on NarcoticsOperations Is a Promising Tool for Drug Task Force', _MiamiHerald_, June 23rd, 1983, p. 11A. (14) For a description of Operation Greenback, the prototypemoney-laundering investigation, see Financial Investigation ofDrug Trafficking: Hearing Before the House Select Comm. onNarcotics Abuse and Control, 97th Cong., 1st Sess. 65 (1981). (15) See International Narcotics Control: Hearings Before theHouse Committee on Foreign Affairs,97th Cong., 2d Sess. 156(1982), International Narcotics Trafficking: Hearings Before thePermanent Subcomm. on Investigations of the Senate Comm. onGovernmental Affairs, 97th Cong., Ist Sess 201-02 (1981). (16) See President's Commission on Organized Crime, 'America'sHabit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime', pp.412-419 (1986). (17) Starita, 'Radar Planes to Hunt Drugs in S. Florida',_Miami Herald_, March 13th, 1982, p. 1B. (18) Congress has likened the drug smugglers to an invadingarmy, complete with generals, soldiers, and an armada thatoperates over the unpatrolled coastline and unmonitored airspaceof the United States . See Note, 'Fourth Amendment and PosseComitatus Act Restrictions on Military Involvement in Federal LawEnforcement', 54 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 404, 417 & nn 140-42(1986). (19) Stein, 'Naval Task Force Enlists in Drug War', _MiamiHerald_, August 24th, 1983, p. 13A. Balmaseda, 'Navy BulletsRiddle Pot-Smuggling Ship', _Miami Herald_, July 17th, 1983, p.1A (20) National Drug Policy Board, 'Federal Drug EnforcementProgress Report, 1986' Exhibit II-2, pp. 19-20 [hereinafter"Progress Report"]. (21) Id., Exhibit II-11, p. 35. (22) Id., Exhibit III-1, pp. 74-78. (23) Data on price, purity and supply are taken from theannual reports of the National Narcotics Intelligence ConsumersCommittee called 'The Supply of Illicit Drugs to the U.S. fromForeign and Domestic Sources'. (24) 'Progress Report', p. 7. (25) Id., p. 5. (26) Id., p. 6. 1987 data from 1987 NNIC Report. (27) Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress,'Drug Abuse Prevention and Control: Budget Authority for FederalPrograms', FY 1986 - FY 1988 [IP 334D] (February 27th, 1987). Thebudget dropped to 3 plus billion in FY 88. (28) Leen, 'Drug War Proving a Costly Failure', _MiamiHerald_, September 11th, 1988, p. 18A. (29) Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, 95thCong., 2d Sess., Congressional Resource Guide to the FederalEffort on Narcotics Abuse and Control 250 (Comm. Print 1976). (30) 'Border War', p. 3. (31) These phenomena are described in some detail in _Breakingthe Imparse in the War on Drugs_ Chs. 7-9. 'The Drug Gangs', _Newsweek_, March 28th, 1988, p. 20. (33) The leader of Panama, General Manuel Noriega, is currently under two separate federal indictments for drug trafficking offenses. The Chief Minister and the Commerce Minister of the Turks and Caicos were convicted in the U.S. of drug smuggling charges in 1985. Top officials in Haiti, Honduras, and Nicaragua are also under investigation in the U. S. 'Oppenheimer, U.S. urged to step up drug fight', _Miami Herald_, February 14th, 1988, p. 14A. George Baron, a U.S. government witness in the Carlos Lehder Rivas cocaine conspiracy trial testified that he paid $3 to $5 million in bribes to Bahamian Prime Minister Lynden O. Pindling. Baron testified that he paid Pindling $15 for each pound of marijuana smuggled through the Bahamas to protect the boats from Bahamian police. AP, _Miami Herald_, February 17th, 1988, p. 10A. (34) See Bin, 'Drug Lords and the Colombian Judiciary: A Storyof Threats, Bribes and Bullets',5 _Pacific Basin Law Journal_, p.178 (1986). (35) Packer, _The Limits of the Criminal Sanction_, pp.277-282 (1968). (36) House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and ControlAnnual Report for the Year 1984 H.R. Rep. No. 1199, 98th Cong.,2d Sess. 9 (1985). (37) _Albernaz v. United States_, 450 U.S. 333, 343 (1981). (38) Pub. L. No. 98-473, Tit. II, ch. 1, [section] 203(a), 98Stat. 1976 (1984) (codified at 18 U.S.C. [section] 3142) (Supp.1986). (39) 18 U.S.C. [section] 3142(e) (Supp. 1986). (40) Kennedy, 'Foreword to Symposium on the Crime Control Actof 1984', 22 Am. Crim. L. Rev.vi,viii n.4(1985). (41) Wald, 'Pretrial Detention and Ultimate Freedom: AStatistical Study', 39 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 631 (1964). (42) _Weeks v. UnitedStates_, 232 U.S. 383 (1914). (43) 367 U.S. 643 (1961). (44) _Florida v. Royer_, 460 U.S. 491, 493 (1983); see also_UnitedStates v. Montoya_, 473 U.S. 531 (1985); _Florida v.Rodriguez_, 469 U.S. 1, 5 (1984). Drug courier profiles are basedon an informal compilation of traits commonly associated withdrug smugglers; they have been criticized for allowingimpermissible intrusions on fourth amendment rights based solelyon an agent's 'hunch'. See Note, 'Drug Courier Profiles inAirport Stops', 14 S.U.L. Rev. 315, 316- 317 & n. 23 ( 1984).For further criticisms, see Note, 'Search and Seizure: Definingthe Outer Boundaries of the Drug Courier Profile', 17 _CreightonLaw Review_ 973 (1985). (45) _United States v. Plase_, 462 U.S. 696, 706 (1983). (46) _United States v. Ross_, 456 U.S. 798, 821 (1982); seealso _Colorado v. Bertine_, 107 S.Ct. 738 (1987). (47) _United States v. Knotts_, 460 U.S. 276, 282 (1983). (48) _United States v. Villamonte-Marquez_, 462 U.S. 579 593(1983) (49) _Illinois v. Gates_, 462 U.S. 213 (1983). Gates replacedthe principles of probable cause established in _Aguilar v.Texas_, 378 U.S. 108 (1964) and _Spinelli v. United States_, 393U.S. 410 (1969) with a more loosely structured 'totality of thecircumstances' test. _Gates_, 462 U.S. at 230. (50) _United States v. Leon_, 468 U.S. 897, 905 (1984). Tosimilar effect are _Illinois v. Krull_, 107 S.Ct. 1160 (1987),and _Maryland v. Garrison_, 107 S.Ct. 1013 (1987). For criticismof the good faith exception, see I W. LaFave, _Search andSeizure: A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment_ [section]1.3(c)-(d), at 51, 58-59 (1987) (arguing that the _Leon_ Courtoverestimated the costs of adherence to the exclusionary rulebased on "intuition, hunches, and occasional pieces ofpartial and often inconclusive data"). (51) _United States v. Dunn_, 107 S.C. 1134 (1987) (barn);_Oliver v. United States_, 466 U.S. 170 (1984) (open fields). (52) _United States v. Sharpe_, 470 U.S. 675 (1985). (53) _Texas v. Brown_, 460 U.S. 730 (1983). (54) _California v. Ciraolo_, 106 S.Ct. 1809, 1813 (1986) (55) _California v. Carney_, 471 U.S. 386, 390 (1985). (56) _New Jersey v. T.L.O._, 469 U.S. 325, 333 (1985). (57) Pub. L. No. 99-750, reprinted in 1986 U.S. Code Cong.& Admin. News (No. 10A) (codified as amended in scatteredsections of U.S.C.). (53) A not untypical example comes from a prominent 1988 newsstory. Larry Singleton had been convicted of raping a teenagerand hacking off the arms of a teenager between wrist and elbow.He was convicted in California and given the maximum sentence of14 years and served 8. In Florida, a person convicted ofpossession of 400 grams of cocaine or other similar drugtrafficking offense would receive a non-parolable mandatory termof 15 years. With typical gain time and work credits, he mightserve approximately 7 years in prison. (59) _United States v. Miranda_, 442 F. Supp. 786, 795 (S.D.Fla. 1977). (60) Financial Investigation of Drug Trafficking: HearingsBefore the House Select Comm. on Narcotics Abuse and Control,97th Cong., 1st Sess. 58 (1981) (statement of Congressman Hutto). (61) _United States v. Caplin & Drysdale_, 814 F.2d 905(4th Cir. 1987). (62) President's Message Announcing the Goals and Objectivesof the National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, 22 Weekly Comp.Pres.Doc. 1040, 1041 (August 4th, 1986). (63) General Dynamics, General Motors, Greyhound, E.F. Hutton,IBM, Mobil, The New York Times, The Teamsters, and United AutoWorkers are but a few of the enterprises that have recentlyinstituted some type of workplace drug testing. Ross, 'DrugTesting at Work Spreading‹and Likely to Spread Further', _LADaily Journal_, June 6th, 1985, p. 4. See generally, 'Testing forDrugs in the American Workplace', 11 _Nova Law Review_ 291(1987); Wisotsky, 'The Ideology of Drug Testing', 11 _Nova LawJournal_ 763 (1987). One rationale for requiring that urinalysis be predicated uponindividual suspicion is the not-unlikely possibility of a falsepositive result: "Two Navy doctors were almost drummed outof the service [in 1984] because they tested positive formorphine, the result of having eaten too many poppy seed bagels.Indeed, the Navy program has seen huge errors‹over 4,000 menand women were recalled at full back pay [in 1985] because theywere discharged on the basis of a [false positive]." (Ross,_supra_.) (64) Speech, Case of Wilkes January 19th, 1770). (65) National Drug Policy Board, 'Toward a Drug Free America'(1988). (66) 1n February, the House Foreign Affairs Committee TaskForce on International Narcotics Control demanded that the StateDepartment impose sanctions against Colombia, Peru, Bolivia andother nations in order to force them to intensify their drugenforcement efforts. (67) 'The Drug Enforcement Report', June 23rd, 1988, p.2. (69) _Time_ magazine ran a cover story on the debate called'Thinking the Unthinkable' (May 30th, 1988). _Newsweek_ did asimilar piece. The _New York Times_ and the _Miami Herald_ bothran front page stories on the same subject in May. (69) The syndicated strip 'Bloom County', for example,satirized the issue on at least two separate occaslons. The April18th, 1988, strip portrayed a scenario in which a lobbyist forsmugglers makes contnbutions to anti-drug candidates forpolitical office as a way to keep drug prices high. "Nothingmakes us madder than some liberal talking druglegalization." TOWARD A NEW BEGINNING IN DRUG CONTROL One historically tested model of exploring policy reform isthe appointment of a National Study Commission of experts,politicians and lay leaders to make findings of fact, canvass afull range of policy options, and recommend further researchwhere needed. The precedent set by the National Commission onMarijuana and Drug Abuse in the early 1970s offers a model thatmight usefully be emulated in many respects. At the very least, aNational Commission performs a vital educational function: itspublic hearings and attendant media coverage inform the public,bringing to their attention vital facts and a broader array ofpolicy options. The level of public discourse is almost certainto be elevated. Only those who prefer ignorance to knowledgecould possibly oppose the commission process.What should be theagenda of such a commission? Its over-riding goal should be todevelop policies directed toward the objectives of 1.reducingdrug abuse and 2.reducing the black-market pathologies resultingfrom the billions in drug money generated by drug lawenforcement. In pursuit of these dual goals, the commission'sstudy might benefit from adherence to the following five points: I. DEFINE THE DRUG PROBLEM What exactly is the problem regarding drugs in the U.S.? Theabsence of an agreed-upon answer to this question is one of theprimary sources of incoherence in present law and policy. Peoplenow speak of "the drug problem" in referring to atleast five very different phenomena: 1. the mere use of anyillegal drugs; 2. especially by teenagers; 3. the abuse ofillegal drugs; 4. drug-induced misbehavior that endangers orharms others, such as driving while impaired; and 5.drug-trafficking phenomena (crime, violence, and corruption)arising from the vast sums of money generated in the black marketin drugs. This confusion in the very statement of the problemnecessarily engenders confusion in solving it. The "drugproblem" as Edward Brecher reminds us in his classic _Licitand Illicit Drugs_ is itself a problem. Therefore, it does notand cannot lead to the formulation of useful solutions. It wouldbe a real breakthrough if the Congress or the next Presidentwould generate a meaningful statement of the "drugproblem". Otherwise, we are condemned to confirm the truth of EricSevareid's quip that the chief cause of problems is solutions. II. STATE YOUR GOALS A creative definition or redefinition of the drug problemwould of itself carry us toward a (re)statement of goals.Rational policy-making is impossible without a clear articulationof the goals sought to be achieved. Part of that impossibilityarises from the inconsistency between, for example, pursuit ofexisting goal number one by an attack on the drug supply andpursuit of goal number five, the suppression of drug money. Pursuit of the first creates a crime tariff which makes thepursuit of the last more or less impossible. Instead, the resultof drug enforcement is a black market estimated by the governmentto be over $100 billion per year, money that funds or gives riseto homicidal violence, street corruption by addicts, corruptionof public officials and international narco-terrorism. It istherefore essential to distinguish between problems arising fromdrugs and problems arising from drug money. For example, how muchcriminality is attributable not to the psychopharmacology ofdrugs but to the excessive prices intentionally caused by theprohibition of drugs? Rational policy-makers have to distinguishbetween the two and acknowledge the trade-offs between the twolines of attack. III. SET REALISTIC AND PRINCIPLED PRIORITIES BASED ON TRUTH The suppression of drugs as an end to itself is frequentlyjustified by arguments that drugs cause addiction, injury, andeven death in the short or long run. Granted that all drug usehas the potential for harm, it is clear beyond any rationalargument that most drug use does not cause such harm. DEADirector John Lawn to the contrary ("Drugs are illegalbecause they are bad"), drugs are not harmful _per se_.Exposure to drugs is not the same as exposure to radioactivewaste.(70) Rather, the overwhelming majority of incidents of drug use arewithout lasting personal or social consequence, just as theoverwhelming majority of drinking causes no harm to the drinkeror to society. Accepting the truth of that premise means that notall drug use need be addressed by the criminal law, and thatsociety might actually benefit from a policy of benign neglectrespecting some forms of drug use. I have in mind the Dutchmodel, where nothing is legal but some things are simply ignored,cannabis in particular. NORML estimates that there areapproximately one half-million arrests per year for marijuana,almost all for simple possession or petty sale offenses.Depending upon the age of consent chosen, most of these arrestscould be eliminated from the criminal justice system, therebyachieving a massive freeing of resources for the policing of realcrime. Because we live in a world of limited resources, it is notpossible to do everything. It is therefore both logical andnecessary to make distinctions among things that are more or lessimportant. I have in mind at least five basic dichotomies: 1. drug use by children (top priority) versus drug use byadults (low priority); 2. marijuana smoking (low priority) versus use of harder drugs(higher priority); 3. public use of drugs (high priority) versus private use ofdrugs at home (low priority); 4. drug consumption (no priority) versus drug impairment (highpriority); 5. occasional use (low priority) versus chronic or dependentuse (higher priority). From these general criteria for drug policy, I would commendto the National Commission five specific goals for an effective,principled drug policy: 1._Protect the Children_. I think this priority isself-evident and needs no discussion. I would simply add thatthis is the only domain in which "zero tolerance" makesany sense at all and might even be feasible if enforcementresources were concentrated on this as a top priority. 2._Get Tough on the Legal Drugs_. It is common knowledge thatalcohol (100,000 annual deaths) and tobacco (360,000 annualdeaths) far exceed the illegal drugs as sources of death,disease, and dysfunction in the U.S. Everyone knows that alcoholand tobacco are big business -- the advertising budget alone foralcohol runs about $2 billion a year -- and, what is worse, thestates and federal government are in complicity with the sellersof these deadly drugs by virtue of the billions in tax revenuesthat they reap. I am not, however, suggesting prohibition of these drugs. Thatis wrong in principle and impossible in practice, as experienceteaches. Nonetheless, there are more restrictive measure that canand should be undertaken. One is to get rid of cigarette vendingmachines so that cigarettes are not so readily available tominors. A second is to require or recommend to the states andlocalities more restrictive hours of sale. A third is to levytaxes on these products that are consistent with their socialcosts -- billions of dollars in property damage, disease, andlost productivity.(71) Those costs should be financed largely bythe sale of these products; at present prices, society is clearlysubsidizing those products by providing police, fire, ambulanceservices for road accidents; medicare and medicaid reimbursementfor therapy, surgery, prosthesis or other medical care; and manyother hidden costs effectively externalized by the industriesfrom smoker and drinker to society as a whole. Precise numbers need to be derived from studies, but Iwouldn't be surprised to find cigarettes at, say, $10 a pack andhard liquor at, say, $30-$50 a bottle to be priced moreconsistently with their true social costs. Such taxes would havethe additional salutary effect of reducing the consumption ofthese dangerous products to the extent that their demand iselastic. 3. _Public Safety and Order_. Here we need policies directedtoward protection of the public from accident and injury on thehighway, in the workplace and from unruly disruptions in publicstreets, public transport, parks and other gathering places.Programs specifically tailored to accomplish this more focusedgoal make a lot more sense than futile and counter productive"zero tolerance" approaches. Street-level lawenforcement practices need to be reviewed to see to what extentthey may actually encourage hustling drugs in the street to avoidarrests and forfeitures that might follow from fixed points ofsale. Promotion of driving and workplace safety require moreknowledge. Nothing should be assumed. Drug use, as the AirForce's and Freud's examples show, does not automatically meanthat a pilot or driver is impaired. Even with marijuana there isambiguous evidence as to its effect on motor co-ordination.(72)Responsible research is required. 4. _Protect Public Health_. The emphasis here is on the word"public". Policy should be directed toward 1. treatmentof addicts on a voluntary basis and 2. true epidemiologicalconcerns such as the use of drugs by pregnant women and thepotential for transmission of AIDS by I.V. drug users. Addictiontreatment is now shamefully underfunded, with months-long waitinglists in many cities. Purely individualized risks are not inprinciple a public health matter and are in any case trivial inmagnitude compared to those now accepted from alcohol andtobacco. Judge Young found no known lethal dose of marijuana.Even with cocaine, which has lethal potential, less than 2,000deaths per year result even though billions of lines or puffs ofcocaine are consumed every year. (Other long-term harms mayresult but are not systematically known at this time.) In any event, harmfulness is not the sole touchstone ofregulation; the requirements of goal number five, listed below,demand considerable deference to individual choice in thisdomain. 5. _Respect the Value of Individual Liberty andResponsibility_. The current administration's goal of a drug-freeAmerica, except for children, is both ridiculous -- as absurd asa liquor-free America -- and wrong in principle. This is notfundamentalist Ayatollah Land after all. A democratic societymust respect the decisions made by its adult citizens, even thoseperceived to be foolish or risky. After all, is it different inprinciple to protect the right of gun ownership, which producessome ten to twelve thousand homicides per year and thousands morenon-fatal injuries? Is it different in principle to protect theright of motorcyclists, skydivers or mountain climbers to risktheir lives? Is it different to permit children to ride bicycleswhich "cause" tens of thousands of crippling injuriesand deaths per year? To say that something is"dangerous" does not automatically supply a reason tooutlaw it. Indeed, the general presumption in our society is thatcompetent adults, with access to necessary information, areentitled to take risks of this kind as part of the right to life,liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Why are drugs different? It would be truly totalitarian if thegovernment could decide these matters. After all, if thegovernment is conceded to have the power to prohibit what isdangerous, does it not then have the power to compel what issafe? More specifically, if one drug can be prohibited on theground that it is dangerous to the individual, would it then notbe permissible for the government to degree that beneficial dosesof some other drug must be taken at specified intervals.Thefreedom of American citizens has already been seriously eroded bythe War on Drugs.(73) More civil liberties hang in the balance ofthe 1988 Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse Act pending in Congress andfurther legislation in years to come. Is the defense of Americansfrom drugs to be analogized to the defense of the Vietnamese fromCommunism, that it was necessary to destroy the city of Hue inorder to save it? The National Commission should give seriousweight to this value in its policy recommendation. IV. FOCUS ON THE BIG PICTURE Present drug policy suffers from a kind of micro-think thatborders on irresponsibility and is sometimes downright silly.This typically manifests itself in proud administrationannouncements or reports to congressional committees of a newinitiative or new accomplishment without regard to its impact onthe bottom line. The examples are endless -- a joint strike forcewith the government of the Bahamas; shutdown of a source ofsupply; the Pizza Connection case, the largest organized crimeheroin trafficking case ever made by the federal government; anew bank secrecy agreement with the Caymans; a new cocaeradication program in Bolivia or Peru, and so on. But none ofthese programs or "accomplishments" has ever made anynoticeable or lasting impact on the drug supply. Even now, as theGodfather of Bolivian cocaine resides in a Bolivian prison, isthere any observable reduction in the supply of cocaine? The lack of insistence that enforcement programs should make adifference in the real world produces fatuous reports like this1979 report by GAO to the Congress: "Gains made inControlling Illegal Drugs, Yet The Drug TradeFlourishes."(74) In what sense is it meaningful to say that gains are made ifthe bottom line grows worse and worse? This is reprehensibledoubletalk or Newspeak that should not be tolerated byresponsible public officials. The whole drug enforcemententerprise needs to be put on a more businesslike basis, lookingto the bottom line and not to isolated "achievements"of the war on drugs. In fact, the investor analogy is a good oneto use: if the war on drugs were incorporated as a businessenterprise, with its profits to be determined by its success incontrolling drug abuse and drug trafficking, who would invest init? Even if its operating budget were to be doubled to $6 billionper year, or doubled again to $12 billion per year, would it be agood personal investment? If not, why is it a good socialinvestment? This kind of hard-headed thinking is exactly what is lackingand has been lacking throughout the War on Drugs. No attentionhas been paid to considerations of cause and effect, or totrade-offs, or to cost-benefit analysis. New anti-druginitiatives are not subjected to critical questioning: whatmarginal gains, if any, can be projected from new programs or anadditional commitment of resources? Conversely, how might thingsworsen? For example, many law enforcement officials believe thatthe coast guard's "successful" interdiction ofmarijuana coming from Jamaica and Colombia in the early 1980s hadtwo negative side-effects: the substitution of domesticcultivation of more potent marijuana in California (andthroughout the U.S.) and the diversion of smugglers into morecompact and more readily concealable cocaine. Was thatinterdiction initiative therefore truly successful? Weren't thoseside-effects reasonably foreseeable? There are other examples. Drug gangs are probably far more ruthlessly violent today thanin the 1970s because they have learned to adapt to aggressivelaw-enforcement methods. The friendly governments of Colombia,Peru, Bolivia are far weaker today, far more corrupt, and farmore subject to narco-terrorist subversion because of similaradaptations there by the drug cartel and its associates. Has ournational security been thus advanced by the War on Drugs? For these reasons, it is important to abjure meaningless,isolated "victories" in the war on drugs and to focuson whether a program or policy offers some meaningful overallimpact on the safety, security and well-being of the Americanpeople. In this respect, does it really matter that the DEA hasdoubled the number of drug arrests from 6,000 to 12,000 duringthe 1980s? Or that the Customs Service has dramatically increased itsdrug seizures to over 100,000 pounds of cocaine? Or that kingpinslike Carlos Lehder Rivas have been convicted and imprisoned forlife plus 135 years? Might it not be that the resources devotedto those anti-drug initiatives were not merely wasted butactually counterproductive? Similarly, it is critical to pay scrupulous attention to causeand effect. Throughout the war on drugs, administration officialshave been making absurd claims about the effects of anti-drugpolicies. Recently President Reagan asserted that the War onDrugs is working. His evidence? Marijuana smoking is down to 18million per year and experimentation with cocaine by high schoolseniors in the University of Michigan survey declined by 20percent. Everyone trained in logic knows that this is the fallacyof _post hoc ergo propter hoc_. But one need not be trained inlogic to realize that there is no provable correlation betweenlaw enforcement initiatives and levels of drug consumption.Indeed, the same University of Michigan survey shows thatmarijuana consumption peaked in 1979, three years before the Waron Drugs even began. Cocaine is purer, cheaper, and moreavailable than ever before. If use is down, it is not because ofsuccessful law enforcement. Most categories of drug use are downand will most likely continue to go down as people become moreeducated and more concerned about health and fitness, fueled insome immeasurable degree by media reports of celebrity overdosedeaths such as those of David Kennedy, John Belushi, Len Bias,and Don Rogers.(75) Another important factor is the aging of the baby boomgeneration. That demographic bulge leaves fewer young peoplebehind and thus contributes to the aging of the population as awhole. An older population is simply one that is less likely touse cocaine, marijuana, and heroin.To attribute these changes tolaw enforcement levels is at the least unprofessional. Theliberalization of marijuana laws in California, Oregon, Maine,and elsewhere in the early 1970s produced no observable rise inconsumption (either new users or increased frequency) ofmarijuana compared to other states.(76) The connection between law and individual behavior at thislevel is remote. Government policies are no more responsible forthe current decline in drug use than they were for the boom inthe 1970s and early 1980s. Drug use will almost certainly declinein the 1990s, no matter what law enforcement does, for roughlythe same reasons that cigarette smoking has declined dramaticallywithout any change in the law. V. SUBSTITUTE STUDY FOR SPECULATION The War on Drugs has produced a siege mentality. Senators fromlarge states speak of invasions and national security threats.Even professionals who should know better succumb to anti-drughysteria. A former director of the National Institute of DrugAbuse claimed that without the War on Drugs to restrain thepeople, we would have 60-100,000,000 users of cocaine in thiscountry.(77) Now this is extremely unlikely; because of thestimulant nature of the drug, it appeals mostly to youngerpeople, the population is aging, there is already a downwardtrend in cocaine except for crack, and so forth. But rather thantrading assertion and counter-assertion, the real question isepistemological: How does the Director know what he 'knows'? Clearly, there is no empirical basis for his claim. It musttherefore be an expression of fear or perhaps political maneuver,but clearly something other than a statement of fact. Why wouldthe Director of the public agency most responsible for informingthe public on drugs take that tack? Whatever his reasons, wildspeculation is not the path to informed judgment and intelligent,workable policy. Why not truly confront the question of what lessrestricted availability of cocaine would mean in terms ofincreased drug use, taking account of both prevalence andincidence.(78) There are a number of ways in which this might be done if wetruly want to know the answers. One way is market research. Astandard technique of market research is to conduct surveys andask people about what they desire in a product in terms of price,quality, and other features. How much w ill they buy at variousprices? The same techniques are adaptable, _mutatis mutandis_, toillegal drugs. What about the effects of the drug? Is it addictive?Longitudinal studies of the kind pioneered by Ronald Siegel ofUCLA should be encouraged.(79) NIDA Household Surveys registeronly gross numbers and do not track users. (They do not evencover group quarters, such as college dormitories and militarybarracks, where drug use may be higher than average.) At thepresent time we have almost no real-world knowledge of theexperience of past and present cocaine users, except thoseunrepresentative few who come forward as former or recoveringaddicts. Even NIDA has conceded that we lack any estimate of therelative proportions of addictive use versus experimental orother non-consequential use in the total population of cocaineusers.(80) Isn't that critical information in regulating thedrug? (Drug users should be systematically interviewed, but theywill be loath to step forward in the current climate ofrepression.) Useful experiments might also be performed using volunteersfrom the prison population (for instance, those serving lifesentences without parole) and perhaps volunteers from themilitary services. How would men behave and how would theirhealth fare with abundant access to cocaine? Would it be usedwidely or intensively or both? Finally, comparative studies fromcountries such as Holland can tell us a great deal about theeffects of more freely available cannabis and heroin, althoughnot so with respect to cocaine. We have a lot to learn from theDutch. CONCLUSION I endorse a substantial measure of relaxation of drug laws insome respects simultaneously with a substantial measure ofintensification in other respects: the enforcement of laws toprotect children, along with more stringent laws regarding thesale of liquor and tobacco. As to the first point, some measureof relaxation of drug laws is both correct in principle andpragmatically necessary in the real world of limited resources.But this is not a 'surrender' in the War on Drugs. There is aparadox here: that the use of less force may actually result inproducing more control over the drug situation in this country. Consider the analogy of a panic stop in an automobile. In atypical scenario, a driver observes a sudden obstruction in hispath and slams on the brakes in order to avoid a collision. If heuses too much force on the pedal, the sudden forward weighttransfer will very likely induce front-wheel lockup. At thatpoint, the car starts skidding out of control. If the driverturns the wheel left or right, the car will simply keep onskidding forward toward the very obstacle that he is trying toavoid. In this moment of panic, the 'logical' or instinctivething to do is to stomp the brake pedal even harder. But that isabsolutely wrong. The correct thing to do to stop the skid is tomodulate the brake pedal, releasing it just enough to permit thefront wheels to begin rolling again so that steering control isrestored. Thus, the correct and safe response is counterintuitive, whilethe instinctive response sends the driver skidding towarddisaster. I leave it to the Committee to decide whether this hasany relevance in the re-making of drug policy. (70) Truth-based legislation will also have to acknowledgethat 'recreational' drugs also have beneficial uses, most notablymedicinal ones. Respectable authorities in the U.S. and abroadendorse heroin for pain relief for terminally ill patients.Francis Young, the chief administrative law judge of the DEA,recommended this summer that marijuana be re-classified to permitdoctors to prescribe it for relief of nausea from chemotherapyand for other purposes. His opinion concludes that marijuana is"far safer than many foods we commonly consume." andthat its medical benefits are "clear beyond anyquestion". Judge Young had previously recommended that MDMA("ecstasy") be removed from Schedule I and be madelegally available to psychiatrists for use in treating theirpatients.Medical uses are not the only beneficial effects ofdrugs. An AP wire from Frankfurt reported that the U.S. Air Forceallows its pilots to take Dexedrine "so that they are ableto fly when they haven't gotten enough sleep or don't feel fitenough." Hundreds of thousands of 'drug abusers' similarlystimulate themselves with amphetamines and cocaine. Over acentury ago, Sigmund Freud discovered in self-experiments thatmoderate doses (one tenth of a gram) of cocaine improved hismuscular strength and reaction time. See Blyck, _Cocaine Papers:Sigmund Freud_ (New York: New American Library, 1974), pp. 98,103. (71) The Research Triangle Institute estimated the annualcosts of alcohol abuse to society at $116 billion in 1983.Conference Board, 'Corporate Strategies for Controlling SubstanceAbuse' 13 (Axel, ed., 1986). With 1,000 daily deaths from lungcancer and other diseases often preceded by years of medicaltreatment, there must be billions more in social costsattributable to tobacco. (72) See Knepper, 'Puff the Dangerous Drug', _Car and Driver_,June 1980, p.43. (73) See Wisotsky, 'Crackdown: The Emerging "DrugException" to the Bill of Rights', 38 _Hastings Law Journal_889 (1987). (74) GGD-80-4 (October 25th, 1979). (75) About the only category of drug use that appears to be upis crack, and even that may be confined in large part to urbanghettos. See the _New York Times_, July 10th, 1988. The overalldecline, of course, is a positive development so long as it isnot offset by a corresponding rise in other drug use, such asalcohol or tobacco, or suicide or other forms ofhealth-endangering behavior. In this regard, the NationalCommission should fund research directed toward the developmentof some meaningful index of health and well-being by somehowcombining total morbidity/mortality date from all major causes.It would be a true Big Picture accomplishment if we could somehowconfirm that specified demographic segments were not only usingdrugs less but were also happier and healthier. (76) Maloff, 'A Review of the Effects of the Decriminalizationof Marijuana', _Contemporary Drug Problems_, p.132 (Fall, 1981). (77) Brinkley, 'The War on Narcotics: Can It Be Won?', _NewYork Times_, September 14th, 1984. (78) To speak of a rise or fall in drug use is simplistic. Itis important to distinguish between prevalence (the number ofusers) and incidence (the frequency of use). In measurable healthconsequences, it may be meaningless if the number of people whotry cocaine goes up or down; conversely a change in the amountsand frequency of consumption may significantly alter morbidityand mortality. (79) In a 1984 paper for NIDA (Research Monograph 50), Siegelconcluded that the "hypothesis that long-term use of cocaineis inevitably associated with an escalating dependency marked bymore frequent patterns of use is not supported by thefindings." Instead he found that "social recreationaldrug users maintained relatively stable patterns of use" inthe face of ready supplies and increased income as they aged. (80) Jerome H. Jaffe, 'Foreword', _Cocaine Use In America:Epidemiologic and Clinical Perspectives_ (NIDA, 1985). Otherresearch agendas should include the possibility of addictionmaintenance treatment and other therapeutic uses of cocaine. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Other Publications related to drug policy WT01-B36-54IA087-000625-B010-200http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/resourc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040905 text/html 7915HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:08:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:01 GMTContent-length: 7698 Sources of Information on Drug Policy Reform Sources of Information The Consumer's Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs The Consumer's Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs isperhaps the best-written overall view of the drug issue. It waspublished in 1972 and some of the information is a little datedbut it still gives a very good picture of how we got into thepresent situation. It also contains a lot of information on themedical problems associated with illegal drugs including achapter on famous drug addicts. It also contains a very good listof references which can be used as a starting point for furtherresearch. It can be found in most good local libraries. The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and DrugAbuse, published in 1973, is the largest study ever conducted bythe Federal Government on the drug issue. It is remarkablebecause it was formed by President Nixon who hand-picked everymember of the commission because they agreed with his views ondrugs. Furthermore, the commission refused to even hear testimonyfrom advocates of legalization or decriminalization. Despitethis, they concluded that our current policy was doomed tofailure and some form of decriminalization was the onlyacceptable approach. It is contained in several large volumes andcan be found in the better libraries, such as university researchlibraries. Clearinghouse and Data Center for Drugs and Crime Current information on drugs and crime can be obtainedthrough the Clearinghouse and Data Center for Drugs and Crimedata at 1-800-666-3332. This is a Federal facility which providesinformation free to anyone who wants it, including a long list ofbooks on drugs and crime statistics. The primary bible of crimestatistics for the Federal Government is the Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics, published every year. This bookcontains several hundred pages of crime statistics includingstate by state breakdowns, racial breakdowns, charts, graphs, andother information. The book is available through theClearinghouse above, or through any branch of the GovernmentPrinting Office. The cost is either free or about $20.00,depending upon how you can get it. The Clearinghouse also operates a free research service whichwill look up the answers to specific questions or help youcompile information on a particular issue. They are generallyvery helpful and will lead you to a lot of other good sources ofinformation. The Bureau of Justice Statistics The Bureau of Justice Statistics maintains an electronicbulletin board which gives online access to a lot of the Federalcrime statistics. The BBS number is 301-738-8895 (8-N-1) 300 to2400 baud. It is up 24 hours a day. Further information on theBBS can be obtained by calling 1-800-732-3277 National Institute on Drug Abuse 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857 NIDA clearinghouse 800-729-6686 The National Institute on Drug Abuse publishes a series ofresearch monographs every year summarizing the research on drugsin the previous year. There is a wide variety of informationpublished every year, including everything from short summariesof research projects to full-blown analyses of different aspectsof the drug problem. Included in these monographs are the currentstatistics for drug deaths and other drug-related health problems(also available through the Clearinghouse above). Interestingitems include a 1979 publication called "Themes in DrugProhibition" which details the rationale and propagandawhich has been used through the years to promote the drug war.Let it suffice to say that the information is not flattering tothe drug warriors by any means. Another interesting piece is the1988 study on drugs and violence which concluded thatdrug-related violence increased directly as drug law enforcementincreased. The information is contained in several volumes whichoften take up five shelves or more in a typical small library.Many libraries, particularly better libraries, will containfairly sizeable collections of the NIDA information. The Emperor Wears No Clothes The Emperor Wears No Clothes, by Jack Herer contains a lot ofgood information about the history and commercial and industrialuses of hemp (marijuana). It contains a lot of amazing factswhich are sure to make you the life of any party with a ReaganRepublican in attendance. It costs about $14.95 and is availablefrom High Times Books, 1-800-858-2665. The Drug Hang-Up The Drug Hang-Up by Rufus King is an excellent history ofdrug prohibition in the United States written by someone who wasa drug policy reform activist in 1951. When you read the book, itis apparent why Mr. King became an activist. He could not standthe outright fraud perpetrated by the drug warriors. It isavailable in many local libraries or you can write to Mr. King at1101 17th St. NW, Washington, DC 20036. It costs about $20.00. Hemp For Victory Hemp For Victory is a fifteen minute film made by the USFederal Government to encourage farmers to grow marijuana duringWorld War II. Very interesting stuff. It is $14.95, availablefrom High Times Books, 1-800-858-2665. CSAP national resource center The CSAP national resource center offers another source ofFederal Government statistics on drug related issues:1-800-354-8824 The Office of Minority Health The Office of Minority Health offers facts and figures onhealth issues in the minority communities, some of which aredrug-related. 1-800-444-6472 AIDS Information on AIDS can be obtained at: 1- 800-458-5231 Bureau of the Census The Bureau of the Census offers statistics and facts on thepopulation at large, which is good for making overall statisticalcomparison. Some of the information is available on CD-ROM foreasier access. 1-800-777-0978 Government Printing Office The Government Printing Office can supply (for a small fee,usually) any documents published by the Federal Government.1-202-783-3238 The National Center for State Courts The National Center for State Courts can supply informationregarding the status and problems of state courts. They arelocated in Williamsburg, VA, and their number is: 804-253-2000. The National Center for Institutions and Alternatives The National Center for Institutions and Alternatives has alot of information regarding prisons and alternatives to prison.703-684-0373 Data Resources of the National Institute Of Justice, 4thEdition (Resource Directory). Wiersema, B., Huang, W.S.W., Loftin, C. 1990. 287 pp. NCJ 122224. Free. This book contains a summary of the data resources of theDepartment of Justice. A good place to start to answer mostquestions. CliffSchaffer's Home Page