WT01-B40-1IA031-000655-B043-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/pidcms.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114034 text/html 43345HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:40:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:06 GMTContent-length: 43127 PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE RESEARCH IN BRIEF NOVEMBER 1993 PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS: A MODEL STATUTE BY SHERRY GREEN Letter from Michael J. Russell, Acting Director, NationalInstitute of Justice: Chemicals diverted from legitimate commerce are used in theproduction of illicit drugs such as cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, PCP,and LSD. Controlling illegal diversion and use of such chemicals isessential to limiting illicit drug production. Recent efforts to addressthis problem are based on the belief that illicit drug production can betraced from the records of chemical manufacturers and dealers of rawmaterials in the same way that laundered money can be traced through financialrecords. The principal U.S. statute to control chemical diversion isthe Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act of 1988, which establishedrecord keeping requirements and enforcement activities, initially for 20chemicals. The Act has already proven effective in limiting theinternational illicit diversion of the identified chemicals and controlling somedomestic manufacturing. However, illicit drug production in the UnitedStates has been rising at an alarming rate, with illegal domesticlaboratories now capable of producing enough stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, andnarcotics to satisfy demand for these substances. Adequate record-keeping ensures that there are paper trailson chemicals sent to illegal laboratories that make drugs. Thirty-two States,however, do not require record-keeping of transactions involving chemicalsidentified as necessary for producing illegal drugs. Criminals camouflagediversion of chemicals by moving shipments through States withoutrecord-keeping requirements. To focus attention on the need for all State law enforcementagencies to supplement Federal controls over chemical traffic and itsdiversion into illicit drug manufacturing, the National Institute of Justicesponsored a project to create a Model State Chemical Control Act. TheModel Act seeks to balance and accommodate the interests of law enforcement andlegitimate commerce. This Research in Brief explains how the Model Actcan be used to help halt the growth of illegal domestic drug manufacturingby stopping the diversion of chemicals from legitimate to illegitimatepurposes. [End letter] Law enforcement agencies around the world are using a varietyof methods to attack the illegal and deadly "industry" of illicitdrugs. Enforcement officials seize contraband substances, break up distributionnetworks, disrupt money-laundering operations, and destroy crops. Acritical part of this multifaceted attack on drug trafficking is the controlof specific chemicals that are necessary to produce illegal drugs. The United States is one of the world's leading producers anddistributors of the chemicals that are used to make controlled substances.Each year our Nation exports more than 50,000 metric tons of chemicals toLatin America, many of which find their way into the clandestinelaboratories of cocaine- and heroin-producing countries. In fact, seizures of illegallabs in Colombia and other Latin American countries often uncover chemicalcontainers with US. company logos. Until 1989 much of the cocaine entering ourcountry was produced using chemicals originating in the United States. Although there has been a decline in the export of chemicalsfor manufacturing illegal drugs, there has been an increase inthe chemicals' distribution at home. Illegal domestic laboratories are nowcapable of producing enough illicit drugs to satisfy U.S. consumers'demand. In 1991 the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) supported aproject to help the States develop a legislative response to the problem ofdistribution of chemicals and their manufacture into illegal drugs. Toprepare the Model State Chemical Control Act of 1992 (the Model), the AmericanProsecutors Research Institute (APRI), the research arm of the NationalDistrict Attorneys Association, brought together investigators andprosecutors from Arizona, California, Oklahoma, Texas, and Washington State.In addition, APRI solicited comments from the Department of Justice and theDrug Enforcement Administration (DEA) on the lessons they had learned at theFederal level and sought to understand the concerns of the chemical andpharmaceutical industries. This Research in Brief describes how chemicals are used tomake illicit drugs, discusses existing Federal and State legislation tocurtail the diversion of chemicals for illicit drug production, andreviews the Model statute. DOMESTIC ILLICIT DRUG PRODUCTION --Essential and precursor chemicals: All major illicit drugsexcept marijuana are either extracted or synthesized in a process requiringchemicals that are categorized as either "essential" or"precursor." Essential chemicals are used to extract drugs, such as cocaine, from plants. Althoughthese chemicals do not become part of the drug's molecular structure, theyare crucial to the manufacturing process. Precursor chemicals are used tosynthesize drugs (such as PCP), which are not naturally derived. These chemicals dobecome part of the drug's molecular structure. --Clandestine Labs: Highly sophisticated laboratoryoperations are sometimes necessary to manufacture drugs. For example, producingmarketable quantities of cocaine requires large-scale operations to handle theenormous amounts of coca leaves and solvents required. On the other hand, illegaldrug production is often a simple process, without need of complextechnology, sophisticated education, or training. Many synthetic drugs such asmethamphetamine and PCP can be produced in someone's home with readily availablelaboratory equipment. In fact, with equipment and precursor chemicalsworth $200, a criminal can in 18 hours produce a batch of methamphetaminewith a street value of $98,000.(ref. 1) In the 1980's States faced an outbreak of clandestinelaboratories because chemicals were readily available on the open market or wereeasily diverted from legitimate commerce. In 1986 the Oklahoma Bureau ofNarcotics (OBN) seized 28 labs, an almost 100 percent increase over the 16labs seized in 1985. Another 100 percent increase in seizures occurred in1988 when OBN seized 62 laboratories, compared to the 30 labs seized theprevious year. From 1985 to 1987, Texas narcotics officers seized more thantwice the number of labs as OBN. Clandestine laboratories range from small crude operations insheds, bathtubs, mobile homes, boats, and motel rooms to highlysophisticated operations with professional quality laboratory glassware andequipment. More than 80 percent of the clandestine labs in the UnitedStates produce methamphetamines.(ref. 2) With a knowledge of chemistryequivalent to that learned in high school, illicit lab operators are believed toproduce 25 tons of methamphetamines annually with a street value of $3billion. Less than 1 percent of that amount is spent on the chemicals needed forproduction.(ref. 3) CHEMICAL DIVERSION AND TRAFFICKING ACT In 1988 Congress enacted the Chemical Diversion andTrafficking Act (CDTA), Subtitle A of the Anti-Drug Abuse Amendments of 1988(codified as amendments to the Federal Controlled Substances Act). CDTA establishedrecord-keeping and reporting requirements and authorized enforcementactivities for domestic and international transactions in designated precursor andessential chemicals. Originally CDTA regulated machines for making thedrugs into tablets or capsules, 12 precursor chemicals, and 8 essentialchemicals. Now, 27 precursor and 7 essential chemicals are on the CDTA list.Chemicals may be added or deleted under standard Federal rule makingprocedures. CDTA applies to any individual or legal entity thatmanufactures, distributes domestically, imports, or exports any of the listedchemicals. The Act makes the unauthorized trade in these listed chemicals equivalentto trafficking in illegal drugs. Each chemical has been assigned a threshold amount, by volumeor weight, or a threshold number of monthly transactions. Once the thresholdhas been reached or exceeded, regulated individuals and entities must complywith Federal record-keeping, reporting, and identification requirements.However, threshold quantities do not apply to machinery; distributionof a single tableting or encapsulating machine triggers CDTA provisions. Among the provisions are requirements that purchasers supplyproof of identity in all regulated transactions. The type ofidentification required depends on whether the customer is new, is an individual orestablished business, is paying in cash, or is exporting the chemical toanother country. Records of regulated domestic transactions involving aprecursor chemical or a tableting or encapsulating machine must be kept for 4years. For an essential chemical, the record must be kept 2 years. Recordsmust be readily retrievable either at the business where the transactionoccurred or some other central location. Each record must contain specificinformation about the transaction and is subject to inspection and photocopyingby the Drug Enforcement Administration. CDTA requires that regulated individuals and entities reportsome circumstances both orally and in writing to DEA. Theseinclude uncommon methods of payment, loss or disappearance of a chemical, andsuspicion that a chemical has been diverted for illegal purposes. As withrecords, reports must contain the date of the transaction, quantity of thechemical purchased, name and address of each party, method of transfer, and otherdescriptive details. On the basis of the reports or a lapse inrecord-keeping, DEA has the authority to stop chemical shipments. Receipt of therequired advance notice of shipments can trigger DEA suspension when anillicit transfer is suspected. --The effect of Federal control: Shortly after implementationof CDTA, DEA noted a downward trend in domestic illegal lab activity asmeasured by the number of lab seizures. Of the 1,000 projected DEA labseizures for 1989, 807 materialized. A sharper decline occurred the following yearwhen DEA seized 521 laboratories. This decline was the first time seizureshad dropped significantly since 1981. CDTA has also been successful in controlling exports ofessential chemicals to Latin America. But as the pathways to foreign buyers havenarrowed, some U.S. exporters have turned their attention to the domesticmarket. Opportunities for diversion exist all along the domesticcommercial chain. Although CDTA's strict requirements help safeguard the legaltransfer of chemicals above the threshold levels, illicit operators arerestructuring their businesses to avoid Federal regulations. They arefocusing their efforts on States that do not have effective mechanisms forcontrolling chemicals. --Closing the door: The Office of National Drug ControlPolicy has estimated that the world supply of cocaine in 1990 was 1,000 metrictons, or about 2.2 million pounds. To produce this amount of cocaine, millionsof pounds of essential chemicals were required for processing. But many ofthese chemicals such as hydrochloric acid also have hundreds of legitimateuses, and for this reason, they are common substances in international trade. Criminals obtain these substances from manufacturers throughtheft, bribery of employees, or even legal purchase, especially in areasthat lack chemical control laws or do not enforce them. Poor plant security canincrease theft, and some retail purchasers are actually "frontcompanies" set up by producers to disguise the illicit drug trade. In addition, the vast international network of freightforwarders, brokers, and agents provides access to chemicals through multiplesales transactions, similar to money-laundering operations. In ports and freetrade zones, criminals can obtain the desired chemicals by repacking orre-labeling materials. CDTA has greatly decreased U.S. exports of essentialchemicals to Latin America. This Federal statute has added to costs borne bycriminals, and the new regulation and record-keeping requirements of the Actmake it increasingly likely that illicit operators are restructuringtheir businesses to avoid Federal regulations. They are focusing their effortson States that do not have effective mechanisms for controlling chemicals. THE NEED FOR EFFECTIVE STATE CONTROLS State regulatory and enforcement efforts are needed tosupplement Federal controls over the movement of chemicals into illegalchannels. If State officials can follow the trail of precursor and essentialchemicals from the chemical manufacturer to the illicit drug producer, thenproducers can be identified and apprehended before they manufacture illegaldrugs. Controlling these chemicals, therefore, is a potent strategy that canhelp identify drug criminals and interfere with their operations. Effective regulation of chemical transactions could dry upthe sources that supply illegal labs. However, clandestine drug production isa nomadic business. When chemicals become difficult to obtain in onelocale, illegal lab operators simply move their operations to a locationwhere acquisition of chemicals is less complicated. Differences in the extent ofcontrol exercised by the States currently make that a fairly easy process. Moreconsistent State laws could curtail movement of illegal labs from Stateto State. EXISTING VARIATIONS IN STATE CONTROLS To date 18 States have sought to control the existence ofclandestine labs by enacting their own detailed chemical tracking requirements.Some jurisdictions have incorporated these requirements into theircontrolled substances acts already on the books, while others haveadopted new, distinct statutes. --Number of chemicals: Colorado controls the largest numberof chemicals (35) while Montana regulates 9. The differences reflect eachState's experience or policy regarding diversion, abuse, and the potential illicituse of a chemical. Nearly all of the States that have controls excludeprescription or over-the-counter drugs, or both, from chemical requirements,with special exemptions for ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,norpseudoephedrine, and phenylpropanolamine. --Registration: All 18 States require a license or permit tolawfully manufacture or transfer a regulated chemical. Only a fewregulate the purchase or possession of chemicals. Registration renewalgenerally happens annually and involves a reasonable fee; the definition ofreasonable varies from a maximum of $25 in Arkansas to a minimum of $250 in NewMexico. Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation include fraud; drug lawviolations and convictions; and denial, suspension, or revocation of Federalregistrations. --Record-keeping: Differences also occur in the requirementsfor record-keeping. For example, several jurisdictions mandatethat chemical transfer records be kept for 2 years after the transactiondate, but Minnesota requires that records be kept for 5 years. Texasrequires that records of sales of laboratory apparatus also be kept. Hawaiiand Missouri maintain the confidentiality of information obtained throughrecords. Pennsylvania penalizes wrongful use of the information. --Reporting: Required reporting of intrastate transfers andout-of-State purchases also varies among States. In several States theregulatory agency must be given 21 days advance notice of any chemicaldelivery. Some States provide a monthly reporting alternative for individuals andentities with a history of lawful use, a regular relationship with arecipient, or both. While California and Montana require notice of receipt ofchemicals within 3 days after delivery, Oregon allows 10 days. Ten Statesrequire that special reports be submitted within 3 days after discovery of a theftor loss of chemicals, and eight require reports within 3 days for adiscrepancy in quantities shipped and received. Iowa and Washington extendthese deadlines to 7 days. --Exemptions: Medical professionals, agents, and licensedentities such as common carriers are traditionally exempt from licensing orreporting obligations. Some States expand the exemptions to includecollege chemistry students, government employees, or researchers. --Purchaser identification: Most jurisdictions mandate thatindividual purchasers identify themselves with a photograph, proof ofstreet or residential mailing address, and signature. Somejurisdictions ask for the purchaser's birth date, driver's license or otherState-issued identification number, year in which the purchaser's vehicle wasmanufactured, and vehicle license tag number. Most business recipients must furnish anauthorization letter listing an identification number, an address, a phonenumber, and a description of the chemical's intended use. --Responsibility: Finally, there is no consensus among theStates on which government agency should be given regulatory responsibility.The 18 States assign this duty to a wide variety of health, pharmaceutical,commerce, and enforcement agencies. ILLEGITIMATE USES FOR LEGITIMATE PRODUCTS Many people recognize ephedrine as an ingredient in sinusmedications. However, consumers are often unaware that ephedrine is alsothe primary precursor used to illegally produce methamphetamine (meth).In 1990, 53 percent of the clandestine meth labs seized by the DrugEnforcement Administration used the ephedrine reduction method to producethe drug.(ref. 4) State officials report that illicit meth laboratories in theWest and Southwest began using ephedrine after phenylacetic acid cameunder State regulation. In northern California 85 percent of the seizedmeth labs used single-ingredient ephedrine tablets. In Oregon officialsdiscovered that over-the-counter ephedrine tablets sold in the Portland areahad become a source of ephedrine for northwest meth lab operators.(ref. 5) For this reason, ephedrine has been included in the list ofchemicals targeted for regulation under the Model State ChemicalControl Act. MODEL STATE CHEMICAL CONTROL ACT In developing the Model State Chemical Control Act of 1992,the drafters sought to close loopholes in existing Federal and Statelegislation and to foster greater consistency among State regulations. Unlikemost criminal laws, the Model is a preventive measure. Its goal is to stopdrug offenses before they occur by preventing precursor and essentialchemicals from being diverted to illegal channels. It seeks to protect theinterests of legitimate commerce without limiting the ability of law enforcement tostop illicit chemical transactions. Monitoring every transaction involving a regulated chemical.The Model creates a monitoring system that tracks 35 chemicals fromsource to use. It covers a comprehensive range of chemicals controlled byStates and the Federal Government. The Model's reporting and record-keeping requirements applyto every transaction involving a regulated chemical, not just thoseexceeding a legal threshold. Under Federal law, manufacturers and distributorsdo not have to report or keep records on individuals or businesses who buychemicals in amounts below the legal threshold. Individuals can circumventthe law by making multiple purchases of small quantities, therebyaccumulating large amounts of chemicals for clandestine production.Unfortunately, Federal officials have no way of obtaining information about suchtransactions. The Model permits State and local officials to address this typeof diversion activity, which would otherwise escape detection until afterillegal use of the chemicals. The list of regulated chemicals can be modified by rule inresponse to changes in diversion or use. Under the Model, State officialsmay regulate a chemical on an emergency basis while awaiting completion ofnormal rule-making procedures. Emergency regulation is sometimes necessary to preventimminent hazards to public health and safety. Some chemicals are flammable ortoxic and their use must be controlled as soon as possible to prevent explosions,environmental damage, or illness. Registering manufacturers and distributors. Responsibilityfor the control of regulated chemicals rests primarily with manufacturers anddistributors. Therefore, the Model requires that they annually furnish lawenforcement with detailed information about the sources, location, and amountof chemicals available for sale. The purpose of annual registration isthreefold: --To convey to manufacturers and distributors anunderstanding of the critical role they play in eliminating illegal chemicaltransfers. --To help government officials determine if the chemicalsfound at clandestine lab sites have been supplied by a legal or"underground" source. --To help government officials more accurately assess theextent of illegal diversion. The drafters anticipate that the number of annualregistrations to be processed will be manageable. For example, in Californiaofficials currently register only 40 to 45 companies per year. Requiring permits to possess a regulated chemical. Permitsidentify which persons intend to use specific quantities of chemicals for aspecific purpose. With certain exceptions, every applicant for a permit mustprovide detailed personal information, including a criminal history andnotarized fingerprint card. Based on this information, government officialsascertain the fitness of a potential chemical recipient and ensure that theintended use is lawful. The permit provision is modeled after Oklahoma's chemicalcontrol statute, which extends the law beyond the traditional"receiving" category of purchasers to individuals who want to "possess" aregulated chemical. By requiring that they obtain a permit each time they seek topossess a regulated chemical, the Model eliminates a significantloophole in many existing statutes. For example, some illegal"cookers" manufacture controlled substances using chemicals produced in their own clandestinelaboratories. They are not subject to existing regulation and liabilityprovisions, which apply solely to purchasers, because they do not buy thechemical from an outside source. Under the Model statute, "cookers"would be subject to the law because although they do not "receive" thechemicals, they nonetheless "possess" them. The Model's permit process protects legitimate commerce intwo ways. First, it exempts the owners and officers of publicly heldcorporations (those with 35 shareholders or more) from the disclosure requirements ofpermit applications. These corporations are often fairly sizablebusinesses or are headquartered out-of-State. Their shareholders and officerslack the personal access necessary to illegally use or transfer regulatedchemicals. The Model assumes that there is no need for detailed backgroundinformation or fingerprint cards for such persons. Second, the Model includes a reporting alternative forpossessors who demonstrate a history of regular, legitimate use. The risk ofthese possessors diverting chemicals for unlawful purposes is lessthan with other possessors. Therefore, they may submit retrospective monthlyreports of actual chemical use in lieu of obtaining permits. The Modelprevents unnecessary duplication by accepting copies of Federalreports containing information about threshold amounts of regulated chemicals. --Exempting individuals from regulation: The Model exemptscommon carriers pharmacists, physicians, and other authorized practitionersfrom the statute's requirements. Manufacturers can obtain a specialexemption to continue marketing bona fide drug products such as over-thecounter sinus and asthma medications. A special exemption is granted upon afinding by State officials that a product is manufactured and distributed in amanner that prevents its diversion. In making the finding, Stateofficials consider the product's packaging, advertising, and actual or potential fordiversion.(ref. 6) --Safeguarding possession of regulated chemicals: The Modelcontains a number of safeguards to prevent unauthorized or unscrupulous personsfrom gaining access to regulated chemicals. It specifies that thefollowing persons are ineligible to apply for a registration or permit: Convicted drug offenders. Persons who have had a prior registration or permit Minors Because juveniles are subject to milder penalties thanadults, they frequently have been recruited to become participants incriminal activity. Therefore, making minors ineligible should preclude drugbalers from using juveniles to acquire chemicals for illegal purposes. The Model also provides for denial, suspension, or revocationof a registration or permit. Violation of the statutory rules,falsification of a document, and similar acts are grounds for denial ofauthorized access to regulated chemicals. Spotting discrepancies in the flow of chemicals. The Modelestablishes four information-gathering mechanisms to help State officials spotpossible diversion activities. First, the Model requires manufacturers, distributors, andpossessors to report any suspicious transaction or circumstance. cashpayments, discrepancies between quantities shipped and received, andtheft or loss of chemicals are all examples of suspicious circumstances. Second, the Model requires manufacturers, distributors,brokers, and traders to provide monthly reports detailing every transactioninvolving a regulated chemical. The reports allow officials to identify the truepurchaser of chemicals and ascertain whether the actual chemical use isconsistent with the stated intended use. Third, the Model requires purchasers to submit informationabout themselves, their permit or other authorization, and their vehicles priorto receiving or distributing a regulated chemical. This provision, whichincorporates California's purchaser identification requirements, alsofacilitates determination of the ultimate purchaser and the chemical'suse. Fourth, manufacturers and distributors are required to takeinventory annually and to keep all transaction records readilyaccessible for 4 years. --Providing for enforcement: The Model vests State officialswith the authority to identify and respond to situations ofnoncompliance. It authorizes limited warrantless inspections during regularbusiness hours and allows State officials to routinely inspect inventories,storage facilities, records, papers, files, and equipment.(ref. 9) It also grantsState officials the power to subpoena witnesses and require documentproduction. The Model provides for stiff fines and terms of imprisonment fornoncompliance. To eliminate the economic incentive for this type of criminalactivity, the Model applies a State's drug forfeiture procedures to moneyand property used in violation of the chemical diversion statute. --Recovering expenses: As with any proactive regulatoryscheme, the Model requires a continuing investment of time and money. Toprevent financial strain on scarce State resources, a system of nonrefundableapplication fees is recommended to help offset the cost of administering theprogram. In addition, the Model imposes a special civil assessment onviolators of the statute to be used for cleanup of illegal laboratory sites.Seizure of clandestine laboratories often reveals significant amounts ofhazardous or toxic waste and other byproducts that have been found. UnderFederal law, law enforcement agencies become liable for various cleanup andtransporting operations, damage to natural resources, and subsequenthealth risks that remain after the lab is dismantled.(ref. 10) Last year Oklahoma spent approximately $6,000 to clean upillegal labs, and for several years California has spent more than $1 million ayear for similar tasks. However, these expenses were only for removingbulk contamination. In the future site restoration throughhazardous waste removal may require even larger sums of money. The civil assessmentwill prevent violators from escaping financial liability for theenvironmental damage they cause and help States address the issue of long-termhazardous waste or residual contamination. APPLYING THE MODEL The chemical control legislation in California, Oklahoma,Texas, and Washington served as guides for creating the Model. Oklahomaand Texas officials have already noted the positive effect of theirlegislation on the struggle to eliminate illegal drug production. The OklahomaBureau of Narcotics and Texas Department of Public Safety indicate thattheir States' precursor laws significantly reduced the availability ofchemicals throughout Oklahoma and Texas. The reduction in supply has led to adecrease in clandestine laboratory activity in both States. The TexasDepartment of Public Safety reports that the availability of illicitamphetamine and methamphetamine in Texas decreased about 50 percent duringthe 3-year period since passage of its statute." Despite the success of these States' efforts, the lack ofadequate chemical controls in many states provides illegal drug manufacturerswith opportunities to expand their production of controlledsubstances. The toll in health, welfare, enforcement, and safety costs as well ashuman suffering is incalculable. The Model is designed to help Statepolicymakers and criminal justice professionals develop legislation that willseverely curtail domestic illegal drug production while protecting legitimatecommercial interests. COPING WITH CHEMICAL HAZARDS Seizures of clandestine labs pose special problems for lawenforcement officers because many of the chemicals used in drugmanufacturing are dangerous. For example, acids and solvents are corrosive andflammable, and some are highly explosive. About one-fifth of clandestine labseizures result from reports of fires caused by chemical processes.(ref. 7) In addition, many precursor and essential chemicals arecorrosive and can cause lung and eye damage, even upon exposure to vaporsemanating from the lab. Furthermore, according to a study in California,one-tenth of seized labs were booby-trapped with explosives or with disfiguringand poisonous chemical devices.(ref. 8) For these reasons, law enforcement experts recommend thatpolice officers in all areas of the criminal justice system be given specialtraining in handling these substances. They note that rural policeagencies are just as likely to encounter clandestine labs as urban police. Highwaypatrols and other agencies in jurisdictions with large railroad and othertransportation hubs are likely to find such substances en route to aclandestine location. NOTES 1. Impact of Clandestine Drug Laboratories on Small Business,1988: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Regulation and BusinessOpportunities of the House of Representatives Committee on Small Business, 100thCongress, 2d Session, 1988 (Statement of David Frohnmayer, Attorney General of theState of Oregon). 2. Drug Enforcement Administration. Guidelines for theCleanup of Clandestine Drug Laboratories. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1990. 3. Laszlo, A.T. "Clandestine Drug Laboratories:Confronting a Growing National Crisis." National Sheriff, 41 (1989): 9-14. 4. American Prosecutors Research Institute, Highlights of theModel State Chemical Control Act. Alexandria, Virginia: AmericanProsecutors Research Institute, 1991: 6-7. 5. American Prosecutors Research Institute, Highlights, pp.6-7. 6. This provision is based on draft CDTA amendmentsnegotiated between DEA and chemical and drug manufacturers. 7. National Institute of Justice. Controlling Chemicals Usedto Make Illegal Drugs: The Chemical Action Task Force and the DomesticChemical Action Group. Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice, January 1993: 3. 8. Laszlo, "Clandestine Drug Laboratories," 9-14. 9. This provision complies with New York v. Burger, 107 S.Ct. 2636 (1987). 10. These requirements result from provisions of theComprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act [42U.S.C. 9601-9657 (1982), amended by 42 U.S.C. 9601-9675 (1988)] and theResource Conservation and Recovery Act [42 U.S.C. 6901-6992 (1988)]. Also, theSuperfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act [Public Law 99-499] makes owners ofcontaminated property responsible for decontamination before it is sold.Thus, if a property is confiscated by a local jurisdiction, seizedthrough asset forfeiture laws, and subsequently sold, the jurisdiction maystill be responsible for cleanup. 11. Jolley, Inspector Jerrell, and Inspector Kenneth Hailey.Chemical Precursor Legislation: Texas Reduces the General Availabilityof Illicit Amphetamine and Methamphetamine. Unpublished report, March1991. REFERENCES American Prosecutors Research Institute. State Drug Laws forthe '90s. Alexandria, Virginia: American Prosecutors ResearchInstitute, 1991. Duncan, John. Clandestine Labs on Decline. Oklahoma Bureau ofNarcotics Enforcement. Unpublished report, 1991-1992. Duncan, John. Surviving Clandestine Labs. Oklahoma Bureau ofNarcotics Enforcement. Unpublished report, 1991-1992. Drug Enforcement Administration. Report summarizing Stateprecursor control laws. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, DrugEnforcement Administration. Unpublished, 1991-1992. General Accounting Office. Briefing report on the DrugEnforcement Administration's implementation of the Chemical Diversion andTrafficking Act of 1988. B-243007, April 1991. Findings and conclusions of the research reported here arethose of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official positionor policies of the U.S. Department of Justice. The National Institute of Justice is a component of theOffice of Justice Programs, which also includes the Bureau of JusticeAssistance, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime. Sherry Green was a senior attorney at the AmericanProsecutors Research Institute in Alexandria, Virginia, when she worked on thisproject to develop the Model (supported by NIJ grant #91-IJ-CX-K002). Shecurrently serves as executive Director of the President's Commission on ModelState Drug Laws, which is reviewing the Model for possible inclusion in itsreport to the States on recommended model laws. Drafters of the Model in addition to Ms. Green were SteveBrookman, Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, Mark Faull, Crime Strike,Phoenix, Arizona; William Holman, San Diego District Attorney's Office; JohnDuncan Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement; Katina Kypridakes,California Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement; Harry Matz, U.S. Department ofJustice; Michael Scott, Texas Department of Public Safety; Richard Wintory, OklahomaCounty District Attorney's Office; and Ken Ronald, Drug EnforcementAdministration. Katina Kypridakes and Mark Faull assisted with the development ofthis Research in Brief. Readers who wish to learn more about how States can addressthe chemical diversion issue may request a special information packagethat includes a copy of the Model and accompanying commentary; sample Statestatutes, regulations, and forms; and a chart of State chemical controlrequirements. Interested persons should write the American ProsecutorsResearch Institute, National Drug Prosecution Center, 99 Canal Center Plaza,Suite 510, Alexandria, VA 22314, or call 703- 549-6790. NCJ 142974 [NOTE: The published report from which this information wasinput contains accompanying charts and tables.] CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-2IA031-000655-B043-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/dcourt1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114116 text/html 85467HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:40:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:19 GMTContent-length: 85249 Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to AddressDrug-Relat Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to Address Drug-Related Crime (Briefing Report, 05/22/95, GAO/GGD-95-159BR). GAO provided information on drug courts, a new approach usedto monitor defendants' drug use, treatment, and behavior. GAO found that: (1) in exchange for reduced charges, drugusing defendants can be diverted to drug courts where judgesmonitor their progress through frequent status hearings; (2) drug courtprograms vary in length, participant eligibility, funding, and otherpractices; (3) as of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug courts operatingnationwide; (4) 33 drug courts have accepted over 20,000 defendants; (5)most drug courts do not accept violent offenders; (6) drug courts havenot been operating long enough to determine their overalleffectiveness; and (7) although the 1994 Crime Act authorized $1 billion to supportdrug court programs from fiscal year (FY) 1995 through FY 2000, Congresshas proposed repealing the drug court grant program. --------------------------- Indexing Terms----------------------------- REPORTNUM: GGD-95-159BR TITLE: Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to Address Drug-Related Crime DATE: 05/22/95 SUBJECT: Crimes or offenses Courts (law) Drug treatment Federal grants Defendants Drug abuse Law enforcement Recidivism Offender rehabilitation IDENTIFIER: Dade County (FL) DOJ Corrections Options Program Federal Drug Court Grant Program ************************************************************************** * This file contains an ASCII representation of the text of aGAO * * report. Delineations within the text indicating chaptertitles, * * headings, and bullets are preserved. Major divisions andsubdivisions * * of the text, such as Chapters, Sections, and Appendixes,are * * identified by double and single lines. The numbers on theright end * * of these lines indicate the position of each of thesubsections in the * * document outline. These numbers do NOT correspond with thepage * * numbers of the printed product. * * * * No attempt has been made to display graphic images,although figure * * captions are reproduced. Tables are included, but may notresemble * * those in the printed version. * * * * A printed copy of this report may be obtained from the GAODocument * * Distribution Facility by calling (202) 512-6000, by faxingyour * * request to (301) 258-4066, or by writing to P.O. Box 6015,* * Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. We are unable to acceptelectronic orders * * for printed documents at this time. * ************************************************************************** Cover ================================================================COVER Briefing Report to the Committee on the Judiciary, U.S.Senate, and the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives May 1995 DRUG COURTS - INFORMATION ON A NEW APPROACH TO ADDRESS DRUG-RELATED CRIME GAO/GGD-95-159BR Drug Courts Abbreviations ===============================================================ABBREV BJA - Bureau of Justice Assistance CSAT - Center for Substance Abuse Treatment DOJ - Department of Justice NIJ - National Institute of Justice OJP - Office of Justice Programs Letter ===============================================================LETTER B-260301 May 22, 1995 The Honorable Orrin G. Hatch Chairman The Honorable Joseph R. Biden, Jr. Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary United States Senate The Honorable Henry J. Hyde Chairman The Honorable John Conyers, Jr. Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary House of Representatives This briefing report provides information on drug courts,\1 anew approach used by state and local governments to addressdrug-related crime. These courts monitor the treatment and behavior ofdrug-using defendants. Title V of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Actof 1994 (the 1994 Crime Act) authorizes the award of federal grantsfor drug courts. The act requires that we assess the effectiveness andimpact of these grants and report to Congress by January 1, 1997. Toassist Congress in its deliberations on whether to fund drug courts,we developed this preliminary report. Specifically, we gathered information on drug courts in existence prior to the awardingof grants under the 1994 Crime Act, assessed evaluations ofthese courts, and reviewed the Department of Justice's (DOJ) responsibilities and plans for implementing the federal drugcourt grant program. During April and on May 11, 1995, we briefed the Committeeson the results of our work. -------------------- \1 Throughout this briefing report, we use the terms drugcourts and drug court programs interchangeably. RESULTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :1 In response to the deluge of drug cases since the late 1980sand the cycle of recidivism (rearrest rates) common to drugoffenders, some state and local jurisdictions created drug courts, themajority of which have been operating since 1993. The main purpose ofdrug courts is to use the authority of the court to reduce crimeby changing defendants' drug-using behavior. In exchange for the possibility of dismissed charges or reduced sentences,defendants are diverted to drug courts. Judges preside over drug courtproceedings, monitor the progress of defendants through frequent statushearings, and prescribe sanctions and rewards as appropriate incollaboration with prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatment providers, andothers. Although there are basic elements common to many drug courtprograms, they vary in terms of participant eligibility, length of theprogram, penalties and rewards, and other practices. The courts aresupported by a variety of local, state, federal, and private funds and participant fees, according to the Drug Court ResourceCenter.\2 As of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug courtsoperating nationwide, most of which had been fully operational for atleast 9 months. Thirty-three drug courts responding to ourquestionnaire reported having accepted over 20,000 defendants, of whom athird had completed their programs. According to the Project Directorof the Drug Court Resource Center, none of the drug courts acceptdefendants currently charged with a violent offense, and most do notaccept defendants with prior violent convictions. However, at leastone drug court accepts defendants regardless of prior offenses.(See sect. I for more general information on drug courts.) We assessed six evaluations of five drug courts completed asof March 1995. Although some evaluation results indicated that drugcourts may have some beneficial effects, limitations in theirdesigns and methodologies, as well as the relative newness of drugcourts, precluded firm conclusions about the overall impact of these programs. The evaluations showed mixed results in recidivismand other defendant outcomes. For example, two evaluations showedless recidivism by drug court defendants. However, three other evaluations showed no significant differences in recidivism. Additionally, two evaluations of the same drug court showed contrasting recidivism results. (See sect. II and app. IIIfor more information on the evaluations we assessed.) The 1994 Crime Act authorized the Attorney General to awardand administer discretionary grants for drug court programs. Akey requirement of the act is that violent offenders areprohibited as drug court participants. The act authorized $1 billion fromfiscal years 1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs. Forfiscal year 1995, $29 million was appropriated. However, Congresshas proposed fiscal year 1995 budget cuts in a pending rescissionbill. In addition, the House has passed legislation repealing thedrug court grant program authorized in the 1994 Crime Act. DOJ expects to award grants beginning in the summer of 1995.The 1994 Crime Act also authorizes the Attorney General toprovide for a national evaluation of drug courts supported by federalgrants. DOJ expects to complete the evaluation to assess the impact and effectiveness of drug court grants in about 2 years. (Seesect. III for more information.) -------------------- \2 The Bureau of Justice Assistance funds the Drug CourtResource Center. The Resource Center began operating October 1, 1994,under the direction of The American University in partnership withthe National Center for State Courts and the National Consortiumof Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime Programs. The ResourceCenter assists state and local justice system officials in planning, implementing, managing, and evaluating drug courts. It alsoacts as a clearinghouse and provides technical assistance and otherservices to jurisdictions interested in developing or expanding drugcourts. OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :2 In preparation for our 1997 mandated study, we initiated a preliminary review of drug court programs. Our objectiveswere to determine the number, location, and key elements of drug courts; the results and validity of evaluations of drug courts; and DOJ's responsibilities and plans for implementing statutory requirements for the federal drug court grant program. The Drug Court Resource Center, which is based at TheAmerican University, Washington, D.C., provided us with generalinformation on drug courts. To obtain more current information, we sent a questionnaire to 37 drug courts. We received responses from33 drug courts as of March 31, 1995. We did not verify the accuracyof the data provided to us by the Drug Court Resource Center anddrug courts. In addition, we attended a January 1995 nationaltraining conference for drug court professionals in Las Vegas, NV, andvisited drug courts in Las Vegas and Washington, D.C. To determine the results and assess the validity ofevaluations of drug courts, we obtained 11 drug court evaluations completedas of March 1, 1995, from the Drug Court Resource Center. These evaluations were done by a variety of sources, includingindependent researchers, county officials, and court representatives. We reviewed them and assessed the evaluative methodology usedand the validity of reported findings. We did not analyze thereported results of three of them because they reported outcome datafor drug court defendants without any reference to comparison orcontrol groups. We were unable to assess the validity of one becauseit did not include a description of the methodology used. Two dealtwith one drug court and were assessed as one evaluation becauseone was a follow-up to the other and contained the same methodology and findings. To determine DOJ's responsibilities and plans forimplementing the federal grant program, we met with representatives of theOffice of Justice Programs, DOJ. We held discussions and revieweddocuments regarding their responsibilities and plans for implementingthe federally supported drug court program. We also obtained drugcourt funding information from the Department of Health and HumanServices' Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Our review was done from January 1995 to April 1995 inaccordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. AGENCY COMMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :3 In April 1995, we provided a draft of this report for commentto the Attorney General and the Project Director of the Drug CourtResource Center. On April 21, 1995, we discussed the report with the ProjectDirector of the Drug Court Resource Center. On May 5, 1995, we alsodiscussed the report with the Deputy Assistant Attorney General andother officials from DOJ's Office of Justice Programs. Theseofficials generally agreed with the information presented in the reportand provided comments that we incorporated as appropriate. DOJ officials said the report was positive, informative, andwill be helpful to drug court professionals. They explained thatthere is no universal model for drug courts, and as a result, each drugcourt operates differently due to local needs and conditions.Similarly, the Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center saidthat the information presented in the report was comprehensive,accurate, and objective. ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :3.1 We are sending copies of this briefing report to otherinterested congressional committees and Members and the AttorneyGeneral. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. The major contributors to this briefing report are listed inappendix IV. If you have any questions about this report, please callme on (202) 512-8777. Norman J. Rabkin Director, Administration of Justice Issues Briefing Section I DRUG COURTS ==============================================================Letter TYPES OF DRUG COURTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :4 (See figure in printed edition.) In the late 1980s, state and local criminal courts wereinundated with drug cases. One response to this challenge was thecreation of drug courts, a relatively recent grassroots movement to dealwith drug-related crime and drug-using defendants. According to DOJ, two main types of drug courts have evolved,those that (1) expedite the processing of drug cases and (2) use court-monitored drug treatment to attempt to achieve changesin defendants' drug-using behavior. In addition, some drugcourts combine these two types. The 1994 Crime Act authorizes grants for those drug courtsthat have programs offering court supervised drug treatment. The actdoes not authorize grants for courts designed solely to expedite the processing of drug cases. This briefing report providesinformation on drug treatment courts. Courts offering court-monitored drug treatment are referredto as "drug treatment courts" or simply "drugcourts." Although there is no standard definition applicable to drug treatment courts, theNational Association of Drug Court Professionals\3 defines them asfollows: "A Drug Court is a special court given theresponsibility to handle cases involving less serious drug using-offendersthrough a supervision and treatment program. These programs include frequent drug testing, judicial and probation supervision,drug counseling, treatment, educational opportunities, and the useof sanctions and incentives." One of the first drug courts to employ drug treatment as anintegral part of the processing of drug felonies is located in DadeCounty (Miami), FL, and began operations in June 1989. This courtbecame a model for other jurisdictions that implemented drug courts. Although drug courts share certain common elements such as court-monitored treatment, the courts are uniquely designedto meet local needs and can vary considerably in the way theyoperate. Organizationally, drug courts generally are distinct parts oftrial courts. -------------------- \3 This is the principal organization of professionalsinvolved in the development of treatment-oriented drug courts. Itsmembers include judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatmentservice providers, educators, researchers, and community leaders. DRUG COURT APPROACHES ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :5 (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT APPROACHES ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :5.1 According to a report provided by the Drug Court ResourceCenter, drug courts have generally taken two approaches to processingcases: (1) deferred prosecution and (2) postadjudication. In thedeferred prosecution approach, shortly after being charged, defendantswaive their right to a speedy trial and enter a treatment program. Defendants who fail to complete the treatment program havetheir charges adjudicated. Defendants who complete the treatmentprogram are not prosecuted further or have their charges dismissed.This approach is intended to capitalize on the trauma of arrestand offers defendants the opportunity to obtain treatment and avoid the possibility of a felony conviction. In the postadjudication approach, defendants are tried andconvicted, but their sentences are deferred or pronounced andincarceration is suspended until they complete or withdraw from the treatmentprogram. This approach provides an incentive for the defendant torehabilitate because progress toward rehabilitation is factored into the sentencing determination. Appendix I presents examples of how cases are processed underthe two drug court approaches. PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :6 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :6.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, drug courtsgenerally accept defendants with substance abuse problems who arecurrently charged with drug possession and/or other nonviolent offensessuch as property crimes. Some drug courts accept defendants who haveprior convictions, and others do not. The Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center alsopointed out that drug courts do not accept defendants currentlycharged with a violent offense. The Project Director further commentedthat most drug courts do not accept defendants with prior violentoffenses. However, at least one drug court accepts defendantsregardless of prior offenses possibly including defendants with priorconvictions for violent crimes. Under the 1994 Crime Act, federal grantscannot be awarded to any drug court that allows either current orpast violent offenders to participate in its program. DRUG COURT PLAYERS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :7 (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT PLAYERS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :7.1 According to a DOJ-funded report on the first national drugcourt conference,\4 judicial leadership is the foundation on whichthe overall drug court approach is most often built. Ajurisdiction's trial court provides the leadership, authority, andmanagement capacity to enable the drug court to operate. The drug courtis headed by a judge whose role is generally expanded beyondnormal court duties to include active involvement in monitoring thestatus of defendants in the treatment program. The judge's dutiesmay include conducting hearings, reviewing treatment progressreports, issuing bench warrants, and deciding who may enter theprogram and who should be terminated considering recommendations ofprosecutors, public defenders, and treatment providers. The judiciary alone, however, cannot successfully implementand operate a drug court, according to the conference report.Rather, a drug court requires a special collaborative effort amongjudges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and related criminal justiceagencies along with treatment providers and other social services and community organizations. This collaborative effort is basedon local needs and the targeted population being served and may differ considerably among drug courts. Specifically, drug courts create new and different roles for prosecutors and defense attorneys. In most drug courts theseplayers are not adversaries in the traditional sense but rather areto work in concert with the court for the sole purpose of helpingdefendants become drug free. This nonadversarial role is significantbecause the court does not arbitrate in the usual fashion and has the opportunity to address addiction-related issues. Further,drug courts place the defendant in the unique role of being heldpublicly accountable for his or her actions. -------------------- \4 Justice and Treatment Innovation: The Drug Court Movement,A Working Paper of the First National Drug Court Conference,December 1993, John S. Goldkamp, October 1994. COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :8 (See figure in printed edition.) COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :8.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, in most drugcourts, treatment is designed to usually last at least 1 year and is administered on an outpatient basis with limited inpatienttreatment as needed to address special detoxification or relapsesituations.\5 These courts operate with the philosophy that because drugaddiction is a disease relapses can occur, and that the court mustrespond with progressive sanctions and/or enhance treatment rather than immediately terminate a participant. The central element of all drug court programs is attendanceat the regularly scheduled status hearings at which the drug courtjudge monitors the progress of participants. Monitoring is based on treatment provider reports on urine test results that detectdrug use, attendance at counseling, etc. The judge reinforcesprogress and addresses noncompliance with program requirements. Theprimary objective of the status hearing is to keep the defendant in treatment. -------------------- \5 These programs recognize that some individuals willrequire a longer period to complete the program. PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ------------------------------------------------------------Letter :9 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS ----------------------------------------------------------Letter :9.1 Overall, according to the Drug Court Resource Center,treatment program requirements are more demanding than the applicablesanction received through traditional adjudication. Most drug courtprograms require that defendants attend status hearings, participatein counseling sessions, and submit to urine tests with the goalof becoming drug free. Some programs focus on special classes of defendants such as women. Many programs also provide support services such as public health services; assistance withhousing, food, and child care; vocational training; and job placement. TREATMENT PHASES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :10 (See figure in printed edition.) TREATMENT PHASES ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :10.1 Treatment services are generally divided into three phases:(1) detoxification, (2) stabilization, and (3) aftercare. First,the defendant's physical dependence on drugs is eliminatedthrough detoxification. Acupuncture is sometimes used as an adjunctto treatment in the detoxification phase. According to theProject Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, 9 of 20 drugcourts responding to the Center's 1994 survey indicated that theyused acupuncture. Second, the defendant's psychological cravingfor the drugs is treated during stabilization. Frequent group and/or individual counseling sessions are employed during thisphase. And third, aftercare focuses on helping the defendant obtaineducation or job training, find a job, and remain drug free. PROGRAM SANCTIONS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :11 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM SANCTIONS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :11.1 Sanctions for failing to abide by program rules can include(1) verbal admonition from the judge; (2) demotion to an earlierstage of the program; (3) incarceration for several days or weeks,increasing with the number and severity of the violations; and (4) morefrequent status hearings, treatment sessions, or urine tests. Manyprograms also use graduated sanctions, increasing the severity of thesanction with subsequent violations of program rules. DOJ also pointed out that most drug courts use sanctions notto simply punish inappropriate behavior but to augment thetreatment process. For example, many drug courts will place a defendantin residential treatment if he or she is unable to achievesatisfactory progress in an outpatient setting. In addition, many drugcourts incarcerate defendants for the purpose of detoxificationrather than detain them for inappropriate behavior. REASONS FOR TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :12 (See figure in printed edition.) REASONS FOR TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :12.1 Drug courts use various criteria for ending a defendant's participation in the program before completion. These mayinclude a new felony offense; multiple failures to comply with program requirements, such as not attending status hearings ortreatment sessions; and a pattern of positive urine tests. According toDOJ, many drug courts do not terminate defendants for a new drug possession offense. Before terminating a defendant for continuing to use drugs,drug courts will use an array of treatment services and available sanctions. There are no uniform standards for the number offailed urine tests and failures to attend treatment sessions thatresult in a participant being terminated that apply to all programs.Each drug court sets its own standards. Relapses are expected and theextent to which noncompliance results in terminations varies fromprogram to program. Generally, the drug court judge makes the decision toterminate, but the prosecutor or treatment provider can recommend thetermination. Once a defendant is terminated, he or she will be referredfor adjudication or sentencing. PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :13 (See figure in printed edition.) PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :13.1 Drug courts typically require defendants to complete atreatment program in order to graduate. Some impose other conditions defendants must meet after treatment. These could includeremaining drug free and not being arrested for a specified period oftime, paying restitution, being employed full-time, or performingcommunity service. For example, the Seattle, WA, drug court requires that adefendant complete all phases of the program to graduate. However, the Beaumont, TX, drug court requires that, in addition tocompleting the treatment program, the defendant maintain sobriety for aspecified time and participate in education and vocational trainingand/or be working full-time. EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :14 (See figure in printed edition.) EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :14.1 In many jurisdictions, completion of the drug court programleads to a dismissal of charges or cessation of prosecution. Inothers, the guilty plea can be stricken, the defendant can be sentencedto probation in lieu of incarceration, or the defendant'sprobation can be shortened. DOJ pointed out that some drug courts will seal all caserecords, including arrests, when defendants complete the program. Thesealing of records is particularly significant when attempting tomeasure the impact of drug court programs at a later date. NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :15 (See figure in printed edition.) Note: One drug court was started in March 1995. (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO and Drug Court Resource Center data. (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :15.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, as of March1995, there were at least 37 drug courts operating across the country.\6Of these drug courts, 29 had been fully operational for at least 9months, and 8 others had been operating for a lesser period. The number of drug courts steadily increased from 1991 to1994, with substantial increases since 1993. As of March 1995, 24jurisdictions were developing drug courts. Another eight jurisdictions had exhibited interest in starting drug courts by initiatingfeasibility studies. Appendix II lists the number of drug courts in operation andbeing developed. -------------------- \6 Because of the absence of any official requirement toreport their existence to a central organization, additional drug courtsmay exist. DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF MARCH 1995 -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :16 (See figure in printed edition.) Source: Drug Court Resource Center data. (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF MARCH 1995 ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :16.1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, the 37 drugcourts in operation as of March 1995 are located in 15 states and theDistrict of Columbia. The largest number of drug courts are located in Florida, with 10, followed by California, with 6. There aretwo drug courts in each of six states, and there is one drug court ineach of the remaining eight states and the District of Columbia. The specific location of each drug court is shown in appendix II. DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :17 (See figure in printed edition.) N = 20,421 (See figure in printed edition.) Note 1: Based on responses from 33 drug courts. (See figure in printed edition.) Note 2: Percentages do not add to 100 percent due to rounding. (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO questionnaires. (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :17.1 Data obtained from 33 of 37 drug courts responding to our questionnaire showed that since inception of the first drugcourt in 1989, 20,421 persons have participated in drug courts. Ofthese, 7,235 participants have graduated, and 7,595 are currently inthe programs. The remaining participants did not complete theprograms. Generally, when participants do not complete drug courtprograms it is because they were terminated, voluntarily withdrew, ordied. Based on the data received, these totaled 5,591.\7 The number of participants currently in each of these drugcourt programs varied widely, ranging from a low of 1 participantin Santa Ana, CA, a new drug court,\8 to a high of 1,200 participantsin Miami, FL, one of the oldest drug courts. The median numberof participants in these drug court programs is 105. It should be noted that many of the drug courts have beenoperating for less than a year and would not yet have graduates. Asshown, more than one-third of the total participants are currentlyenrolled in drug court programs. -------------------- \7 We calculated the number (5,591) of participants notcompleting the programs by subtracting the number (7,235) of graduatesand the number (7,595) of participants currently in the programs fromthe total number (20,421) of participants in the programs sincetheir inception. \8 At the time of our review, Orange County, CA, had filedfor bankruptcy and curtailed resources for its drug court. FUNDING SOURCES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :18 (See figure in printed edition.) According to the Drug Court Resource Center Project Director,drug courts generally piece together funding from a variety ofsources. Information reported to the Drug Court Resource Center by 15drug courts showed that these sources included local taxes andsurcharges, state alcohol and drug agency funds, private foundationmonies, participant fees, and federal grants. Some drug courts have developed innovative fundingapproaches. For example, a drug court judge from Orange County, CA, told usthat when the county filed for bankruptcy, it cut back servicesnecessary for the drug court operation. The judge said that he was forminga nonprofit corporation to try to provide funding for the drugcourt outside of the bankruptcy proceedings. Until the 1994 Crime Act, there was no federal grant program specifically designed for drug courts. However, some drugcourts have received federal grants and technical assistance fromthe Department of Health and Human Services' Center for SubstanceAbuse Treatment (CSAT) and DOJ's Bureau of Justice Assistance(BJA). According to CSAT, it has provided or plans to provide anestimated $15 million in assistance to some drug courts. Of the $15million, about $6 million is for a drug court demonstration projectfor the District of Columbia Superior Court. BJA could not provide us with complete information on DOJgrants used in support of drug courts. According to a BJA official,"drug courts" was not a specific grant category that granteescould designate for funding. However, this official commented thatBJA is aware that DOJ grant funds provided under other grantcategories such as "corrections options" have been used in supportof drug courts, and that three drug courts had received $2.5 million from the Corrections Options program.\9 -------------------- \9 The Corrections Options program assists states withdesign, development, and implementation of innovative alternatives to traditional modes of incarceration. PARTICIPANT FEES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :19 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT FEES ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :19.1 We obtained data (based on our questionnaire and informationprovided by the Drug Court Resource Center) from 34 drug courts onfees charged to participants in drug court programs. Twenty-threeof the 34 drug courts reported that they charged fees, and 11reported that they did not. Insufficient data on fee amounts actuallycollected precluded us from determining the extent to which drug courtsrelied on participant fees as a funding source. Of the 23 drug courts charging participant fees, the amountscharged for the total cost of treatment ranged from $20 to $2,500.One drug court reported charging fees on a sliding scale from $60 to$300 for treatment based on a defendant's ability to pay, whileanother reported charging on a sliding scale from $500 to $2,500. Atleast nine courts responded that they charged fees ranging from$200 to $350. Several drug courts reported applying participant fees tocounseling and treatment costs, drug testing costs, and other programexpenses. In addition, DOJ commented that many treatment providersbelieve participant fees are a useful therapeutic tool and should becharged regardless of the extent to which fees are needed to coverprogram costs. COST SAVINGS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :20 (See figure in printed edition.) COST SAVINGS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :20.1 Drug courts have reported information to the Drug CourtResource Center on savings that they believe their programs haveachieved in the costs of court and other criminal justice systemoperations. One of the larger categories of savings reported by drugcourts was jail costs avoided, i.e., the estimated costs ofincarcerating a typical drug court defendant that would be expected to incurif he/she were not participating in a drug court program. Onecourt estimated savings of $5,400 per drug court participant, andanother estimated savings of $2,566 to $5,185. Another drug court claimed a savings of $2 million over a3-year period resulting from drug court participants spending fewerdays in custody and the consequent ability of the county to rentunused jail cells to other law enforcement agencies. Still another drugcourt estimated it had saved about $875,500 in jail costs for itsprogram but did not specify the time frame. The National Association of Drug Court Professionals notedthat drug court programs are much less costly than the incarceration of drug-using offenders. The Association reported thatincarceration of drug-using offenders ranges from $20,000 to $50,000 annually,and the cost to build a prison cell is $80,000 to $90,000. It alsosaid that drug courts cost less than $1,500 annually for each offender. Some drug courts identified savings such as reduced caseloadsof other trial judges not in the drug court program. Inaddition, some drug courts claimed savings in court-appointed attorney fees,reduced probation office caseloads, and costs of prosecution,arrests, and police overtime. We did not verify this information, and further analysis ofall drug court costs is essential to fully understanding the benefitsof these programs. Briefing Section II EVALUATIONS OF DRUG COURTS ==============================================================Letter DO DRUG COURTS MAKE A DIFFERENCE? -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :21 (See figure in printed edition.) In evaluating the effectiveness of drug courts, the basicquestion is: Do drug courts make a difference? Specifically, dodefendants who successfully complete drug court programs exhibit reduced recidivism, decreased drug use, and other socially beneficialeffects as a result of participating in drug court programs whencompared to their counterparts, i.e., control groups who were not exposedto the same drug court treatment? Based on evaluations we reviewed, drug courts generally mayhave some beneficial effects. However, because of the nature of thestudy designs and the short periods of time elapsed betweentreatment and measurement of outcomes (drug courts are relatively new),firm conclusions cannot be drawn about the effects of drug courts. It is both difficult and costly to conduct programevaluations that can measure program effects. Although the strongest designinvolves assembling and randomly assigning defendants to controlgroups (comparing drug courts versus traditional courts, forexample), such studies raise serious logistical and ethical issues.Additionally, according to the Project Director of the Drug Court ResourceCenter, control groups cannot be used properly unless a drug court is originally designed to define such groups. An alternative approach is to design studies allowing theresearcher to create comparable groups from existing programs, throughthe use of various analytical techniques. However, even such studiesare often made more difficult by the fact that existing programschange over time, resulting in individuals at the end of the studyperiod being exposed to different treatments than those at thebeginning. Also, different locations of the same program may have verydifferent implementation needs, making it more difficult to comparesuch programs. GAO ASSESSED DRUG COURT EVALUATIONS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :22 (See figure in printed edition.) We assessed six evaluations that compared performanceoutcomes for drug court defendants to the experiences of other defendants,i.e., previous divertees or unsuccessful drug court defendants or defendants who had never been in a drug court. In order todetermine whether a drug court has an impact on its participants, anevaluation should compare outcomes of drug court defendants to those ofother groups of similar defendants who are not in drug courts. The six evaluations covered five drug courts and variedconsiderably in terms of the study designs, types of outcomes measured,and scope of analyses performed on the available information. Ourassessment indicates that the evaluations differed particularly in termsof the validity of the designs, which determine the extent to whichthe reader is able to draw conclusions from any findings. Of thesix studies: two studies had fairly strong designs; of these, one providedsome evidence of an effect of the drug court program, and theother study's results were too preliminary to draw any conclusions; two studies had designs with more serious problems; of these,one suggested possible effects of the program, and the other was inconclusive; and two studies had design weaknesses that prevented anyconclusions about the effects of the program. The major outcome measure used, in five of the sixevaluations, was recidivism (rearrest rates). To a lesser degree,recidivism-related measures were also used, such as length of time beforerearrest and days spent in custody for felony offenses. We focused onthese measures in this report because they provided the strongestevidence for the long-term effect of the drug court programs, eventhough other measures were used in these studies. EVALUATION OUTCOMES -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :23 (See figure in printed edition.) Two of the six evaluations were well-designed. However, theresults in terms of recidivism outcomes were mixed. One of theevaluations showed that drug court defendants had significantly lowerrearrest rates than defendants not in drug court, and that they spentfewer days in custody for felony offenses (app. III, evaluation 1).This evaluation also showed that drug court defendants had a lowerrate of failures-to-appear for required court hearings than did other defendants. However, the other evaluation, with preliminary information only, showed no significant difference so far inrearrest rates between drug court defendants and defendants who werenot in the drug court (app. III, evaluation 2). Although these evaluations have strong study designs and one indicates some beneficial effects on defendants resultingfrom the drug court programs, the evidence does not permit firmconclusions about the effects of the drug courts studied. Additionally,for one of the evaluations, insufficient time had elapsed to providefirmer evidence of program effect. Of the next two evaluations, both of the same drug court, one provided some suggestive evidence of program effect. Itshowed lower recidivism by drug court defendants and longer time beforerearrest (app. III, evaluation 3). The other generally showed nodifference in recidivism rates (app. III, evaluation 4). Design problemsmade it difficult to attribute these findings to the programs.There are too many potential differences between the drug courtparticipants and the groups to which they were compared to develop strong conclusions. The final two evaluations did not provide reliable evidence concerning the effects of the programs. One showed nosubstantial difference in recidivism between drug court defendants anddefendants who left the drug court (app. III, evaluation 5). The other evaluation measured defendants' drug abstinence andfailure-to-appear rates and showed positive results for drug court defendantsas compared to defendants terminated from the drug court (app.III, evaluation 6). Because the study design did not control for anumber of factors, such as motivation and susceptibility totreatment, these evaluations do not permit conclusions to be drawn about theeffects of the programs. Appendix III contains further information on each of these evaluations. Briefing Section III FEDERAL DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM ==============================================================Letter THE 1994 CRIME ACT -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :24 (See figure in printed edition.) THE 1994 CRIME ACT ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :24.1 Beginning in fiscal year 1995, DOJ may provide jurisdictionswith drug court grants. Title V of the Violent Crime Control andLaw Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-322) authorizes theAttorney General to award discretionary drug court grants to states,units of local government, Indian tribal governments, and state andlocal courts. Grants may be awarded to drug court programs when ajudge continuously supervises the progress of nonviolent offenderswith substance abuse problems. The act requires the Attorney General to issue regulations toensure that jurisdictions receiving drug court grants to supporttheir programs do not allow violent offenders to participate. Itdefines a violent offender as a person who is charged with or convictedof an offense involving a firearm, dangerous weapon, death, seriousbodily injury, or force; or who has one or more prior convictionsfor a violent felony crime. Drug court programs must also integrate a number of judicial sanctions and treatment services. Specifically, the actrequires programs to include (1) mandatory periodic testing for theuse of addictive substances; (2) substance abuse treatment; (3)diversion, probation, or other supervised releases with the possibilityof prosecution, confinement, or incarceration when participantsdo not comply with program requirements or fail to show satisfactory progress; and (4) program and aftercare services, such asrelapse prevention, health care, education, vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and child care. FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :25 (See figure in printed edition.) FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :25.1 The 1994 Crime Act authorized a total of $1 billion forfiscal years 1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs. Althoughthe act authorized $100 million for fiscal year 1995, DOJ's fiscalyear 1995 Appropriations Act (Public Law 103-317) included only $29million for the drug court program. However, Congress has proposed fiscalyear 1995 budget cuts for the drug court program. On March 16,1995, the House passed H.R. 1158, the Emergency SupplementalAppropriations Act of 1995, which rescinds $27.75 million for the drug court program. During its consideration of H.R. 1158, the Senatereduced the rescission to $17.1 million. On April 6, 1995, the Senatepassed its version of the bill and requested a conference with theHouse. The House and Senate conferees began May 3, 1995, to try toreconcile the separate provisions of the bill. The President's fiscal year 1996 budget requests $150 millionfor drug court grants. However, H.R. 667 (The Violent Crime Incarceration Act of 1995) passed by the House ofRepresentatives on February 10, 1995, would amend Title V of the 1994 Crime Actand in doing so would repeal the 1994 Crime Act's drug courtdiscretionary grant provisions. On February 22, 1995, H.R. 667 was referredto the Senate Committee on the Judiciary. DOJ'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR DRUG COURTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :26 (See figure in printed edition.) DOJ recognizes that no single model exists for an effectivedrug court. Consequently, DOJ plans to maintain flexibility inawarding grants to programs that use a variety of approaches tocoordinate drug treatment and persuade offenders to abstain from drugswith the goal of becoming drug free. In addition, given the greatdiversity in the structure and operation of state and local courts andcriminal justice systems, DOJ plans to allow jurisdictions to tailorlocal initiatives to best suit their needs and local conditions. DOJ's Office of Justice Programs (OJP) has overallresponsibility for the new federal drug court program, including policy setting.To carry out this responsibility, OJP has hired an actingdirector and policy analyst to staff its Drug Court Program Office. Inaddition, BJA, an office of OJP, recently established a Drug CourtProgram Office to manage and monitor drug court program grants,according to an OJP official. BJA has hired four people to staff thisoffice. Since November 1994, OJP and BJA staffs have worked togetherto develop program guidelines and application materials.\10 Currently, these staffs are considering the most appropriateand effective ways of providing technical assistance to federally supported drug courts, operating drug courts, and relatedfederal projects to be funded with other fiscal year 1995 resources.The level and source of funding to support this technicalassistance is also under review. OJP's National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is responsible forfunding a national evaluation of drug court program impacts. Thisevaluation will assess whether federally supported drug court programshave helped their participants to break the cycle of substanceabuse and crime. It will also assess the cost-effectiveness of theseprograms. NIJ is also responsible for ensuring that drug court programsuse part of their grants to conduct process evaluations. Theseare aimed at determining, among other things, if the drug court isachieving its objectives, if it was implemented as originally intended,and whether major changes are appropriate. They will also examinehow drug courts affect the rest of the court system and otherelements of the criminal justice system. -------------------- \10 In March 1995, DOJ published Drug Court Grant ProgramGuidelines and Application Information. FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :27 (See figure in printed edition.) FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM ---------------------------------------------------------Letter :27.1 If Congress does not rescind the fiscal year 1995appropriation, DOJ plans to award grants for planning, implementing, andimproving or enhancing drug court programs. Eligible applicants may applyonly for one type of grant. Assuming no rescission is enacted, ofthe $29 million appropriated for fiscal year 1995, DOJ plans to awardup to 100 planning grants for not more than $35,000 each tojurisdictions interested in establishing drug courts, 10 implementation grants for not more than $1 million each to jurisdictions that have identified their target populationsand case processing procedures, 3 additional implementation grants for not more than $2million to larger jurisdictions with populations exceeding 1 million,and 20 improvement and enhancement grants for not more than $1million to jurisdictions that have already established drug courts. Federal grants for each drug court program will be 75 percentof program costs. The grantees will be required to provide cashto fund the remaining 25 percent. Applications are due by May 23, 1995. Then, OJP and BJAstaffs will focus on screening and processing qualified applications for potential grant awards, pending final congressional action onthe fiscal year 1995 budget rescission. If the current deadlinefor filing drug court applications does not change, the firstgrants are expected to be awarded in the summer of 1995. EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERALLY FUNDED DRUG COURTS -----------------------------------------------------------Letter :28 (See figure in printed edition.) Evaluating effectiveness is a critical element of the federaldrug court program. The 1994 Crime Act authorizes the AttorneyGeneral to carry out or make arrangements for evaluations of programsthat receive discretionary program grants. The act also mandatesus to study and assess the effectiveness and impact of thesediscretionary grants and report to the Congress by January 1, 1997. OJP program guidelines require recipients of drug courtgrants to cooperate with a national evaluation team. The evaluationwill be aimed at measuring program impact primarily through the useof the following criteria: reduction in recidivism rates of program participants, maintenance of acceptable treatment completion rates, decreased participant drug use, and maintenance of a cost-effective program. NIJ is responsible for overseeing the national evaluation.The evaluation will focus on treatment and its impact and isexpected to take at least 2 years to complete. At the time of our review,NIJ was developing the solicitation for proposals to conduct the evaluation. Program guidelines also require each drug court grantrecipient to conduct process evaluations of their programs. For these evaluations, grantees are expected to collect descriptiveinformation on the role of drug court players, potential eligiblepopulation, and participant program characteristics. Grantees will also beasked to collect information on program procedures used to identifyand screen eligible offenders, accept and assess offenders, respond torelapses, manage and monitor cases, and discharge and referparticipants. FLOWCHART OF TWO DRUG COURT APPROACHES ===========================================================Appendix I (See figure in printed edition.) \a Judges may reward progress and impose sanctions fornoncompliance with program requirements. Source: Drug Court Resource Center and GAO analysis of selected drug court program descriptions. (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER AND LOCATION OF DRUG COURTS IN OPERATION AND BEING DEVELOPED AS OF MARCH 1995 ==========================================================Appendix II In About to Location operation start Planned ------------------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- Alabama Mobile 1 Arizona Phoenix 1 Arkansas Little Rock 1 California Bakersfield 1 East Bay Corridor 1 El Monte 1\a Los Angeles 1 Oakland 1 Riverside 1 Sacramento 1 Santa Ana 1\a San Bernardino 1\a 1 San Francisco 1 Connecticut Hartford 1 Colorado Denver 1 Delaware Wilmington 1 District of Columbia Washington 1 Florida Bartow 1\a Crestview 1 Ft. Lauderdale 1 Gainesville 1 Jacksonville 1\a Key West 1 Miami 1 Orlando 1 Panama City 1 Pensacola 1 1 Tallahassee 1 Tampa 1 Georgia Atlanta 1 Hawaii Honolulu 1 Illinois Chicago 1 Indiana Gary 1 Kansas Wichita 1 Kentucky Louisville 1 Maryland Baltimore 2\a Massachusetts Dorchester 1 Michigan Kalamazoo 1 St. Joseph 1 Missouri Kansas City 1 Nevada Las Vegas 1 Reno 1\a New Mexico Las Cruces 1 New York Rochester 1\b Ohio Akron 1 Cincinnati 1 Cleveland 1 Sandusky 1 Oregon Eugene 1 Portland 1 South Carolina Columbia 1 Texas Austin 1 Beaumont 1 Fort Worth 1 Utah Salt Lake City 1 Washington Seattle 1 Tacoma 1\a Spokane 1 ============================================================ Total 37 5 19 ------------------------------------------------------------ \a Drug courts in operation less than 9 months. Includes oneof the two Baltimore drug courts. \b In commenting on a draft of this report, the ProjectDirector of the Drug Court Resource Center told us that a drug court inRochester began operating on a pilot basis in early 1995. Source: Drug Court Resource Center data. OUTCOMES REPORTED IN AND GAO'S ASSESSMENT OF EVALUATIONS OF FIVE DRUG COURTS =========================================================Appendix III EVALUATION 1: F.I.R.S.T. OAKLAND -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:1 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.1 Drug use defendants granted admission to a diversion program. Admission requirements changed during the course of thestudy. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.2 Comparison of 110 defendants in a program with a similargroup of 110 defendants in a different program a year earlier. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.3 Drug court participants referred in January and February of1991; earlier group referred in January 1990 through March of 1990.The report contained a 3-year follow-up study. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.4 (1)Felony rearrests: Drug court defendants had a loweraverage rate of felony rearrests per defendants (0.75) than had previousdivertees (1.33). (2)Days in custody for felony offenses: Drug courtdefendants, on average, spent fewer days in custody per defendant (44) thanhad previous divertees (78). (3)Bench warrants: Drug court defendants, on average, hadfewer bench warrants issued for failures to appear at courthearings (0.67) than had previous divertees (1.1). ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:1.0.5 There were some questions concerning the comparability of thetwo groups, as well as the eligibility requirements for the twoprograms. (The report stated that eligibility requirements were relaxedfor the drug court program participants in order to obtain a broadergroup for comparative purposes.) In spite of these concerns, theevaluation suggested some fairly strong evidence of program successafter 3 years. EVALUATION 2: MARICOPA COUNTY -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:2 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.1 Offenders sentenced to probation for first-time drugpossession convictions. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.2 Random assignment to four groups: (1)No drug testing, frequent visits (n=approximately 154). (2)Monthly random drug testing, occasional visits(n=approximately 154). (3)Biweekly scheduled drug testing, limited visits(n=approximately 154). (4)Drug court, with testing and treatment supervised by aprobation officer (n=177). TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.3 Participants in program between March 1992 and April 1993.Current data reported only preliminary findings after 6 months. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: No statistically significant differences(16.95 percent for the drug court group vs. 15.37 percent forothers). (2)Rates of technical probation violations: Drug court grouphad lower rates than those of others (7.9 percent vs. 11.9percent). ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:2.0.5 Although the evaluation design was quite strong, the resultswere preliminary; insufficient time had elapsed to provide a firm indication of program effect. Future comparisons may becomplicated by the fact that the drug court sample had lower rates ofreported history of prior marijuana use. Otherwise, the control groups (groups 1-3) were quite similar to the drug court group(group 4). EVALUATION 3: DADE COUNTY (GOLDKAMP AND WEILAND) -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:3 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.1 Persons arrested for 2nd and 3rd degree drug-relatedfelonies. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.2 Five key groups:\11 (1)Persons admitted to drug court program (n=326). (2)Sample of felony drug defendants in same period noteligible because of more serious drug-related offenses (n=199). (3)Sample of nondrug felony defendants in same period(n=185). (4)Sample of felony drug defendants in period several yearsearlier (n=302). (5)Sample of felony nondrug defendants in period severalyears earlier (n=536). In addition, the evaluation compared persons completing thedrug court program with those failing to complete. -------------------- \11 An additional sample of offenders could not reliably beused as a control group because they were exposed to the drug courtprogram. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.3 Participants in groups 1-3 had charges filed in August 1990and September 1990. Charges for groups 4-5 were filed in thesummer of 1987. Data report results after 18 month follow-up. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: Drug court defendants were rearrested at a statistically significant lower rate (33 percent, vs. 40percent to 53 percent for other groups). (2)Time before rearrest: Drug court defendants hadstatistically significant longer time before rearrest (median of 235 days,vs. 52 to 115 days for other groups). (3)Rearrests and treatment completion: Rearrest rates were associated with failure to complete the treatment program. ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:3.0.5 The results suggested an effect of the program. However, thestudy design was unable to make the comparison with offenders inthe same situation with similarly serious drug offenses; therefore,the results must be interpreted cautiously. In particular, thedrug court sample had fewer prior arrests than had the othercomparison groups, and the key group of felony drug defendants used for comparative purposes were not eligible for the drug courtprogram because of the seriousness of their charges or prior records. The comparisons between those completing and failing tocomplete the program must also be viewed with caution, due to possible motivational and other differences between the groups. In commenting on a draft of this report, DOJ officials notedthat this study had a strong design with carefully drawncomparison groups. We agree that the study's design was generallystrong. However, as we state in this report, there were somepotentially important differences in prior arrest rates between thegroups, and the study was not able to compare similarly situated drugdefendants in a roughly similar time period. Therefore, as we noted, the study's results should be interpreted cautiously. EVALUATION 4: DADE COUNTY (SMITH, DAVIS AND GORETSKY) -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:4 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.1 Defendants with no prior convictions charged with a drugpossession offense, admitting to a drug problem for which they wantedtreatment. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.2 Comparison of 318 defendants assigned to the drug court witha sample of 99 narcotics cases in early 1988. In addition, a group ofdrug court defendants who were accepted into the drug courtprogram were compared on rearrest rates. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.3 Participants were assigned to the drug court in January 1990through March 1990. The comparison group was charged between January1988 and March 1988. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.4 (1)Rearrest rates: There was no statistically significantdifference in the rate of felony rearrests after 1 year between thoseassigned to drug court (32 percent) and the comparison group ofdefendants charged 2 years earlier (33 percent). Those defendantsaccepted by the drug court did have lower rates of rearrest (15 percent),but the authors noted that these individuals constituted "ahighly select group . . . least disposed to commit new crimes." Therearrest results in this evaluation differed from those in the other evaluation of Dade County (evaluation 3). (2)Sentencing dispositions: There were statisticallysignificant differences in dispositions between those assigned to drugcourt and the comparison group of earlier defendants. Those assigned todrug court were more likely not to face further prosecution andless likely to serve probation or short jail terms. ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:4.0.5 There were concerns about the comparability of theparticipants in the various groups. In particular, the finding of lowerrearrest rates for program participants should be viewed cautiously inlight of the selectivity of admission to the program. As a result,there were strong reservations about the results reported. DOJ officials, in commenting on a draft of this report,indicated that this study had several flaws. They pointed out that thestudy was done when this drug court was less than 10 months old.They further noted that information on successful drug courtparticipants was not available for evaluation because the participants'records were sealed. We concur with these comments. EVALUATION 5: BROWARD COUNTY (TERRY) -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:5 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.1 First-time offenders arrested for possession or purchase ofcocaine. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.2 Comparison of 392 defendants completing or remaining in thedrug court program with 241 defendants not completing the drugcourt program. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.3 Participants entered the program from July 1991 through June1992. Study results were reported for October 1993. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.4 Rearrests: Persons remaining in the program committedfelonies at a slightly lower rate than did those leaving the program (7.7percent vs. 12.0 percent). (Cases dismissed were not included inthese comparisons.) No differences occurred in comparing theproportions having committed misdemeanors (4.1 percent for personsremaining in the program vs. 5.0 percent for those leaving the program). ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:5.0.5 There was no adequate comparison group in this study fromwhich to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program. EVALUATION 6: MULTNOMAH COUNTY -------------------------------------------------------Appendix III:6 TREATMENT GROUP --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.1 Defendants arrested for possession of any illegal substancefor personal use. STUDY DESIGN --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.2 Comparison of 105 defendants graduating from the drug courtprogram with 78 defendants who terminated unsuccessfully. TIME OF STUDY --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.3 Participants entered the program on or before August 1, 1992,and graduated or terminated unsuccessfully on or before April 1,1994. KEY MEASURES --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.4 Graduates had lower rates of bench warrants for failure toappear, went slightly longer before the first bench warrant wasissued, and had a lower percentage of positive urine tests than those who terminated unsuccessfully. However, the report did notindicate whether these figures referred to prior histories orfollow-up information after program completion. ASSESSMENT --------------------------------------------------- AppendixIII:6.0.5 There was no adequate comparison group in this study fromwhich to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program. MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS BRIEFING REPORT ==========================================================Appendix IV GENERAL GOVERNMENT DIVISION, WASHINGTON, D.C. Weldon McPhail, Assistant Director, Administration of Justice Issues Samuel A. Caldrone, Senior Evaluator Deborah A. Knorr, Senior Evaluator Patricia J. Scanlon, Staff Evaluator Barry J. Seltser, Assistant Director, Design, Methodology and Technical Assistance Group Douglas M. Sloane, Assistant Director David P. Alexander, Senior Social Science Analyst Arthur J. Kendall, Senior Mathematical Statistician Katherine M. Wheeler, Publishing Advisor Pamela V. Williams, Communications Analyst BOSTON/NEW YORK FIELD OFFICE Brenda R. James Towe, Evaluator-in-Charge Rudolf F. Plessing, Core Group Manager Michael Savino, Senior Evaluator OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C. Ann H. Finley, Senior Attorney CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-3IA031-000655-B043-123http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/cjstcha.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114137 text/html 87759HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:41:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:10 GMTContent-length: 87541 A Criminal Justice System Strategy for TreatingCocaine-Heroin A A Criminal Justice System Strategy for Treating Cocaine-HeroinAbusing Offenders in Custody National Institute of Justice James K. Stewart, Director. Contents Introduction Research findings The problem The criminal justiceresponse The efficacy ofcriminal sanctions Some dimensions of effective drugabuse treatment Conclusion Policy recommendations The identification of drug-involvedoffenders Jail-based intervention In-prison treatment Community treatment programs Organization and staffing issues Conclusion Appendix A-"Stay 'NOut": A model for prison-based drug treatment Program overview "Stay 'N Out" components Glossary Reference notes Introduction Despite the demonstrated relationships between drug abuse andcrime, criminal justice agencies too seldom focus on reducingdrug abuse as a means of reducing the criminal activities ofdrug-involved offenders. Yet evidence from the researchliterature continues to accumulate, indicating that some drugtreatment programs have been successful in reducing recidivism.Following an overview of pertinent research findings, this paperoutlines the elements of an effective strategy for treatingcocaine and heroin abusing offenders. The interventions proposed in this paper grow out of the drugabuse research literature, the authors' urban-based research, andtheir clinical expcriencc with drug abuse treatment incorrections. In addition, the suggested interventions emerge fromyears of correctional outcome research which has assessed whatworks, with whom, and under what circumstances. Although thispaper will focus on heroin and cocaine involved offenders, somerecommendations may apply to offenders who use other illicitdrugs. Research findings The problem Recent research provides amplc evidence that offenderpopulations are composed of large numbers of drug abusers-andthat drug-involved offenders commit substantial number-, ofundetected crimes. Very recent cocaine and heroin abusers constitute amajority of the arrestees and inmates in jails and prisons in NewYork City and some other jurisdictions. National surveys of jail and prison populations, smallerself-report studies, and urine testing results indicate thatincreasing proportions of offenders are users of drugs and thatcocaine use is increasing the most rapidly. More thanthree-quarters of the nation's inmates and almost all inmates inNew York City report illicit drug use.' Similarly, sclf-rcportstudies among prison and jail inmates in California, Michigan,and Texas reveal that approximately half are heroin users andmany are daily heroin users.' Recent urinalysis-based studies ofarrestees in Washington, D.C. reveal that well over half testpositive for at least one illicit drug and a quarter testpositive for two or more illicit drugs, In a recent Manhattanstudy the level of co caine use had doubled .;ince 1984.Eighty-three percent of arrestees in September and October 1986tested positive for cocaine, compared with 42 percent in 1984;the increase in cocaine was found at all age levels and for alloffenses. Comparable increases have also been reported inWashington, DC. Frequent users of heroin and cocaine in the generalpopulation exhibit a multiproblem lifestyle that mayinclude a pattern of persistent criminal behavior. Drug addiction is a chronic relapsing condition that is partof a complex multiproblem lifestyle which is highly resistant torehabilitation. Several studies show that daily or near dailyheroin users-many of whom also use other illicit substancesdaily-are not in treatment, and do not seek treatment. Many alsoconsume alcohol heavily. They average over 200 non-drug crimcsand hundreds of drug distribution offenses annually, yet areunlikely to be arrested more than once a year, and then spendless than a month in incarceration, The majority commit manycrimes for which they are not arrested or incarcerated, butbecause of sheer volume of activity, they still have many morearrests and incarceration periods than non-drug offenders. Overhalf their generally modest income comes from drug distributionactivities. They usually spend most of that income on drugs.Daily heroin abusers also generally do not have a residence normake their own meals, but rather stay and eat with a relative orfriend. They do not receive or seek public assistance. They haveno legal employment during a typical week nor do they seek any.Thus, they are typically an economic burden on the poorestmembers of their low-income communities. Many aspects of theirlifestyle also put them at high risk for violence and many othersocial and health problems such as AIDS, alcoholism, and TB.Therefore, whatever treatment programming is applied to thispopulation, it must contend with all or most of these problems ifit is to achieve long-term changes in this lifestyle.' Data about chronic cocaine users' crime rates are not as welldeveloped. Recent evidence from street and treatment settinginterviews with crack users indicate that about 60 percent admitpaying for their cocaine with money derived from illicitsources-ranging from drug dealing and prostitution to theft androbbery. The persons using cocaine, however, generally come frommore varied socioeconomic backgrounds than heroin users, theirlifestyles vary accordingly, and many do not ever get arrested.Nevertheless, the lifestyles of cocaine abusers who do becomeinvolved with the criminal justice system appear to be verysimilar to those of heroin abusers, as cocaine users often alsouse heroin. The criminal justiceresponse While much remains to be learned about the precise nature ofthe links betnveen doing drugs and doing crime, the two behaviorsare clearly associated. Yet criminal justice agencies have fewstrategies for routinely detecting and intervening in the druguse of arrested heroin and cocaine abusers. The justice systemfocuses almost exclusively on its criminal processing functionsof arrest, adjudication, probation, incarceration, and parole.Even these interventions often represent a limited intrusion onthe criminal activities of the drug abusing offender. Criminal justice agencies, with rare exceptions, do notseek or use information about the drug use of persons who arearrested or convicted of crimes. Littlc cffort is made to identify drug abusers, to recordinformation about their drug use, to provide treatment (otherthan dctoxification) while in jail or prison, to refer them totreatment programs in the community, or to use such informationin plea bargaining or case dispositions (where legallyappropriate). Only a few jurisdictions maintain anyinformation about the drug use of arrestees or convictedoffenders, and there is a strong likelihood that the druginformation in their records is both incomplete and inaccuratebecause it is most often based on self-report and notsubstantiated through urinalysis. Thus, information that couldhelp inform criminal justice processing is not generallyavailable.' To the extent that criminal sanctions are applied, theirability to interrupt the life style of the vast majority ofcocainc-heroin abusers is minimal. Nationally, only a low percentage (less than 10 percent) ofall felony arrests lead to a felony conviction resulting inincarceration. Over half of all felony arrests (60 percent inManhattan) lead to conviction, but there is much variation byjurisdiction. Typically, offenders plead guilty to lesser chargesand are sentenced to time served, a fine, community service,probation, or a few months in jail. Consequently, the vastmajority of offenders, mainly those arrested on less severefelony and misdemeanor charges, are at liberty within threemonths after arrest. In addition, many felony offenders (asignificant portion of whom are involved with drugs) are atliberty on bail or on personal recognizance while awaiting trial.Active heroin-cocaine users have higher failure-to-appear ratesand much higher rates of rearrest while out on bail thanoffenders not involved with drugs.9 The efficacy ofcriminal sanctions Little evidence is available that criminal justice sanctionsalone are as effective as drug treatment in reducing the drug useand criminality of cocaineheroin abusers at liberty. The centralvalue of the criminal process may lie in the leverage that can beexerted to bring hardcore drug abusers into treatment. Existing evidence does not show that criminal justicesanctions (fine, probation, or parole, or length of time served)reduce criminality or drug use more effectively than drugtreatment among cocaine-heroin abusers. It is not known whether or to what extent jail or prison timealone suppresses post-incarceration criminality or cocaine-heroinabuse among drug involved offenderq- The limited evidenceavailable suggests that two-thirds or more of arrestedheroin abusers return to heroin-cocaine use and their diversecriminal patterns within three months after release fromdetention. In contrast, several studies of drug treatmentoutcomes with criminal justice clients (mainly probationers) showsubstantial post-treatment reductions in both drug use andcriminality.10 Outpatient clients in methadone treatment reportless than half as much criminal activity as heroin abusers not intreatment. Compared with their pretreatment criminality,methadone clients report 50 to 80 percent less crime duringtreatment." Even among those who continue criminal activityduring treatment, methadone clients report reduced involvement inserious crimes such as robbery, burglary, or dealing of heroin orcocaine; they report mainly low-level property crimes, con games,and sale of marijuana or pills." Residential drug programs have sizable proportions(frequently over half) of clients who are on probation or paroleor under related legal pressure, and whose criminality isnear zero while in the residential program. This nearzerocriminality of cocaine-heroin abusers while in residentialprograms is documented for therapeutic communities in severalcities. A study of treatment facilities in New York found thatabout a third of residential clients were criminal justicereferrals and had extensive criminal histories. These clientstended to stay longer and have as good or better outcomes thanclients with similar pretreatment criminal and drug abusehistories who were not referred by the criminal justice system.13 The coercive power, surveillance potential, and timeoffcmd through criminal justice sanctions, open significantopportunities for effectively treating cocaine-heroin abusers. Although criminal justice sanctions alone may have uncertainvalue in reducing the criminality of drug involved offenders,those sanctions can serve a powerful role by facilitatingeffective drug treatment. There are a variety of pressures thatbring hardcore drug abusers into treatment: parents, employers,loved one, and friends may all apply psychological and socialpressures. The most powerful pressure, however, may be the threatof legal sanction -- the threat of arrest and conviction, andmost importantly, the threat of incarceration. The leveragecreated by this threat, and by the sanction itself, permitstreatment to be considered as a viable option by serious abusers.Moreover, by reducing early program termination, it allows thetreatment and aftercare to continue for the length of thepermissable custody. Cocaine-heroin abusers typically wish to avoid the"hassles" associated with changing their lives. Whenthe alternative is lengthy incarceration, cocaine-heroin abusersmay be more willing to be referred to drug treatment. If,however, the alternative is a short sentence, detainees and jailinmates may prefer the incarceration rather than diversion tolong-term drug abuse treatment. Unfortunately, relatively few offenders voluntarily seektreatment. Many offenders are referred by the criminal justicesystem to drug treatment as the result of negotiated pleabargains in which the offender agrees to enter treatment insteadof receiving a substantial sentece. For many years TASC(Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime) has operated in selectedjurisdictions to recruit clients and negotiate with court stafffor release of offenders to drug programs. TASC clients are morelikely to select treatment because the alternative is consideredmore onerous. Few cocaine-heroin abusers in custody volunteer for drugtreatment unless the treatment program is seen as an attractivealternative. Prison inmates seek out in-house treatment programsbecause they often provide better living conditions, a saferenvironment, parole release considerations, and an opportunity topossibly change one's lifestyle. In-prison programs that offersuch conditions are substantially better able to recruitparticipants than those which do not. Although these offendersmay not be completely sincere at admission, there is anopportunity for the program to engage them in an effectivetreatment experience. In short, the threat of substantialsanctions (for arrestees) or the promise of better in-prisonconditions (for those in custody) can operate as extremely usefulincentives for treatment. Nevertheless, it must be understoodthat a significant portion of offenders who have long chronicheroin or cocaine abuse patterns will not want treatment underany circumstances. Some dimensions of effective drugabuse treatment. As the preceding section has demonstrated, the criminality ofheroin abusers is substantially reduced while they are receivingsome form of treatment. The experiences of effective programssuggest that whatever treatment method is used must have a soundtheoretical and empirical basis for its implementation.Additionally, the treatment method must emerge from a powerfulsocial restoration tradition (discussed further below) that iscapable of teaching offenders to interact with others in lessdeviant, more socially acceptable ways. Such an approach must becredible to participants and not be perceived to be coercive andauthoritarian. The approach must have the capability to convinceoffenders that the demanding path to a socially acceptablelifestyle is worthwhile despite their deprived backgrounds, theirexperience with quick criminal profits, and their recognitionthat there is a low probability they will be caught for theircrimes. Despite the often cited conclusion that "nothingworks", evidence from the research literature continues toaccumulate that some programs have been successful in reducingrecidivism." The majority of successful programs have been based on asocial learning theory of criminal behavior." According tothis theory, criminal behavior is learned through a process ofsocial interaction with others. Thus, pro-social behaviors mustbe learned to replace deviant behavior. Effective approachesinclude: therapeutic communities, self-help groups, familytherapy, contingency contracting, role playing and modeling,vocational and social skills training, training in interpersonalcognitive problem-solving skills, and other programs involvingongoing peer monitoring of participants' behavior." Successful programs have several things in common: authoritystructures that clearly specify rules and sanctions,anti-criminal modeling and reinforcement of pro-social behavior,pragmatic personal and social problemsolving assistance, programstaff knowledgeable about the use of community resources, andrelationships between staff and clients which are empathic andcharacterized by open communication and trust. Ex-offender-addictcounselors who serve as credible role-models of successfulrehabilitation also are often utilized." The "Stay 'NOut" program (see Appendix A) provides an example of asuccessful program that employs these treatment principles. Conversely, unsuccessful programs are frequently based on amedical (disease) model of criminology which suggests thatcriminal behavior is a sickness.'9 Similarly, interventionprograms based on deterrence models (e.g., "ScaredStraight") have shown very limited effects and have evenbeen associated with increased offending."' Other types ofprograms that have been unsuccessful include those that relysolely on open communication, "friendship" models,inmate-directed therapy groups, and those that arenon-directive.,, While inmate-dircctcd therapy groups have not had a record ofsuccess, behavioral programs that are simply imposed-withoutinvolving inmates in their development-do not appear to workeither. Such programs are often focused on anti-social ratherthan pro-social behaviors and as a result give undue attentionand reinforcement to negative behavior. Other features ofunsuccessful programs include the failure to either neutralize orutilize the inmate's peer group and failure to sustain continuityof care after release from prison. 22 A number of factors have been identified that degradetreatment integrity23 and impede treatment success. Many arecommon to intervention pro grams in any setting. The absence ofsound theoretical basis for treatment is a typical obstacle tothe development of successful programs. Often, the quality andintensity of treatment interventions are inadequate. Sometimesprograms propose treatment interventions that are based on soundprinciples which are not followed when the program isimplemented. Another common problem is lack of staff training andtreatment experience, and/or their inadequate commitment to.boththe clients' and program success. Other impediments to the establishment and maintenance ofsuccessful treatment programs are related to a lack ofcorrectional system support and the negative influence of inmatesubcultures. Fundamental differences between custodial andtreatment perspectives often contribute to the failure of thecorrectional environment to support program staff and goals, Thelack of support from the custodial forces of an institution isexacerbated within prisons by the negative influence of theanti-authoritarian and antitherapeutic "prisoners'code." Under this code, suspicion colors most interactionsbetween staff and inmates. The result may be a program thatreceives neither staff support nor inmate cooperation. Time in community drug treatment is inversely related toposttreatment cocaine-heroin abuse and criminality. Turning to a more quantitative dimension of treatmentprogramming, the available research clearly suggests the longerheroin and cocaine abusers remain in treatment, the greater thereduction in post-treatment criminality. Those who remain incommunity-based residential, methadone, or outpatient programsfor more than three months have lower levels of bothpost-treatment heroin and cocaine abuse and criminality thanthose who drop out before three months and significantly lowerrates than their own pre-treatment levels. Subsequent months oftreatment in these programs yield even greater reductions inpost-treatment criminality, especially after 12 months oftreatment and after each subsequent treatment cycle. Treatment personnel generally agree that it is hard even tostabilize the cocaine-heroin abuser's lifestyle in three months,much less begin to transform long-standing patterns of deviance.After three months, clients can begin to be comfortable with thetreatment regime and start to make progress in changingdisruptive patterns in their lives. However, due to the chronicrelapsing pattern characteristic of the drug addict, several"cycles of treatment" are frequently necessary forhardcore drug abusers to achieve substantial improvement in theirbehavior and lifestyle. Clients who leave treatment early against program advice aresignificantly more likely to recidivate than those who completethe recommended program, Early leavers who later return totreatment ultimately have less heroin use and criminality thanthose who fail to return." Outcome studies have shown that the first 12 months intreatment are critical to long-term reductions in criminalityafter leaving treatment. For cocaine and heroin abusers who areincarcerated and who participate in prison-basedtherapeutic community programs, the optimum period of treatmentappears to be nine to twelve months followed by release into thecommunity. Longer stays are associated with diminishing results.It is believed this occurs for two reasons: First, longer periodsof program participation while in prison creates increaseddependency on the program and less transference of the learnedexperiences to the community upon release. Secondly, some personsare transferred as rehabilitated back into the general prisonpopulation after completing more than a year of treatment, andthe criminal subculture undermines some gains made during thetreatment period. Thus, the timing of treatment and release forprison inmateswith serious drug abuse problems needs to becoordinated to achieve the optimum outcome Conclusion Clearly, much has been learned about effective ways ofreducing the drug involvement of heroin and cocaine abusingoffenders. Given the chronic recurring nature of addiction, noprogram can realistically expect to eliminate severe heroin andcocaine abuse for all offenders. Yet even if a program succeedsonly in reducing the frequency of use, substantial reductions incriminality may follow. The evidence is clear: cocaine-heroinabusers commit much less crime when they use once or twice a weekor less often than when they use once a day or more often. If,for example, daily cocaine-heroin users were placed undercourt-directed intensive surveillance and frequent urinemonitoring which curtailed their use of drugs by half or more, avery substantial drop in their criminality'. would be likely tooccur, especially in crimes such as robbery and burglary- Policy recommendations What steps should be taken by the criminal justice system todeal more effectively with the drug-involved offender? Based onthe research findings discussed in the preceding section and theexperience and opinions of the authors, this sectionpresents a series of policy recommendations. While it may not bepossible to institute all or even most of these recommendationsin many jurisdictions, they are offered as goals or guidelinesfor the practitioner. We argue that the interventions proposedwill improve the system by leading to the effective integrationand coordination of offender supervision and drug treatmentapproaches. Beginning with the crucial need to identify heroin andcocaine abusers at arrest, the recommendations focus in turn onjail-based interventions, inprison programs, and communitytreatment options. Also included are systemwide recommendationspertaining to the organization and staffing of drug abusetreatment programs. All of the recommendations presented in this;ection call for the criminal justice system to supervisecocaine-heroin users frequently and systematically:  Convicted cocaine-heroin abusers under communitysupervision should be intensively supervised and compelled toattend treatment for their maximum period of custody. Optimalsupervision includes near daily validation of employment, time inresidence, associations, and absence of drug use.  Convicted cocainc-hcroin abusers sentenced to prisonshould be required to participate in drug treatment for ninemonths to one year prior to release and to continue incommunity treatment as a condition of parole. Their urine andbehavior should be carefully monitored while under fieldsupervision to insure attendance and prevent relapses."  Steps should be taken to ensure that drug-involvedoffenders in city and county detention facilities are placed intreatment after release, During their confinement, methadonemaintenance should be continued for addicts previously assignedto this program or initiated for other heroin users. Naltrexonecombined with urine surveillance should be used for those heroinusers on work release who opt for drug-frcc treatment. The identification of drug-involvedoffenders In areas with a large number of heroin and cocaine users,urinalysis should be used to identify these users at arrest. Most cocaine-heroin abusers who have contact with thecriminal justice system are arrested about once per year. Resultsof the pretrial drug-testing program operating in Washington,D.C. suggest that recent users of cocaine or heroin can beidentified accurately at arrest through urinalysis. By collcctingurine samples from all arrestees, and analyzing the specimens forfive types of drugs including opiates, the D.C. Pretrial ServicesAgency has been able to identify and increase supervision of drugusers released pen-ding trial. These procedures appear to havereduced the rates of rearrest and failure-to-appear. Moreover, bysystematically retaining the results of the urine tests, theinformation has been made available to help determine appropriatecriminal sanctions for those arrestces ultimatelyconvicted." The costs of a urine testing program may be amply justifiedin any jurisdiction with a significant drug problem. As in D.C.,the data collected should be systematically maintained and usedfor determining conditions of pre-trial release and sanctions forthose convicted. In particular, the opportunity should be seizedto present appropriate treatment options. Jail-based interventions Treatment orientation and referral to drug treatmentprograms should be instituted in metropolitancourts and jails. A central intake staff and/or representatives of drugtreatment programs should be present at court and in jails. Alloffenders who test drug positive at arrest should be required toattend orientation and preliminary intake procedures while indetention. These preliminary treatment steps may help ensure thatthose who are released from custody are placed in appropriatetreatment after returning to the community." Full treatment interventions, however, should not beinitiated for cocaineheroin offenders who will be free of custodyin less than three months. It is neither cost effective northerapeutically wise to implement full treatment programming whenthere is little expectation that treatment can be completed. Methadone programs should be permitted to maintain clientsin jails to facilitate resumption of treatment at the end ofdetention. Methadone treatment has proven effective in reducing dailyheroin use and substantially reducing criminality among heroinabusers. Enrolled methadone clients who are arrested can bemaintained on methadone while detained. In this way, return tomethadone treatment upon release after short-term jail custodywould be facilitated. Those who are convicted and sentenced toincarceration should be given the option (when medicallyrecommended) to remain on methadone or to detoxify from methadoneand enter an in-prison therapeutic community. Considerationshould also be given to initiating methadone treatment in jailsfor chronic heroin addicts. Heroin addicts serving shortsentences who arc introduced to methadone treatment whileincarcerated are more likely to enter and remain in methadonemaintenance treatment in the community when they are releasedfrom custody. Daily naltrexone consumption should be used for someconvicted heroin abusers in combination with drug-free treatmentand intensive supervision. For her-oin-abusing offenders who receive jail orprobation sentences and who opt for drug-free treatment,use of naltrexone (Trexan@), combined with urine surveillance,could be instituted. Its use with jail inmates on work release orschool furlough appears particularly appropriate. Naltrexone isan easily administered narcotic antagonist drug which taken dailyproduces almost immediate withdrawal symptoms in addicts whenthey use an opiatc, but is harmless to nonaddicts. It is mosteffective with heroinaddicted offenders who have a high level ofcommunity integration. It has no effect on cocaine, however;therefore, urine monitoring must be sustained.'o In-prison treatment Therapeutic communities and other intensive milieu drugtreatments should be made available to cocaine-heroin abusingstate prisoners about one year prior to parole eligibility. A successful therapeutic community, the "Stay 'NOut" program (see Appendix A), was developed at twocorrectional facilities in New York Stateone for men and one forwomen. This model therapeutic community in prison holds thegreatest promise for changing hard-core, drug-abusing inmates andreducing recidivism." Despite their proven effectiveness, few therapeuticcommunities such as "Stay 'N Out" are in place forcriminally involved drug abusers. One of the factors that limitsthe creation of additional programs of this type is the concernthat such programs might engage in activities that threatensecurity and encourage inmate resistance to the correctionalsystem. Nonetheless, correctional administrators learn quickly asthey become exposed to the operation of well-run programs thatsuch undesirable variance can be avoided. In fact, ininstitutions where most of these programs have been established,the wardens and correctional officers frequently are their mostvocal champions. To encourage their development, however, staffand administration need education and training. Further, a numberof fiscal and practical issues have to be addressed prior toimplementation- The implementation of prison-based treatment programsrequires isolation from the general prison population. The inimical influence of the criminal inmate subculture("prisoners' code") will inevitably undermine anyattempts to establish viable programming if the program is notisolated from this anti-therapeutic force. Separate livingquarters, recreation, food services, etc. should be maintainedwithin the institution for this separation to be ideallyeffective. Total isolation is, however, neither necessary nordesirable; rather, some contact with the general inmatepopulation is useful for the purpose of allowing the inmate intreatment to see where he has come from and how much he haschanged. In addition, the contact experience provides theopportunity for the program resident to test both his newprosocial values against the inmate subculture and his resistanceto negative influences. This kind of isolation is most possiblein medium security institutions with dormitorytype housing spacewhere one dormitory or two are physically segregated or separablefrom the main institution. Prisoners in therapeutic communities who make goodtreatment progress should be paroled to residential drug-freeprograms that sustain the therapeutic community model prior tocompletion of (heir sentence. They should be required to stay intreatment as a condition of parole until their date of maximumcustody or until the program deems them recovered. It is essential for the successful treatment ofcocaine-heroin abuser offenders to maintain continuity-of-carefrom the outset of treatment to termination of custody. Whilethere is benefit from prison treatment alone, these effects areaugmented and sustained by continuing that specific treat inentin the community. Ideally, release to the community facility would becontingent on the progress made during in-prison treatment. Underthis incentive system, specific behaviors would be rewarded witha specified number of restitution or release "points"that might be administered as a form of "good timc"system. Alternatively, prisoners might earn more favorableconditions of confinement or higher status and associated programprivilege.-,. However it is administered, the basic notion is toreinforce the desirability of pro-social behaviors. Community treatment programs Drug-abusing misdemennants should be considered forcommunitybased sentencing alternatives. In lieu of confining drug-involved offenders in jails andcounty penitentiaries, a range of intermediate sanctions shouldbe considered for heroin and cocaine abusers convicted ofmisdemeanors. These might include house arrest with electronicmonitoring, intermittent sentences (e.g., weekend or eveningincarceration), TASC programs, or residence in a facility such asa "halfway in-halfway out" center (a "HiHo").Again, in any of these alternatives offenders would ideally beable to achieve release status more quickly by providingdrug-negative urine samples, routinely attending andparticipating positively in treatment sessi ns, paying back theirvictims, and providing evidence of prosocial activity.'2 The community treatment resources available to supportintermediate sanctioning policies range from self-help groupsthat meet once a week for a couple of hours to residentialfacilities that provide 24 hour supervision and programming- At aminimum, almost all communities have an Alcoholics Anonymous orNarcotics Anonymous group that provides an context for recoveringsubstance abusers to meet, discuss day-to-day steps formaintaining a drug free life, and participate in many differenttypes of social activities not involving alcohol or drugs."Some communities provide drug treatment counseling through theDepartment of Mental Health. And in many cities, recoveringsubstance-abusers operate group homes that use many of the sameprinciples of Alcoholics Anonymous or therapeutic communitiesfound in prison programs. TASC programs run throughout the nation provide staff who arefamiliar with the particular resources available fordrug-involved offenders in specific communities. And almost allstates have an agency that periodically determines theavailability of both private and public programs available fordrug treatment. A list of these agencies is available fromthe National Association of State Drug and Alcohol AbuseDirectors, in Washington, DC Even if no other treatment is provided, heroin-cocaineabusers who are on probation and parole should be required tohave frequent urine tests. Drug-abusing offenders on probation or parole who are in nospecial treatment programs, as a minimum should be routinelyrequired to provide specimens for urinalysis over the entirelength of their probation or parole. At the outset the frequencyof urinalysis should be near daily, and decreascd as positiveprogress warrants. The effective monitoring of urinalysis resultswill help to interrupt relapse to daily heroin or cocaine use,and, hence, high-rate criminality is likely to dropsubstantially." When drug positive urines are detected,offenders should be immediately confronted, clearly warned afterthe first such incident, be required to enter treatment fordiagnosis and assessment after the second positive urine, and berequired to remain in treatment if relapse seems imminent or hasoccurred. Refusal to enter treatment upon an affirmativediagnosis should be considered a violation of release conditions. Organization and staffing issues The integrity of the treatment programs for convictedoffenders must be maintained by developing structural safeguardsof independence and autonomy from correctional management. All too often well designed interventions operated bycompetent and motivated agency and institutional staffs do notsucceed. Usually, the efforts arc not trusted by the criminaljustice clients, are overwhelmed by the difficulty of theclients' problems, are weakened by inadequate funding andinstitutional resistance, and are subject to high rates of staffburnout and turnover. For a treatment program to last long enoughto make a substantial difference, it must maintain its ownintegrity, ie., honesty and commitment to the treatment goals andprogram participants. The staff must also have sufficientindependence and automony to deliver on their promises. Treatment programs conducted by organizations independent of(but closely linked to) corrections agencies are more likely tomaintain their integrity thz programs operated by correctionalstaff within institutions or community corrections settings. Thissuggests that an outside agency working in cooperation with orunder contract to the Department of Corrections may be the mostappropriate treatment organization. Management responsibility forthe rehabilitation program should be assigned to a team ofcommitted treatment professionals, as well asex-addict/ex-offender peer counselors, For this approach to work,the power and authority of the treatment team should becomparable to and complement the criminal justice authority. Thismanagement group should be associated with and monitored byrespected professional self-help/therapeutic communityorganizations, for example, Therapeutic Communities of America. Probation and parole officers should have their functionsdivided into Surveillance Officers and Community 'fteatment TeamLeaders. For many years, correctional observers have debated thewisdom of vesting probation and parole officers with thepotentially conflicting responsibilities of surveillance andtreatment. In the opinion of the authors, surveillance andtreatment functions of field supervision officers should beseparated to resolve the inherent conflicts and strengthen eachfunction. Essential to the effectiveness of thetreatment/counseling relationship is trust and confidentiality.Persons tinder field supervision are unlikely to freely admitcriminal acts or drug use to someone in a position to return themto prison for such violations. Therefore, surveillance andrehabilitation responsibilities should be handled by staffs whowork separately but cooperatively to avoid role confusion forboth officer and offender. As the next recommendation suggests,both types of officers should be augmented by carefully selectedexoffeiider-addicts who would serve as Monitors for theSurveillance Officers and as Treatment Team staff for theCommunity Treatment Team Leader. The Treatment Team staff should rotate between working inprison and the community to maintain continuity between therehabilitation efforts in both environments. For in-prisonprograms, the objective of separating custodial and treatmentfunctions is satisfied by the organization discussed in thepreceding point. Former addict-offenders who have shown clear evidence ofprosocial change should have training and employmentopportunities, for example, as Monitors and Rntment Team members. Large numbers of offenders who have been chroniccocaine-heroin abusers are unable to gain and to keels legalemployment. Their background is so limited and so stigmatizedthat legal employers are reluctant to employ them, and suspiciousafter they do. Thus, even after making good treatment progress,many offenders may still be unable to gain stable employment.First, systematic skill development and training programs shouldhe providcd. Second, providing employment to ex-addict-offenderswithin the treatment program itself is a valuable opportunity todeal with this unemployment issue as well as cope with shortagesof field supervision personnel. The employment of ex-addict-offenders in a variety ofprogressively more responsible paraprofessional and professionalrolcs will help new monitoring and drug treatment systemsfunction effectively. They also will serve as role models tooffenders they supervise. The ex-addict offenders are the rolemodels (as in "Stay 'N Out") whose presencedemonstrates the realistic possibility of achieving successfulrehabilitation. Graduation from a drug treatment program,evidence of successful integration into community life, andadditional training are prerequisites for the employment ofex-addictoffenders as Monitors and Treatriient Team members. Conclusion By substantially reducing their cocaine-heroin abuse, thecriminality of drug-involved offenders may be reduced by 20 to 50percent or more. To do so, however, the criminal justice systemmust develop an alliance with the drug treatment system geared toachieve the goals of effective rehabilitation, enhanced prosocialbehavior, and reduced recidivism. The difficulties inherent in bringing about this allianceshould not be minimizcd. Some reallocation of resources clearlywill be required, with all the tensions attendant on anysignificant shift in funding and operational priorities. Ifcustodial and treatment functions are to be effectivelyseparated, recruitment, training, and retraining programs willhave to be developed for community corrections personnel.Institutional corrections environments must be prepared to acceptindependent treatment organizations. Procedures must be developedto identify and train those therapeutic community graduates bestqualified to become competent treatment team members andmonitors. The problem of intensive community resistance toaccepting community treatment facilities (HiHo's) that housefelons and substance abusers must also be addressed. Withinprisons, space will have to be reallocated to create therapeuticcommunities to house clients during treatment. If institutionsare converted for total therapeutic community utilization,abandoned mental hospitals may be utilized, with significantcapital expenditures necessary for conversion. Beginning at thepoint of arrest, screening procedures will have to be developedto monitor drug use and to identify cocaine-heroin users who canmost benefit from the proposed interventions. Perhaps most important, cooperation will be needed amongstable drug abuse agencies and drug treatment programs andcriminal justice organizations (courts, probation, corrections,and parole) that traditionally have had competing political andfiscal interests and often lack a history of successful Jointventures. Careful documentation of pilot results will also beneeded to evaluate whether the system is moving in desired orunanticipated directions. For this, evaluation researchers willhave to be in place from the outset. Since many problems willarise that have the potential for compromising the interventions,the evaluation design must provide decision makers with timclyinformation to assist them in formulating corrective actions. Atthe same time, ongoing dissemination of outcome informationthrough professional and media channels will help foster andmaintain the support necessary to accomplish the changesproposed. Appendix A "Stay 'N Out": A model for prison-based drugtreatment "Stay 'N Out" is a therapeutic community(TC), in part based upon the Phoenix House model, that has beenoperating in the New York State prison system for the last tenyears. Over time the program has been modified to operate moreeffectively within the prison environment. The program has beenfortunate to be operated by many of the founding staff who haveprovided the vision, commitment, and determination necessary fora successful prison program. An early evaluation of the "Stay 'N Out" programindicated that it was successfully implemented, maintained apositive TC environment, and produced positive psychological andbehavioral changes in participants. In 1984, the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse funded an evaluation of "Stay'N Out", comparing it to two other prison-bascd programs inNew York State and a control group of inmates on program waitinglists, but receiving no treatment. A milieu program and astandard counseling program were the comparison groups. Althoughparticipants were not randomly assigned to thcsc treatmentconditions, preliminary results of the comparison areprovocative. The data indicate the "Stay 'N Out"participants who remained in the program for nine to twelvemonths were less likely to have problems while on parole thaneither those who left "Stay 'N Out" earlier or those inother prison-based programs. For example, "Stay 'N Out"participants who remained in the program more than nine monthswere more likely to have a positive parole discharge (80 percentpositive) than those who remained in the program less than threemonths (50 percent positive). Positiv e parole discharge isdefined as no reported violations of parole during the parolecustody period. Long-term (9-12 months) participants of the otherprograms studied also had fewer cases of positive paroledischarge; the milieu program reported a 56 percent positivedischarge rate and the counseling program a 47 percent positiverate. Preliminary analysis indicates that long-term "Stay 'NOut" participants may also have a more encouraging patternof re-arrest than those in the other programs. Continuingfollow-up shows that only 27 percent of the TC participants werere-arrested compared to 35 percent of the milieu participants, 50percent of the counseling participants, and 42 percent of thewaiting list persons. In addition, TC participants averaged 18months to rearrest compared to 11 months for the milieu and ninemonths for the counseling group. These data should be interpretedwith caution, however, as variation in the actual number of daysat risk may vary greatly among samples. Program overview 64 Stay IN Out" programs were begun as a joint effortamong New York State Division of Substance Abuse Services (DSAS), New YorkTherapeutic Communities (NYTC), New York Department ofCorrectional Services (DOCS), and the New York State Division ofParole. Currently, NYTC. operates the programs, DOCS suppliesfunding, and Parole provides increased opportunities for programresidents. The DSAS Bureau of Research and Evaluation continuesto evaluate the program. The current program consists of two treatment units for maleinmates in one facility with 35 beds per unit (a total capacityof 70 beds), and one treatment unit with 40 beds for women-inmates in another facility. Each unit is staffed by a total ofseven persons, including both professionals andparaprofessionals. Inmates selected for the programs arerecruited at Statc correctional facilities. The criteria forselection are: history of drug abuse, at least 18 years of age,evidence of positive institutional participation, and no historyof sex crimes or mental illness. "Stay IN Out" clientsare housed in units segregated from the general prisonpopulation. They cat in a common dining room, however, and attendmorning activities with other prisoners. The optimum length oftreatment is from nine to twelve months. Most program staff areex-addict-offenders who are graduates of community T)Cs: they actas "role models" exemplifying successfulrehabilitation. The course of treatment is a developmental growthprocess with the inmate becoming an increasingly responsiblemember of the program. During the early phase of treatment, the clinical thrustinvolves assessment of client needs and problem areas.Orientation to the prison TC procedures occurs through individualcounseling, encounter sessions, and seminars. Clients are givenlow-level jobs and granted little status. During the later phasesof treatment, residents are provided opportunities to earnhigherlevel positions and increased status through sincereinvolvement in the program and hard work. Encounter groups andcounseling sessions are more in-depth and focus on the areas ofself-discipline, self-worth, selfawareness, respect forauthority, and acceptance of guidance for problem areas. Seminarstake on a more intellectual nature. Debate is encouraged toenhance self-expression and to increase self-confidence. Ilpon release, participants are encouraged to seek furthersubstance abuse treatment at cooperating community TCs. Extensiveinvolvement with a network of community TCs is central to theprogram's operation. Staff and senior residents of community TCsvisit "Stay IN Out" on a regular basis to recruitresident inmates for their programs. These visitors provideinspiration since they are ex-addicts and ex-felon role modelswho are leading economically and socially productive lives. "Stay 'N Out" Components Program Elements  Isolated Unit  Utilization of Ex-Offender/Ex-Addict Staff * Establishment of Psychological and Physical Safety  Hierarchical Therapeutic Community  Confrontation and Support Groups  Individual Counscling  Community and Relationship Training  Program Rules with Opportunities to Learn from Misbehavior * Immediate Discharge for Drug Possession, Violence andSexual Misbehavior  Developing Pro-Social Values: Honesty, Responsibility, andAccountability  Continuity-of-Care: Networking with Community TCs Administmtive Components DOC Contract Arrangement with Private Agency AdministrativeOffices Outside Prison Membership in Local and National Professional OrganizationsMaintain Political Relations with Alternative Funding Sourccs andLegislators Institutional Relations Earned Respect of Prison Administrators and Guards Development of a Model Unit Impressive to Visitors Placcment of Program Residents in Important Prison Jobs Relations With Inmate Culture Earned Respect of General Population Inmates Opportunities to Test TC Values Glossary Contingency contracting: A behavioral modificationtechnique in which desired behaviors are negotiated or contractedfor and rewards or sanctions meted out as that contract'sobligation is fulfilled. Detoxification: Gradual removal of an illicitsubstance from a user's body through decreasing dosage of thatsubstance with the support of therapeutically compatiblesubstances. Electronic monitoring: A supervision system usingelectronic devices, usually anklet/bracelets, which emit codedsignals to a central computer monitoring system. This systemallows continuous monitoring of persons under house arrest. Full treatment intervention: The maximum use ofcombined treatment resources, for example, drug treatmentprograms, urinalysis, intensive counseling, etc. Hi-Hos (Halfway In - Halfway Out Houses): Transitionalresidential facilities in which releasees are supervised by bothprison staff and community services personnel. House arrest: A system of incarceration in which anoffender is confined to his or her own home instead of in atraditional correctional facility. Intermediate sanction: A sanction more severe thantraditional probation and less onerous than incarceration. Interpersonal cognitive problem-solving: Therapeutictechniques which teach an array of skills and strategies forresolving problems, particularly those encountered in relationswith others. Intervention: A therapeutic regimen or action designedto stop or change an individual's course of drug use or criminalactivity. Methadone: A long lasting (24-36 hours) syntheticnarcotic analgesic medication. Methadone treatment: The use of methadone,administered orally in daily dosages, to either detoxify ormaintain (through maintenance of same dosage level) a narcoticaddict. Miliett Program: Therapeutic programs in whichparticipants live together in an isolated environment designed topromote behavioral change; see also therapeutic community. Misdemeanor: A relatively minor violation of criminallaw, generally penalized through fines or a short period ofincarceration. Modeling: An attempt to gradually alter behaviorthrough observation of socially appropriate behavior. Narcotic antagonist: (Naltrexone, Naloxone, Narcan) Asubstance designed to discourage the use of opiates through twoactions: 1) when introduced into a user's system after ingestionof narcotics, withdrawal ensues- and 2) when introduced into auser's system prior to ingestion of narcotics, thepharmacologic effect of the narcotics is blocked. Opiate: Any natural drug derivative of opium orsynthetic opiates with similar pharmacological action (methadone,percodan, Dilaudid) capable of producing physiological addictionand withdrawal symptoms with repeated use. Prisoners code: An unwritten code of ethics developedby the culture in a prison setting with its own norms, values,and sanctions. This code is in general hostile and suspicious ofauthority and discourages cooperation with officials of thecorrectional system or their representatives. Prosocial. Socially acceptable. Recidivism: An offender's return to patterns ofcriminal behavior or drug abuse which were evident prior totreatment or incarceration. This may include official re-entryinto the criminal justice system, for example, rearrest, or areturn to drug use or criminal activity even if undetectedofficially. Restitution: A system of pay back or reparation for anoffense either to society in general or to specific victim.Restitution may be made a condition of release. Restitution points: A behavioral accounting system inwhich a quantifiable sequence of steps using positive andnegative reinforcement determine speed of release fromincarceration. TASC: (Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime@ A nationalprogram which provides alternatives to incarceration andassistance after release to substance abuse offenders through-referrals to drug treatment and special supervision programs. Therapeutic community (in drug treatment): A specifictype of Milieu Program; a residential, drug free treatmentprogram utilizing community or peer counseling, role modeling,and increasing levels of responsibility to prepare for re-entryinto the community. Programs require full-time participation andmay last a few months to over a year. Reference notes 1. BJS 1983c,def; 1985a; 1986b,d, Sanchez and Johnson 1987. 2, Chaiken and Chaiken 1982; Chaiken 1986. 3. Toborg 1984; Toborg et al. 1996; Carver 1986; Wish, Brady,and Cuadrado 1984, 1986. 4. Wish 1987. 5. Wish 1987; John Carver 1987 (personal communication): DCPretrial Services Agency; 400 F St., NW; Washington, DC20001. 6. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984; Ball, Shaffer, and Nurco 1983;Collins, Hubbard, and Rachal 1985; Hanson et al. 1985; Johnson etal. 1985; Johnson and Wish 1987; Sanchez and Johnson 1987. 7. Hanson et al. 1985, Johnson et al. 1985; Johnson and Wish1987; Sanchez and Johnson 1987; Hunt, et al. 1984. 8. Belenko 1981; Carver 1986; Chaiken and Chaiken 1984;Toborg et al. 1986; Wish 1986; Wish et al. 1980; Wish, Brady, andCuadrado 1986: Chaiken and Chaiken 1987. 9. Belenko 1984; BJS 1983f; Lynott 1986; Petersilia et al.1985; Wish, Brady, and C'tjadrado 1986, 10. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984; BJS 1983f; DeLeon 1984a,b;1985, Hubbard et al. 1984; Robins 1973; Sells 1974; Sells and Simpson 1976. 11. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984; Dole and Joseph 1979;DesJarlais et al. 1982; Hubbard et al. 1984,, McGlothlin 1979; McGlothlin, Anglin, and Wilson 1977;McGlothlin and Anglin 1981a,b; Senay 1984, 1985; Simpson 1984. 12. Kleinman and Lukoff 1975-, Hunt et al. 1984; Hunt 1985. 13. DeLeon et al. 1980; DeLeon, Wexler, and Jainchill 1982;DeLeon 1984a,b, 1985 Hubbard et al. 1984; Simpson and Sells 1982;Tims and Ludford 1984; Wexler and DeLeon 1977; Wexler andWilliams 1986. 14. Carver 1986; Collins and Allison 1983; Goldsmith et al.1984; Hunt et al. 1984,, Johnson et al. 1985; Wish, Brady,Cuadrado 1986; Wish 1986. 15. Alexander and Parsons 1973; Andrews 1980; Chandler 1973;Gendreau and Ross 1979; Peters 1981; Philips, Phillips, and Wolf1973; Ross and McKay 1976, Walter and Mills 1979; Wexler, Lipton,and Foster 1985; Wexler and Williams 1986. 6. Bandura 1979; Nctticr 1978; Niezel 1979. 17. Gendreau and Ross 1983-1984. 18. Andrews and Kiessling 1980; Lee and Haynes 1980; Platt, Perry, and Metzger 1980; Ross andMcKay 1976; Wexler and Williams 1986. 19, Balch 197,5; Ross and Ciendreau 1980. 20. Blumstein, Cohen, and Nagin 1978; Critelli and Crawford1980; Erickson, Gibbs, and Jensen 1977; Hart 1978. 21. Craft, Stephenson, and Grangcr 1964; Fenton 1960; Grantand (irant 1959; Kassebaum, Ward, and Wilner 1971. 22- Ross and McKay 1978. 23. Gendrau and Ross 1979; Quay 1977; Ral)t3eport et al.1979; Repucci et al. 1973; Sechrest et al. 1979a,b. 24. Des Jarlais et al. 1982. 25. Wexler, Lipton, and Foster 1985. 26. Ball et al. 1979, 1981; Collins, Hubbard, and Rachal1985; Des Jarlais et al. 1982; Hunt, Lipton, and Spuiit 1984;Johnson et al. 19R5; Ntirco et al. 1985; Sanchez and Johnson1987; Speckart and Anglin 19R6a,b. 27. Anglin and McGlothlin 1984-1 Carver 1986; McGlothlin,Anglin, and Wilson 1977. 28. Carvcr et al. 1986; Toborg et al. 1986, Wish et al. 19RO,198.1; Wish, Brady, and Cuadrado 1984, 1986; Wish, Cuadrado, andMontorana 1986; Wish, Cuadrado, and Mortorana 1986. 29. Collins. Hubbard, and Rachal 1985; National Associationof State Drug Abuse Program Coordinators 1978; Toborg et al.1975. 30. Braheii 1983; Brahen et al. 1979. 31. Wexler 1985; Wexler and Lipton 1985; Wexler, Lipton, andFoster 1985; Wexler and Sharron 1985; Wexler and Williams 1986. 32. Wish, Brady, and Cuadrado 1986. 33. Chaikeii, Marcia 1979. 34. NASAD is located at 444 W Capitol St,, NW, Suite 530;Washington, DC 20001. 35. Carver 1986; Chamlee 1986; Toborg ct al. 1986. Reference Notes Alexander, J.F. and Parsons, R.J. 1973- Short-term BehavioralIntervention with Delinquent Families: Impact on Family Processand Recidivism. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 81,219-225. Andrews, D.A. and Kiessling, I.]. 1980. Program Structure andEffective Correctional Practices: A Summary of the CAVICResearch, In R.R. Ross and P. Gendreau (eds.) EffectiveCorrectional Treatment. 1980. Toronto: Butterworths. Andrews, D.A. 1980. Some Expcrimcntal Investigations of thePrinciples of Differential Association Through DeliberateManipulation of the Structure of Service Systems, AmericanSociological Review, 45, 448-462. Anglin, M.D. and McGlothlin, W.C. 1984. Outcome of narcoticaddict treatment in California. Pp. 106-128 in Frank M. Tims andJacqueline P. Ludford (eds.). Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation.Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. Research MonographSeries 51. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Balch, R.W. 1975. The Medical Model of Delinquency:Theoretical, Practical, and Ethical Implications. Crime and Delinquency, 21, 116-129. Rail, J.C-, Shaffer, ].W. and Nurco, D.N. 1983. Theday-to-day criminality of heroin addicts in Baltimore: A study inthe continuity of offense rates. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,12 (1): 19-142. Ball, J.C., Rosen, L., Flueck, J.A. and Nurco, D.N. 1981. Thecriminality of heroin addicts when addicted and when off opiates.Pp. 39-65 in J.A. Inciardi, (ed.), The Drugs-Crime Connection.Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Ball, J.C., Rosen, L., Flueck, J.A. and Nurco, D.N, 1982,Lifetime criminality of heroin addicts in the United States. Journalo Drug Issues. 3: 225-239. Ball, J.C., Rosen, L., Friedman, E.G. and Nurco, D.N. 1979.The impact of heroin addiction upon criminality. Pp. 163-169 inL. Harris (cd.), Problems of Drug Dependen,,e, 1979.Research Monograph Series 27, Rockville, Md.: National Instituteon Drug Abuse, Bandura, A. 1979. The Social Learning Perspective: Mechanismsof Aggression. In H. Toch (ed.) Psychology of Crime andJustice. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Relenko, S. 1981. Drugs and the criminal justice system: Theprocessing and impact of drug cases in New York. Report preparedfor Joseph A. Califano, New York State Heroin and Alcohol Study. Belenko, S. 1984. Lower cast side narcotics arrests, August1982: Court outcomes and rearrests. Research Department. NewYork: New York City Criminal Justice Agency. Blumstein, A., Cohen, J., and Nagin, D. (eds.) 1978.Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of CriminalSanctions on Crime Rates. Washington, D.C.: National Academy ofScience. Boyle, J.M. and Brunswick, A.F. 1980. What happened inHarlem? Analysis of a decline in heroin use among a generationunit of urban black youth. Journal of Drug Issues: 109-29. Brahen, L.S., Capone, T., Bloom, S., Adams, H.E., Seniuk,M.P. and DeJulio, P. 1979. An alternative to methadone forprobationer-addicts: inarcatic antagonist treatment. Journalof Drug Education, 9 (1): 117-132. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1981. Expenditure and Employment Data for the Criminal Justice System, 1978. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Jail Inmatev 1982. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983b. JusticeExpenditure and Employment in the US. 1979. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983c. Prisoners andAlcohol. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983d. Prisoners andDrugs. Bulletin, Washington, D.C.: tJ.S, Department ofJustice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983e. Privoner-s inPrison. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department ofJustice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1983f. Report to theNation on Crime and Justice. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1985a. Jail Inmates1983. Bulletin. Washington, ac.:.U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1985b. JuvticeExpenditure and Employment Extracts., 1980 and 1981.Washington, D.C-- LJ,S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1985c. JusticeExpenditure and Employment, 1982. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.:U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1996a. FelonyCase-Processing Time. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). 1986b. Jail Inmates1984. Bulletin. Washington, D,C,: U.S. Department of Justice. 28 References and bibliography Bureau of Justice Statistics (RJS). 1986c. JusticeExpenditurc and Employment. 1983. Bulletin, Washington, D.C.:U.S. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistic,; (RJS). 1986d. Prisoners in1985. Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice. Carpenter, C., Glassner, B., Johnson, B.D., and Loughlin, J,1987. Kids, Drugs, Alcohol, and Crime- I-exingion, Mass.:Lexington Books, forthcoming. Carver, J.A. 1986. Drugs and crime.Controlling use andreducing risk through testing. NIJ Reports. Washington, D.C.:National Institute of Justice. Chaiken, J. and Chaiken, M. 1982. Varieties of CriminalBehavior. Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand Corporation. Chaiken, M.R. 1979. Alcoholics Anonymous.- A Sociological Study- University Microfilms. - Chaiken, M.R. 1986. Crime rates and substance abuse amongtypes of Offenders. Pp. 12-54 in Bruce D. Johnson and Eric Wish(eds.), Crime Rates Among Drug-Abusing Offenders. FinalReport to National Institute of Justice. New York: Narcotic andDrug Research, Inc. (haiken, M. and Chaiken, J. 1983. Crime rates and the active offender. Pp. 11-29 in J.Q. Wilson (ed.), Crime and Public Policy. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books. Chaiken, M. and Chaiken, J. 1984. Offender Types and PublicPolicy. (,rime and Delinquency, 30: 2, 195-226. Chaiken, M. and Chaiken, J. 1987. Selecting 'CareerCriminals'for Priority Prosecution. Submitted to NationalInstitute of Justice, Washington, D.C.: US. Department of@lustice, Chaiken, M.R. and Johnson, B.D. 1988. Characteristics of Different Types of Drug-involved Offenders. Issues and Practices. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice. Chamlee, D.L. 1996. Personal communication. (Chief of FederalProbation.) Chandler, M.J. 1971, Egocentrism and Antisocial Behavior: TheAssessment and Training of Social Perspective-Taking Skills. Developmental Psychology, 9, 326333. Collins, J.J. and Allison, M. 1983. Legal coercion andretention in drug abuse treatment. Hospital and CommunityPsychiatry, 34 (12)1145-49. Collins, J.J., Hubbard, R.L. and Rachal, J.V. 1985. Expensivedrug use and illegal income: A test of explanatory hypotheses. Criminology,23 (4): 743-64. Craft, M., Stephenson, G., and Granger, C.A. 1964. Acontrolled trial of authoritarian and selfgoverning regimes withadolescent 1)sychopaths. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 34,543-554. Critelli, J.W. and Crawford, R.F. 1980. The effectiveness ofcourt ordered punishment: fines versus punishment. CriminalJustice and Behavior, 7, 465-470. DeLeon, G. 1984a. Program-based evaluation research intherapeutic communities. Pp. 69-87 in F.M. Tims and J.P. Ludford(eds.), Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation.Strategies, Progress,and Prospects. Research Monograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.:National Institute on Drug Abuse. DeLeon, G. 1984b. The Therapeutic Community. Study ofEffectiveness. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on DrugAbuse. DeLeon, G. 1985. The Therapeutic Community: Status andEvolution. International Journal of the Addictions, 20(6-7): 823-845. DeLeon, G., Wexler, H.K. and Jainchill, J. 1982. Thetherapeutic community: success and improvement rates 5 yearsafter treatment. International Journal of the Addictions, 17(4): 703-47. DeLeon, G., Wexler, H.K., Schwartz, S., and Jainchill, N. 1980. Therapeuticcommunities for drug abusers. studies of treatment environment. Paperpresented at a meeting of the American Psychological Association. Des Jarlais, D.C.. Joseph, H., Dole, V.P., and Schmeidler, J.1982. Predicting post-treatment narcotics use among patientsterminating from methadone treatment. Advances in Alcohol andSubstance Abuse, 2 (1): 57-68. Division of Criminal Justice Services. 1986. Criminal JusticeStatistics for New York State. Albany. DSAS (Division of Substance Abuse Services). 1985a. Estimatesof Taxes Paid by Working Methadone Patients in 1981. TreatmentIssues Report No. 30. New York. Dole, V.P., and Joseph, H. 1979. The Long-term Consequencesof Methadone Maintenance Treatment. Final Report to NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. New York: Rockefeller University. IPrickson, M.L., Gibbs, ].P., and Jensen, G.F. 1977. Thedeterrence doctrine and perceived certainty of legal punishment. AmericanSociological Review, 42, 305-317. Fenton, N. 1960. Group counseling in correctional practice. CanadianJournal of Corrections, 2, 229-239, Gendrau, P. and Ross, R.R. 1979. Effective correctionaltreatment: bibliography for cynics. Crime and Delinquency, 25,463-489. Gendreau, P. and Ross, R-R1983-1984. Correctional treatment:some recommendations for effective intervention. Juvenile andFamily Court Journal, Winter., 31-39. Goldsmith, D.S., 14unt, D.E., Lipton, D.S., and Strug, D.L.1984. Methadone folklore: beliefs about side effects and theirimpacts on treatment. Human Organization, 43 (4): 330-40. Grant, J.D. and Grant, M.Q. 1959. A Group Dynamics Approachto the Treatment of Non-Conformists References and bibliography 29 in the Navy. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Sociul Science, 322,126-135. Hanson. B., Beschner, G., Walters, J.M., and Bovelle, E.1985. Life with Heroin.' Voices from the Inner City.Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. Hart, R.]. 197R- Crime and punishment in the Army. Journalof Personality and Social Psychology, 161456 1471. Hubbard, R.L., Rachal, J.V., Craddock, and Cavanaugh, E.R.1984. Treatment outcome prospective study (TUPS): clientcharacteristics and behaviors before, during, and aftertreatment. Pp. 42-68 in F.M. Tims and J.P. Ludford (eds.), DrugAbuse @atment Evaluation: Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. ResearchMonogral3h Series 51. Rockville, Md.: National lntitute on DrugAbuse. Hunt, D. 1985. The Violent Offender in Trcatment. Paper presentedat meeting of Academy of Criminal Justice Science, Las Vegas,Nevada. Hunt, D.E., Lipton, and Spunt, B. 1984. Patterns of criminalactivity among methadone clients and current narcotics users notin treatment. Journal of Drug Issues. (Fall): 687-702. Johnson, B.a, Goldstein, P., Preble, E.. Schmeidler, J.,Lipton, D.S., Spunt, B., and Miller, T. 1985. Taking Care ofBusiness.- The Economics of Crime By Heroin Abusers. Lexington,Mass.: Lexington Books. Johnson, B.D. and Wish, E.D. 1987. Criminal Events AmongSeriously Criminal Drug Abusers. New York: Narcotic and DrugResearch, Inc. Kassebaum, Ci-, Ward, a and Wilncr, D. 1971. PrisonTreatment and Parole Survival.- An Empirical Assessment. NewYork: Wiley. Kleinman, P.H. and Lukoff. I.F. 1975. MethadoneMaintenanceModest Help for a Few.- Final Report, New York:Addiction Research and Treatment Corporation Evaluation Team, NewYork: 30 References and bibliography Columbia University School of Social Work. Lee, R. and Haynes, N.M. 1980. Project CREST and theDualTreatment Approach to Delinquericy: Methods and ResearchSummarized. In R.R. Ross and P. Gendreau (eds.) Effective(,orrect;onal Treatment. 1980. Toronto: Butterworths. Lynott, D. 1986. Operation Pressure Point. Presentation toNIDA Community Epidemiology Work Group. New York: New York CityPolice Department. McDonald, D. 1980. The Price of Punishment.- PublicSpending for Corrections in New York, Boulder, Colo.:Wcstview Press. McGarrell, E.F., and Flanagan, T.J. (eds.) 1985. Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics-1984. U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Oifice, McGlothlin, W.C. 1979. Criminal justice clients. Pp. 203-209in Robert L. DuPont, Avram Goldstein and John O'Donnell (eds.), Handbookon Drug Abuse. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on DrugAbuse, McGlothlin, W.C. and Anglin, M.D. 1981a. Long term follow-ut3of clients of high- and low-dose methadone programs. Archivesof General Psychiatry, 38; 1055-63, McGlothlin, W.C. and Anglin, M.D. 1981b. Shutting offmethadone: costs and benefits. Archives of General Psychiatry,38., 885-92. McGlothlin, WC,, Anglin, M.D. and Wilson, B.D. 1977. AnEvaluation of the California Civil Addict Program. Rockville,Md.: National Institute on Drug Abuse. Miller, J.D,, Cisin, I.H., GardnerKeaton, H., Wirtz, P.W.,Abelson, H.I., and Fishburne, P.M. 1982. National Survey onDrug Abuse., Main Findings 1982. Wahington, DC,: U.S.Government Printing Office. National Association of State Drug Abuse ProgramCoordinators, Inc. 1978. TASC.- An Approach for Dealing with the SubstanceAbusing Offender., Guidelines for Development of a TreatmentAlternative to Street Crime Project. Washington, D.C.: U.S.Department of Justice. Nettler, G. 1978. Explaining Crime. New York-.McGraw-Hill. Nietzel, M.T. 1979. Crime and Its Modification.- ASocial Learning Perspective. New York: Paragamon. Nurco, D.N., Ball, J.C., Shaffer, J.W., and Hanlon, T.E.1985. The criminality of narcotic addicts. Journal of Nervousand Mental Disease, 173 (2): 94-102. Peters, R. 1981. Deviant Behavioral Contracting with ConductProblem Youth; A Review and Critical Analysis. Department ofPsychology, Queens University. Kingston, Ontario. Petersilia, J., Turner, S., Kahan, J., and Peterson, J. 1985.Granting Felons Probation: Public Risks and Alternatives. SantaMonica, Calif.: Rand. Philips, F.L., Phillips, R.A-, and Wolf, M.W. 1973. Behaviorshaping works for delinquents. P.%vchology Today, 6,75-79. Platt, J.J., Perry, G.M., and Met7ger, D.,S, 1980, Theevaluation of a heroin addiction treatment program within acorrectional environment. In R.R. Ross and P. Gendreau (eds.)Effective Correctional Treatment. 1980. Toronto:Butterworths. Quay, H.C. 1977. The three faces of evaluation: what can beexpected to work. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 4,341-354. Rappeport, J., Seidman, E., and Davidson II, W.S. 1979.Demonstration research and manifest versus truc adoption: the natural history of a research project. InR.E Munoz, L.R. Snowden, and J.G. Kelly (eds.) Social and Psychological Research and Com tni4nity SOllings. 1979.San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Repucci, N.D., Sarata, B.P., ,;aunder,.;, JT, McArthur, AV,,and Michlin, L.M. 1973. We bombed in Mountville: Lessons learnedin consultation to a correctional facility for adolescentoffenders. In I.I. Goldberg (ed.) The Helping Professions inthe World of Action. 1973. Boston: D.C. Heath. Robins, L.N. 1973. A Follow-up of Vietnam DrugUsers. Washington, D.C. U.S. Government Printing Office. Ross, R.R. and Gendreau, P. 1980. Effective Correctional Treatment, Toronto:Butterworths. Ross, R.R. and McKay, H.B. 1976. A study of institutionaltreatment programs. International Journal of Offender Therapyand C'omparativp Criminology, 20, 165-173. Ross, R.R. and McKay, H.B. 1978. Treatment in corrections:requiem for a panacea. Canadian Journal of Criminology, 120:279-295, Sanchez, J.E., and Johnson, B.D. 1987. Women and the drugcrime connection: crime rates among drug-abusing women at RikersIsland. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 19 (2): 205-216. Sechrest, L., West, S.G., Philips, M.A., Rcdner, R., andYeaton, W. 1979a. Some neglected problems in evaluation research:strength and integrity of treatments. In L. Sechrest, S.G. West, M.A. Philips, R. Redner, and W. Yeaton (eds.) Evaluation Studies Annual Review (Vol. 4), 1979a. Beverly Hills: Sage. Sechrest, L., White, S.O., and Brown, G.D. (eds.) 1979b. TheRehabilitation of Criminal Offenders. Washington, D.C.:National Academy of Sciences. Senay, E.C. 1984. Clinical implications of drug abusetreatment outcome research. Pp. 139-150 in Frank M. Tims andJacqueline P. Ludford (eds.), Drug Abuse Treatt?zentEvaluation Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. ResearchMonograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.: National Institute on DrugAbuse. Senay, E.C. 1985. Methadone maintenance treatment, InternationalJournal of the Addictions, 20 (6-7): 803-22. References and bibliography 31 Sells, S.B., and Simpson, D.D. 1976. Effectiveness of DrugAbuse Treatmeni. Vols. 111, IV, and V. Cambridge, Mass.:Ballinger. Simpson, D.D. 1984. National treatiiient system evaluationbased on the drug abuse reporting program (DARP) followupresearch. Pp. 29-41 in Frank M. Tims and Jacqueline P. Ludford(eds.), Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation.Strategies, Progress,and Prospects. Research Monograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.:National Institute on Drug Abuse. Simpson, D.D. and Sells, S.B. 1982. Effectiveness oftreatment for drug abuse: an overview of the DARP researchprogram. Advances in Alcohol and Substance Abuse, 2 (1):7-29. Speckart, G. and Anglin, M.D. 1986a. Narcotics use and crime:a causal modeling approach. Journal of QuantitativeCriminology, 2: 3-28. Speckart, G. and Anglin, M.D. 1986b. Narcotics use and crime:an overview of recent research advances. Presentation to Drugs,Alcohol, and Crime Conference, sponsored by National Institute ofJustice. San ]Francisco, California. Time. 1986. Drugs: The enemy within. September 15:58-73. Tims, F.M. and Ludford, J.P. (eds.) 1984. Drug Abuse Treatment Evaluation: Strategies, Progress, and Prospects. Research Monograph Series 51. Rockville, Md.: Slational Institute on Drug Abuse. Toborg, M. 1984. Drug use and pretrial crime in theDistrict of Columbia, Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Justice. Toborg, M.A., Bellassai, J.B., Yezer, A.M.J., Carver, J.,Clarke, J., and Pears, E. 1986. The Washington, D.C. UrineTesting Prograt?i for atrestees and defendants awaiting trial., asummary of interim findings. Washington, D.C.- ToborgAssociates. 32 References and bibliography Toborg, M.A., Levin, D,R., Milkman, R.H., and Center, L.J. 1975.Treatment alternatives to street crime (TASC).- an evaluativeframework and state of the art review. Washington, D.C.:Lazar Institute. Walter, T.L., and Mills, C.M. 1979. A Behavioral-EmploymentIntervention Program for Reducing Juvenile Delinquency. In J.S.Stumphauzer (ed.), Progress in Behavior Therapy withDelinquents. 1979. Springfield, Illinois: Thomas. Wexler, H.K. 1985. Therapeutic communities'role in thePrivatization of corrections. Paper presented at Ninth WorldConference of Therapeutic Communities, San Francisco, California,September. Wexler, H.K. and DeLeon, G. 1977. The therapeutic community:multivariate prediction of retention. American Journal of Drugand Alcohol Abuse, 4 (2): 145-51. Wexler, H.K. and Lipton, Douglas S. 1985. Prison drugtreatment.- the critical 90 days of m-enity. Paper presentedat meeting of the American Society of Criminology, San Diego,California. Wexler, H.K. and Sharron, A. 1985. Prison drug treatment.two year followup of successes and failures. Paper presentedat meeting of the American Society of Criminology, San Diego,California. Wexler, H.K., and Williams, R, 1986. The "Stay 'NOut" therapeutic - community: prison treatment for substance abusers. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 18(3): 221-230. Wexler, 14-K,, Lipton, D.S., and Fostcr, K. 1985. Outcomeevaluation of a prison therapeutic community for substance abusetreatment.preliminary results. Paper presented at meeting ofthe American Society of Criminology, San Diego, California, Wish, E.D. 1982. Are heroin users really nonviolent? Paperpresented at meeting of the Academy of Criminal Justice Sciences, Louisville, Kentucky. Wish, E.D. 1986. Personal Communication. Wish, E.D. 1987. Drug use forcasting.- New York 1984 to1986, NIJ Research in Action. Wash-ngton, D.C.: National Institute of Justice, U.S.Department of Justice, February. Wish, E.D., and Johnson, B.D. 1986. The impact of substanceabuse on criminal careers. Pp. 52-88 in Alfred Blumstein,Jacqueline Cohen, Jeffery A. Roth, and Christy A. Visher, CriminalCareers and "Career Criminals." Volume 2.Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. Wish, E.D., Brady, E., and Cuadrado, M. 1984. Drug use and crime in arrestees inManhattan. Paper presented at the 47th Meeting of theCommittee on Problems of Drug Dependence, New York, Narcotic andDrug Research, Inc. Wish, E.D., Brady, E. and Cuadrado, M. 1986. Urine testing of arrestees.- findingsfrom Manhattan. New York: Narcotic and Drug Research, Inc. Wish, F,.D-, Citadrado, M,, and Mortorana, J.A. 1986. Estimatesof drug use in intensive supervision probationers.- results froma pilot test. New York: Narcotic and Drug Research, Inc. Wish, E.D., Klumpp, K.A., Moorer, A.H. and Brady, E. 1980. Ananalysis of crime among arrestees in the District of. Columbia. Institutefor Law and Social Research. Springfield, Va.: National TechnicalInformation Services. Wish, E.D., Johnson, B.D., Strug, D., Chedekel, M., andLipton, D.S, 1983. Are urine tests good indicators of thevalidi@v of se(f'reports of drug use? Paper presented atmeeting of the American Society of Criminology, Denver, Colorado. Zedlewski, Edwin. 1987. Making Confinement Decisions.-Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: National Institute ofJustice, U.S. Department of Justice, July. -U.S. G.P.O. 1988-202 Olt5l8OO82 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-4IA031-000655-B043-175http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/doff90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114156 text/html 6121HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:41:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:38 GMTContent-length: 5904 DRUG OFFENSES ACCOUNT FOR A LARGER PERCENTAGE OF JAILINMATES DRUG OFFENSES ACCOUNT FOR A LARGER PERCENTAGE OF JAILINMATES WASHINGTON, D.C.-- Drug offenses accounted for 23 percent of the charges against the almost 400,000 men and women beingheld in local jails during 1989--up from 9 percent in 1983, theBureau of Justice Statistics announced today. The Bureau, a componentof the Office of Justice Programs in the U.S. Department of Justice,reported that the number of inmates in the nation's 3,312 local jailsgrew 77 percent from 1983 to 1989. More than 40 percent of thatgrowth resulted from the increased number of persons held for orconvicted of drug offenses. "The dramatic increase in the number of persons in jailson drug charges occurred both among those awaiting trial andthose already convicted of crimes," said Bureau DirectorSteven D. Dillingham. "And more than one-half of all convictedjail inmates said they had committed the offense for which they wereincarcerated under the influence of drugs or alcohol or both." The findings were drawn from a nationally representative survey of 5,675 inmates held in 424 local jails. SimilarBureau surveys of jail inmates were conducted in 1972, 1978 and1983. A jail is a locally administered institution that holds peopleawaiting trial or already sentenced, usually for one year or less. About half of all jail inmates in 1989 had been convicted and were serving time, 7 percent had been convicted but not yetsentenced, 26 percent were awaiting or on trial and 16 percent wereawaiting arraignment. An estimated 46 percent of the jail inmates in 1989 were on probation, on parole, on bail or were in some other criminaljustice status at the time of their arrest. More than three-quartersof all inmates being held in 1989 for any offense had had a priorsentence of probation or incarceration. At least a third of the inmateswere in jail for a violent offense or had been previously sentencedfor a violent offense. Other survey results: --More than four of every 10 convicted inmates said they had been using an illegal drug during the month before theycommitted the offense for which they were incarcerated. About one in fourconvicted inmates said they had used a major drug, such as heroin,cocaine, crack, LSD or PCP, in that month. --Women and Hispanic prisoners were the most likely among all jail inmates to be held on drug charges--about one-third ineach group. --Among convicted inmates, 29 percent reported they had committed their offenses under the influence of only alcohol,15 percent under the influence of only drugs and 12 percentunder the influence of both. --Almost one-third of all jail inmates said they had participated in a substance abuse treatment program at sometime in their lives--about 18 percent of the inmates had receivedtreatment for drugs, 9 percent for alcohol and 6 percent for both. --More than four of every 10 female inmates reported they had been abused at some time before their currentincarceration--33 percent physically and 36 percent sexually. --About 39 percent of all jail inmates had grown up in a single parent household and an additional 11 percent hadlived in a household without either parent. --The racial and ethnic composition of local jails changed between 1983 and 1989--blacks increased from 38 percent to 42percent of the inmates population, Hispanics increased from 14percent to 17 percent and the percentage of white non-Hispanics decreasedfrom 46 percent to 39 percent. --The female jail population increased from 7.1 percent in 1983 to 9.5 percent in 1989. One of every four female inmateswas in jail for larceny or fraud. --About 11 percent of the inmates were being held for other authorities--most awaiting transportation to a state prison. --Among the inmates who had been sentenced to serve theirtime in local jails, half had received a sentence of six months ofless. It is estimated that about half of the inmates sentenced tolocal jails would serve less than five months. Single copies of the special report, "Profile of JailInmates, 1989," (NCJ-129097), as well as other Bureau of JusticeStatistics publications and statistical information may be obtained fromthe National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Box 6000,Rockville, MD 20850. The telephone number is 1-301-251-5500. The toll-freenumber from areas other than Maryland and metropolitan Washington,D.C., 1-800-732-3277. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-5IA031-000655-B043-211http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/DRUGCRT.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122114208 text/html 18170HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:41:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:17 GMTContent-length: 17952 DRUG COURTS: Proposed Rule DRUG COURTS: Proposed Rule DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 28 CFR Part 93 Office of Justice Programs [OJP No. 1014] January 26, 1995 RIN 1121-AA26 Drug Courts AGENCY: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of JusticePrograms. ACTION: Proposed Rule. SUMMARY: This notice announces a proposed rule and requestscomments on the Drug Court Program as authorized by Title V ofthe Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. Thisrule gives general guidance regarding the program andspecifically delineates the prohibition on participation byviolent offenders. Detailed program guidelines and applicationmaterials for the Fiscal Year 1995 Drug Court Program will beavailable in early 1995. DATE: All comments must be received by February 24, 1995. ADDRESS: All comments should be addressed to Reginald L.Robinson, Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Officeof Justice Programs, 633 Indiana Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.20531. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: The Department of Justice Response Center at 1-800-421-6770or 202-307-1480. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Overview of Title V-Drug Courts Federal discretionary grants are being made available underthe Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, TitleV, Public Law 103-322, 108 Stat. 1796 (September 13, 1994), 42U.S.C. 3796ii-3796ii-8 [hereinafter the "Act"] toStates, units of local government, Indian tribal governments, andstate and local courts for assistance with drug court programs.The Act gives the Attorney General, and through statutoryauthority contained in the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe StreetsAct, an authorized designee (in this case the Assistant AttorneyGeneral for the Office of Justice Programs), the authority tomake grants to the above-mentioned entities for drug courtprograms that involve continuing judicial supervision overnon-violent offenders with substance abuse problems and theintegrated administration of sanctions and services including:(1) mandatory periodic testing for, the use of controlledsubstances or other addictive substances during any period ofsupervised release or probation for each participant; (2)substance abuse treatment for each participant; (3) diversion,probation, or other supervised release involving the possibilityof prosecution, confinement, or incarceration based onnoncompliance with program requirements or failure to showsatisfactory progress; and (4) programmatic, offender management,and aftercare services such as relapse prevention, health care,education, vocational training, job placement, housing placement,and,child care or other family support services for eachparticipant requiring such services. Section 50001 of Title V of the Act requires that regulationsbe issued to ensure exclusion of violent offenders from thesefunded programs. This proposed rule responds to that requirement.To more fully develop and define the grant program and to providedirection and guidance to potential applicants, programguidelines, will be issued subsequent to the publication of thisproposed rule. This Supplementary Information section isintended, in part, to elicit comment on a broad range of issuesrelevant to the development and implementation of those programguidelines. Statement of the Problem More than half of all individuals brought into the criminaljustice system have substance abuse problems. Many of theseindividuals are non-violent offenders who repeatedly cyclethrough the court, corrections, and probation systems withouthelp to change their behavior. The underlying problem of suchnon-violent substance abusing offenders frustrates and inhibitsjudicial effectiveness. All too often, the non-violent drugoffender faces little certainty of punishment and represents along-term, recurring problem for both the criminal justice systemand society. In too many cases, the criminal justice system fails tosubject non-violent, drug abusing offenders to interventionmeasures that provide the mix of services and sanctions necessaryto change their behavior, or if necessary, coerce abstinence.Some courts and prosecutors, however, have cost-effcctivelyaddressed the problem through the use of treatment drug courts.Their results suggest that "drug courts" cansignificantly enhance the offender's opportunity to break thecycle of substance abuse and crime. Those who are coming intocontact with the criminal justice system for the first time maybe particularly susceptible to effective early intervention. Indeed, research and evaluation demonstrate that the"drug court" approach is effective in reducing bothdrug abuse and drug-related crime. The Drug Court discretionarygrant program of Title V seeks to support the development ofinnovative measures that provide courts additional resources toassure certainty of punishment for drug abusing offenders throughthe integrated administration of services and sanctions,including close supervision and coerced abstinence. The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 The Department of Justice (Department) recognizes that nosingle model exists for an effective drug court. To the contrary,the Department believes there may be a variety of validapproaches that deal effectively with non-violent offenders withsubstance abuse problems. Consequently, the Drug Court grantprogram will maintain flexibility in providing funds to supportthe development of a variety of initiatives that coordinatetreatment and coerced abstinence. The Department also recognizes the great diversity in thestructure and operation of state and local courts and criminaljustice systems. Hence, the Department is committed to a flexibleapproach that allows jurisdictions to tailor local initiatives tobest suit their needs and local conditions. Program flexibility,however, is necessarily balanced by statutory requirementsconcerning the design and administration of the funded programs.Accordingly, Drug Court programs that receive grant awards must: exclude violent offenders from program participation; include a long-term strategy and detailed implementation.plan; explain the applicant's inability to fund the program adequately without Federal assistance; use Federal support to supplement, and not supplant, State, Indian tribal, and local sources of funding that would otherwise be available; identify related governmental or community initiatives which complement or will be coordinated with the proposal; consult with all affected agencies and insure that there will be appropriate coordination with all, affected agencies in the implementation of the program; certify, that participating offenders will receive continuing judicial supervision by one or more designated judges with responsibility for the drug court program; specify plans for obtaining necessary support and continuing the proposed program following the conclusion of Federal support; and describe the methodology that will be used in evaluating the program. Consistent with Congressional intent, program evaluation willbe crucial. Grant recipients will be required to cooperate with anational evaluation team throughout their involvement with theprogram. Recipients will also be required to provide forindependent evaluation of the impact and effectiveness of theirfunded programs. The following issues will be especiallyimportant in determining whether programs receiving grants underthis initiative are effective: (1) reduction in recidivism ratesof program participants, (2) maintenance of acceptable substanceabuse treatment completion rates among program participants, (3)decreased drug use by program participants, and (4) maintenanceof a cost effective program in relation to the overall criminaljustice system. FY 1995 Drug Court Initiative The Fiscal Year 1995 Department of Justice AppropriationsAct, Public Law 103-317, has allocated $29 million for the DrugCourt grant programs. Eligibility of applicants to receive grantswill be based on requirements of the statute and theseregulations, as well as assurances and certifications specifiedin detailed program guidelines and application materials thatwill be available in early 1995 for the Fiscal Year 1995 DrugCourt initiative. While detailed program guidelines will follow the publicationof this notice of proposed rulemaking, the Department has madesome broad programmatic decisions upon which it welcomes comment.Three types of funding will be available under this programduring Fiscal Year 1995. First, planning funding will beavailable for those jurisdictions that express interest ininitiating a drug court but have not engaged in the comprehensiveplanning necessary to make such a program successful. Second,jurisdictions currently operating drug court programs may seekfunding to expand enhalace, or augment these ongoing efforts.Finally, for those jurisdictions that have engaged (or arecurrently engaged) in a comprehensive drug court planningprocess, funding may be available to implement the plans theirefforts have produced. Call For Comments Concerning The Drug Court Initiative Substance abuse-related offender case management is primarilya state and local issue; thus, the Drug Court grant programcontemplates collaboration between federal and state and localagencies. State and local government officials were involved inCongressional hearings and meetings that guided the developmentof this legislation and will continue to be involved as theDepartment moves forward in developing this regulation,establishing policy guidance, and implementing programguidelines. At this time, comments are welcome regarding thebasic program design requirements described in Section 93.4 ofthe proposed rule and to the entire scope of the program. Administrative Requirements This regulation has been drafted and reviewed in accordancewith Executive Order 12866,  1 (b), Principles ofRegulation. This rule is not a "significant regulatoryaction" under Executive Order 12866,  3(f),Regulatory Planning and Review, and accordingly, this rule hasnot been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget. The Assistant Attorney General for the Office of JusticePrograms, in accordance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5U.S.C. S 605(b)), has reviewed this regulation, and by approvingit, certifies that this regulation will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. Subpart A-Drug Courts 93.1 Purpose. This part sets forth requirements and procedures to ensurethat grants to States, State courts, local courts, units of localgovernment, and Indian tribal governments, acting directly orthrough agreements with other public or private entities, excludeviolent offenders from participation in programs authorized andfunded under this part. 93.2 Statutory Authority. This program is authorized under the Violent Crime Controland Law Enforcement Act of 1994, Title V, Public Law 103-322, 108Stat. 1796, (September 13, 1994), 42 U.S.C. 3796ii-3796ii-8. 93.3 Definitions. (a) "State" has the same meaning asset forth in Section 901(a)(2) of the Omnibus Crime Control andSafe Streets Act of 1968, as amended. (b) "Unit of Local Government" hasthe same meaning as set forth in Section 901 (a) (3) of theOmnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as amended. (c) "Assistant Attorney General" meansthe Assistant Attorney General for the Office of JusticePrograms. (d) "Violent offender" means a personwho either - (1) is currently charged with or convicted of an offenseduring the course of which: (i) the person carried, possessed, or used a firearm or otherdangerous weapon; or (ii) there occurred the use of force against the person ofanother; or (iii) there occurred the death of, or serious bodily injuryto, any person; (iv) without regard to whether proof of any of the elementsdescribed herein is required to convict; or (2) has previously been convicted of a felony crime ofviolence involving the use or attempted use of force against aperson with the intent to cause death or serious bodily harm. 93.4 Grant Authority. (a) The Assistant Attorney General may make grants to States,State courts, local courts, units of local government, and Indiantribal governments, acting directly or through agreements withother public or private entities, for programs that involve: (1) continuing judicial supervision over offenders withsubstance abuse problems who are not violent offenders, and (2) the integrated administration of other sanctions andservices, which shall include-- (i) mandatory periodic testing for the use of controlledsubstances or other addictive substances during any period ofsupervised release or probation for each participant; (ii) substance abuse treatment for each participant; (iii) diversion, probation, or other supervised releaseinvolving the possibility of prosecution, confinement, orincarceration based on noncompliance with program requirements orfailure to show satisfactory progress; and (iv) programmatic, offender management, and aftercareservices such as relapse prevention, health care, education,vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and childcare or other family support services for each participant whorequires such services. (b) Applications for grants under this program shall be madeat such times and in such form as may be specified in guidelinesor notices published by the Assistant Attorney General.Applications will be evaluated according to the statutoryrequirements of the Act and the programmatic goals specified inthe applicable guidelines. Grantees must comply with allstatutory and program requirements applicable to grants underthis program. 93.5 Exclusion of Violent Offenders. (a) The Assistant Attorney General will ensure that grants toStates, State courts, local courts, units of local government,and Indian tribal governments, acting directly or throughagreements with other public or private entities, exclude violentoffenders from programs authorized and funded under this Part. (b) No recipient of a grant made under the authority of thisPart shall permit a violent offender to participate in anyprogram receiving funding pursuant to this Part. (c) Applicants must certify as part of the applicationprocess that violent offenders will not participate in programsauthorized and funded under this Part. The required certificationshall be in such form and contain such assurances as theAssistant Attorney General may require to carry out therequirements of this Part. (d) If the Assistant Attorney General determines that one ormore violent offenders are participating in a program receivingfunding under this part, such funding shall be promptlysuspended, pending the termination of participation by thosepersons deemed ineligible to participate under these regulations. (e) The Assistant Attorney General may carry out or makearrangements for evaluations and request information fromprograms that receive support under this part to ensure thatviolent offenders are excluded from participating in programshereunder. Subpart B - [Reserved] List of Subjects Grant Programs, Judicial Administration For the reasons set out in the preamble, Title 28, Chapter 1,of the Code of Federal Regulations is proposed to be amended byadding a new Part 93, consistent of Subpart A as set forth below. PART 93 - PROVISIONS IMPLEMENTING THE VIOLENT CRIMECONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT ACT OF 1994 Subpart A-Drug Courts Sec. 93.1 Purpose 93.2 Statutory Authority 93.3 Definitions 93.4 Grant Authority 93.5 Exclusion of Violent Offenders Subpart B - [Reserved] Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3796ii-3796ii-8 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-6IA031-000655-B043-234http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/dojpr1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114217 text/html 6055HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:42:09 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:34 GMTContent-length: 5838 THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREW ALMOST 9 PERCENT LASTYEAR THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREW ALMOST 9 PERCENT LAST YEAR U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EDT BJS WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 9, 1995 202/307-0784 WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The nation's state and federal prisonshad to find room for 83,294 more inmates last year--the secondlargest annual increase in history and just 1,470 fewer than the84,764 increase recorded in 1989. The total number of men andwomen in prison last December 31 was 1,053,738--a new record.Overall, almost 1.5 million people were incarcerated in theUnited States in 1994. State and federal prisons, which primarilyhold convicted felons serving longer sentences, contained abouttwo-thirds of the total. Locally operated jails, which primarilyhold people awaiting trial or serving sentences of a year orless, held the other third. At the end of 1994 state prisons held 958,704 men and womenand federal prisons held 95,034 inmates. California (125,605) andTexas (118,195) together held more than one in every five inmatesin the nation. Seventeen states, each holding fewer than 5,000inmates, accounted for 4 percent of all prisoners. Prison populations increased by at least 10 percent in 16states last year. Texas reported the largest growth (28 percent),followed by Georgia (20 percent). Alaska and Connecticut reported fewer prisoners who had been sentencedto more than a year. The average sentence length and time served for stateprisoners has remained stable in recent years. Between 1985 and1992, the years for which comparable data are available, half ofthe state prisoners served at least 48 months. In the federal system, however, the "truth insentencing" provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984have contributed to increasing the median time served in prisonfrom 15 months in 1986 to 24 months in 1992. The incarceration rate for prisoners sentenced to more than ayear reached a record 387 per 100,000 U.S. residents lastDecember 31. States with the highest incarceration rates wereTexas (636 inmates per 100,000 residents), Louisiana (530) andOklahoma (508). North Dakota (78) had the lowest, followed byMinnesota (100) and West Virginia (106). Since 1980 per capita incarceration rates rose the most inthe South (from 188 to 451) and West (from 105 to 333). The ratein the Northeast rose from 87 to 285, and the rate in the Midwestfrom 109 to 297. In absolute numbers, violent offenders were the greatestcontributors to state prison inmate growth. Between 1980 and1993, the number of violent offenders grew by an estimated221,300, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) estimated using1993 data. More than a quarter of the state and federal inmates were inprison for drug offenses (234,600 prisoners) in 1993. Prisonersserving a drug sentence increased from 8 percent of the state andfederal prison population in 1980 to 26 percent in 1993. Infederal prisons, inmates sentenced for drug law violations werethe single largest group--60 percent in 1993, up from 25 percentin 1980. At the end of the year, states reported they were operatingbetween 17 percent and 29 percent over capacity, while thefederal system was operating at 25 percent over capacity. Because of prison construction and the creation of new prisonbeds, the ratio of the inmate population to the capacity of stateprisons has remained almost the same since 1990. The average growth in the number of state and federalprisoners sentenced to at least a year's incarceration was equalto the need for 1,542 more beds per week in 1994. During 1994 almost 5 percent of all state prisoners--48,949inmates in 21 jurisdictions--were held in local jails or otherfacilities because of prison crowding. The number of female inmates grew 10.6 percent last year,compared to an 8.5 percent increase among male inmates. OnDecember 31, 1994, there were 64,403 women in state and federalprisons--6.1 percent of all prisoners. The rate of incarcerationfor inmates serving a sentence of more than a year is 746 malesper 100,000 U.S. male residents, vs. 45 females per 100,000female population. Between 1980 and 1993, the number of white and black femaleinmates grew at a faster pace than the number of male inmates ineither racial group. During this period the number of white malesgrew 163 percent, the number of black males grew 217 percent, thenumber of white females 327 percent, and the number of blackfemales 343 percent. An estimated 1,471 blacks per 100,000 blackresidents and 207 whites per 100,000 white residents wereincarcerated in the nation's prisons on December 31, 1993. The report, "Prisoners in 1994" (NCJ-151654), waswritten by BJS statisticians Allen J. Beck and Darrell K.Gilliard. Single copies may be obtained from the BJSClearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179.The telephone number is 1-800/732-3277. Fax orders to410/792-4358. Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can beobtained in spreadsheet files on 5.25 and 3.5 inch diskettes bycalling 202/616-3283. After hours contact: Stu Smith at 301-983-9354 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-7IA031-000655-B043-266http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/dojpr2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114226 text/html 4331HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:42:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:30 GMTContent-length: 4114 STATE AND FEDERAL PRISON POPULATION TOPS ONE MILLION STATE AND FEDERAL PRISON POPULATION TOPS ONE MILLION U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The nation's prison population exceeds 1million for the first time in history, the Department of Justiceannounced today. At the end of June, 1,012,851 men and women wereincarcerated in state and federal prisons. State prisons held919,143 inmates and federal prisons held 93,708 inmates.California (124,813) and Texas (100,136) together accounted formore than one in five inmates in the country. The prison population grew by almost 40,000 inmates duringthe first half of 1994, the equivalent of more than 1,500 aweek--or three additional 500-bed prisons. During the last 12 months the prison population expanded bymore than 71,000, the second largest annual increase everrecorded. This growth was slightly greater than the annual growthin the preceding 12 months (69,525) and exceeds by 11 percent theaverage annual growth (63,793) during the previous five years,that is from July 1988 to June 1993. The incarceration rate of state and federal prisonerssentenced to more than a year reached a record 373 prisoners per100,000 U.S. residents last June. The states with the highestincarceration rates were Texas (545 per 100,000), Louisiana(514), South Carolina (504) and Oklahoma (501). During the 12 months preceding June 30, 1994, eleven statesrecorded prisoner growth rates of 10 percent or more, led byConnecticut (20 percent), Texas (18 percent), and Tennessee (15percent). In the last decade the U.S. prison population doubled on aper capita basis. During this 10-year period, the incarcerationrate doubled both for white inmates and black inmates. At the endof last year (the latest available data) there were 1,432 blackinmates per 100,000 black U.S. residents and 203 white inmatesper 100,000 white residents. During the first six months of 1994, the number of femaleinmates grew 6.2 percent, compared to a 3.9 percent increaseamong male inmates. On June 30, 1994, there were 61,872 women in state andfederal prisons--6.1 percent of all prisoners. The maleincarceration rate, 719 per 100,000 male residents, was more than16 times higher than the female incarceration rate--43 per100,000 female residents. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) collects state andfederal prisoner data twice a year--on June 30 and December 31.These counts are designed to provide regular updates to thepublic on the number of people confined by state and federalauthority. The data have been published since 1926. The report was prepared by Allen J. Beck and Thomas P.Bonczar, statisticians in the Department's Bureau of JusticeStatistics (BJS). Data from tables and graphs used in many BJSreports can be obtained in spreadsheet files on 5 1/4 and 3 1/2inch diskettes by calling 202-307-0784. To receive a fax copy of the 3 tables with complete statedata call 301-216-1827. Single copies of other BJS bulletins andreports may be obtained from the BJS Clearinghouse, Box 179,Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179. The telephone number is1-800-732-3277. Fax orders to 410-792-4358. For additionalinformation and statistics on drugs and crime call the BJS Drugsand Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse on 1-800-666-3332. After hours contact: Stu Smith 301-983-9354. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-8IA031-000655-B043-295http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/dojpr3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114240 text/html 4606HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:42:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:26 GMTContent-length: 4389 THE NATION'S CORRECTIONAL POPULATION TOPS 5 MILLION THE NATION'S CORRECTIONAL POPULATION TOPS 5 MILLION U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EDT BJS SUNDAY, AUGUST 27, 1995 202/307-0784 WASHINGTON, D.C. -- More than 5.1 million Americans-or almost2.7 percent of the adult population--were under some form ofcorrectional supervision last year, the Department of Justicereported today. Almost three-quarters of these men and women werebeing supervised in the community on probation or parole. Theothers were confined in jail or prison. The number of adults incarcerated or under supervision in thecommunity increased 3.9 percent during 1994. Since 1980 thenumber has almost tripled, growing at an average annual rate of7.6 percent. At the end of last year, 2,962,000 adults were on probationunder community supervision rather than incarceration. Anadditional 690,000 adults were on parole--conditional supervisedrelease after serving a prison term but subject to being returnedto incarceration for rule violations or other offenses.Three-quarters of probationers and parolees were required tomaintain regular contact with a supervising agency. The otheroffenders were not required to have regular contact (9 percent)or had failed to report and could not be located (9 percent). Texas had the largest number of adults on probation andparole with more than 503,000 under such supervision, followed byCalifornia with 370,000. At the end of 1994, more than 3.8percent of all adults in Texas were on probation or parole. Thirteen states reported that fewer than 1 percent of theiradult populations were on probation or parole. North Dakota hadthe lowest probation and parole supervision rate (450 offendersper 100,000 adults), followed by West Virginia (517), Mississippi(552) and Kentucky (553). Overall, the state and federal probation and parolepopulations rose by 2.0 percent during 1994. Six states reportedincreases of at least 10 percent in their probation populations,and 11 reported similar increases in their parole populations.Alabama, with a 14.5 percent rise in their probation population,and Iowa, with a 27.1 percent rise in the parole population, ledthe nation. Twelve states and the Federal probation system reported adecrease in the number of adults on probation, led by SouthDakota (down 6.2 percent), California (down 5.8 percent) and theFederal system (down 6.8 percent). Half of all offenders on probation in 1994 were on probationfor a felony. A quarter were on probation for a misdemeanor. Oneof every seven probationers had been convicted of driving whileintoxicated or under the influence of alcohol. Almost all of theoffenders on parole (95 percent) had served a felony sentence injail or prison. Approximately, 21 percent of the nation's probationers werewomen, as were 10 percent of the parolees. About 58 percent of the adults on probation were white, and45 percent were black. Ninety percent of adults on parole weremen. Fifty-one percent of adults on parole were white, 45 percentwere black. These data were collected and analyzed by Darrell Gilliardand Allen Beck, statisticians at the Bureau of Justice Statistics(BJS). The NCJ number is NCJ-156432. Additional information aboutDepartment of Justice Statistics may be obtained from the BJSClearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701- 1079.The telephone number is 1-800/732-3277. Fax orders to410/792-4358. Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can beobtained in spreadsheet files on 5 and 3 inch diskettes bycalling 202/616-3283. After hours contact: Doug Johnson at 703/644-0450 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-9IA031-000655-B043-323http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/denf90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114255 text/html 42040HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:42:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:58 GMTContent-length: 41822 Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990 Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report Drug Enforcement by Police and Sheriffs' Department, 1990: A LEMAS Report May 1992 NCJ-134505 Full text with tables available from: BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 1-800-732-3277 Box 6000 Rockville, MD 10850 Few issues are as important in law enforcement today as howgovernments at all levels respond to the challenge to rid our society ofillicit drugs. This report is drawn from the second triennial surveyconducted by the Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics program.The survey included new questions about drugs seized, drug enforcementtechniques, and testing of arrestees and employees. State and local lawenforcement agencies have provided a national understanding of theinnovations in the fight against drugs-special drug enforcement units,interagency task forces, and drug asset forfeiture programs. We salute thedepartments in their cooperation with LEMAS and trust that this profile willprove valuable in their assessments and planning. Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director Drug Enforcement by Police and Sheriffs' Department, 1990: A LEMAS Report By Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D. BJS Statistician In 1990, about 9,300 local police departments and 2,500sheriffs' departments had primary responsibility for the enforcement ofdrug laws. Collectively, these agencies employed 466,000 full-timeofficers, 92% of all local police and sheriffs' officers nationwide. Inaddition, 34 State police departments, employing 43,000 officers, had primarydrug enforcement responsibilities. This report presents information collected from State andlocal law enforcement agencies with primary drug enforcementresponsibilities. It includes information on types of illegal drugs seized,operation of special drug units, multi-agency task force participation, andreceipts from drug asset forfeiture programs. For all agencies the report also summarizes how drug testingpolicies apply to arrestees, applicants for sworn positions, and employees. Major findings include the following: *Among agencies with primary drug enforcementresponsibilities that served 50,000 or more residents, over 90% of the police departmentsand over 80% of the sheriffs' departments operated special drugenforcement units. *Nationwide, more than 16,000 local police and sheriffs'officers, and over 2,000 State police officers were assigned full time tospecial drug units. *Half of local police and sheriffs' departments with primarydrug enforcement responsibilities were participating in amulti-agency drug enforcement task force. These 6,500 agencies had assignednearly 10,000 officers full time to such task forces. *Among departments with primary drug enforcementresponsibilities, over 90% of the police departments serving a population of 50,000 ormore, and over 90% of the sheriffs' departments serving 250,000 or moreresidents, received money or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program. *Among the State police departments with primary drugenforcement responsibilities, 85% operated a special drug unit, 91%participated in a multi-agency drug enforcement task force, and 94% receivedmoney or goods from drug asset forfeitures. *About 2 in 3 State police departments and 2 in 5 localpolice and sheriffs' departments reported that at least some of thepersons they arrested were required to take a test for illegal drugs. *A majority of State police departments and local policedepartments serving a population of 25,000 or more required that allapplicants for sworn positions take a test for illegal drugs. *About 3% of local law enforcement officers worked foragencies that had a mandatory drug testing program for regular field officers;17% were employed by agencies that had a random selection testingprogram for officers. *Nonprobationary officers could be dismissed after onepositive test in about two-thirds of local police and sheriffs' departmentsand in about three-fourths of State police departments. Nearly alldepartments had a policy specifying dismissal for two positive drug tests. *Treatment alternatives were a part of the drug testingpolicy for employees in about half of State and local police departmentsand two- fifths of sheriffs' departments. Such alternatives weregenerally limited to the first positive test results only. THE LEMAS SURVEY The 1990 Law Enforcement Management and AdministrativeStatistics (LEMAS) survey questionnaire was mailed to all 780 State and locallaw enforcement agencies with 100 or more sworn officers and to a sample of2,338 agencies with fewer than 100 officers. Of the 3,118 agencies receivingthe LEMAS questionnaire, 2,945 (94.5%) responded. The survey used asampling frame based on personnel data from the 1986 Directory Survey of LawEnforcement Agencies. (See Methodology for further discussion ofsampling.) The local police departments included in this report aregeneral purpose agencies operated by municipal or county governments. TheState police departments included in this report are the primary generalpurpose agencies in all States except Hawaii, which does not have aState police department. This report presents only data collected on drug-relatedpolicies. The BJS Bulletins State and Local Police Departments, 1990(NCJ-133284) and Sheriffs' Departments, 1990 (NCJ-133283) present other datacollected in the LEMAS survey. The first section of this report, on drug enforcementactivities, includes only agencies with primary drug enforcement responsibilities.Agencies involved in drug enforcement only in a backup capacity, orthose whose responsibilities are limited to traffic enforcement, jailoperation, court operations or other such duties are not included. The secondsection, on drug testing policies, includes all local police, sheriffs',and State police departments. Drug enforcement activities State and local law enforcement agencies made an estimated1.1 million arrests for drug law violations during 1990, according to theUniform Crime Reports (UCR) of the FBI. Excluding traffic violations, 1 inevery 13 arrests made during the year was for a drug-related offense. Local police and sheriffs' departments During 1990, 77% of the Nation's local police and sheriffs'departments reported they had primary responsibility for the enforcementof drug laws in areas under their jurisdiction. These 11,800 agenciesemployed 466,000 full-time officers, 92% of all local officers nationwide. Over 9,000 local police departments, employing 96% of alllocal police officers, reported they had primary drug enforcementresponsibilities. Nearly all of the police departments in jurisdictions of10,000 or more in population had such responsibilities. These 2,800 departmentsemployed approximately 300,000 full-time officers. Departments intowns with a population of 2,500 to 9,999 (83%), or a population less than2,500 (60%), were less likely to have primary drug enforcementresponsibilities. These 6,500 departments in smaller communities employed about46,000 officers. About 2,500 (81%) of the sheriffs' departments nationwidereported having primary drug enforcement responsibilities in 1990. Sheriffs'departments located in jurisdictions with a population of under 100,000were somewhat more likely to have drug enforcement responsibilities thanthose in larger jurisdictions (83% versus 65%); however, the departmentsserving a population of 100,000 or more employed more officers thanthose in smaller jurisdictions (77,000 versus 42,000). Local police and sheriffs' departments with primary drugenforcement responsibilities seized numerous types of illegal drugsduring the 12-month period ending on June 30, 1990. Across all categories,departments in larger jurisdictions were more likely to have seized eachtype of drug than those in smaller jurisdictions. Most of the police and sheriffs' departments serving apopulation of 50,000 or more seized nearly all of the types of drugs asked aboutin the survey. In the smallest jurisdictions, marijuana and cocaine were theonly drugs seized by more than a third of all departments, and onlymarijuana was seized by more than half. Eighty-six percent of local police depart-ments and 94% ofsheriffs' departments made seizures of marijuana--higher percentagesthan for any other drug. The percentage of departments making marijuanaseizures was 94% or higher for departments in all population categories,except for sheriffs' departments serving a population of 10,000 or less(88%) and police departments serving a population of 2,500 or less(70%). According to UCR data for 1990, 30% of all arrests for druglaw violations were marijuana-related. About 4 in 5 marijuana arrests werefor possession, and the remainder, for offenses related totrafficking. Cocaine was seized by 72% of local police and sheriffs'departments, the second highest total percentage for any drug type. All policedepartments serving a population of 100,000 or more, and over 90% ofthose serving 10,000 to 99,999 residents, reported making seizures ofcocaine. Over 95% of the sheriffs' departments serving 50,000 or more residentsreported making seizures of cocaine. Only among police departmentsserving under 2,500 residents (39%), and sheriffs' departments servingunder 10,000 residents (50%) did less than 75% of the departments in apopulation category report making cocaine seizures. Among police andsheriffs' departments that did seize cocaine, nearly all of themreported seizing the powdered form of the drug, and a majority of them also seizedcrack cocaine. A majority of the police departments serving a population of25,000 or more made heroin seizures, including all of those serving 500,000or more residents. More than two-thirds of the sheriffs' departmentsin jurisdictions with a population of 250,000 or more alsoreported seizing heroin. Amphetamine seizures were made by 40% of all police andsheriffs' departments, including more than 70% of those serving apopulation of 50,000 or more. More than half of the departments serving apopulation of 50,000 or more also reported making seizures of barbiturates,methampheta- mines, and LSD. PCP was seized by most of the policedepartments serving a population of 250,000 or more and the sheriffs' departmentsserving 500,000 or more. An aspect of the drug enforcement effort in manyjurisdictions involves the operation of special drug enforcement units.Where they exist, such units are an integral part of the law enforcementresponse to drug trafficking and use. Since they focus directly onconducting sophisticated investigations of drug traffickers, thesespecial units accumulate substantial knowledge about drugs in general andabout drug- related activity in the community. Nationwide, an estimated 3,270 local police and sheriffs'departments were operating a special drug unit during the 12-month periodending on June 30, 1990 (table 3). Overall, these agencies had over 16,000officers assigned to special drug units on a full-time basis. Included in thistotal were an estimated 12,715 police officers and 3,805 sheriffs'officers. Over 90% of local police departments serving 50,000 or moreresidents were operating a special drug unit, and 75% of all local policeofficers assigned to a drug unit nationwide were in one of thesedepartments. Police departments serving 1 million or more residents hadthe largest special drug units, an average of 240 full-time officerseach. These 13 departments accounted for a fourth of the local policeofficers assigned to drug units nationwide. A majority (62%) of the police departments in jurisdictionswith 25,000 to 49,999 residents also operated a special drug unit. Localpolice departments in small towns were the least likely to operate aspecial drug unit. About 19% of those serving a population of 2,500 to9,999 and 5% of those serving a population of under 2,500 had such a unit. Among sheriffs' departments, over 90% of those serving apopulation of 500,000 or more and over 75% of those serving a population of50,000 to 499,999 operated a special drug unit. About 44% of thesheriffs' departments serving a population of 25,000 to 49,999 operateda drug unit. In the smallest jurisdictions (under 10,000 residents), 11%of the sheriffs' departments had a drug unit. The average size of special drug units in sheriffs'departments ranged from 34 full-time officers in departments serving a population of1 million or more to 1 officer in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000residents. Many local police and sheriffs' departments operated othertypes of special units that were important to their drug control effort. Over90% of large police and sheriffs' departments (100 or more officers) withprimary drug enforcement responsibilities operated a special unit for drugeducation in schools during 1990, and nearly 60% were operating a specialunit on gangs. Law enforcement agencies recognize the value of coordinatingtheir efforts to reduce drug abuse. For many police and sheriffs'departments, this coordination involves participating in a multiagency drugenforcement task force. Organizationally, such task forces often involve thecooperation of law enforcement agencies across jurisdictional boundaries andgovernmental levels. The police and sheriffs' departments in multiagency taskforces develop coordinated enforcement strategies aimed at accumulating theevidence needed to arrest, prosecute, and convict known drugdistributors. Typically, these strategies involve the use of informants,surveillance, and undercover operations. They may also include complexfinancial investigations designed to trace drug distribution networks.The resources of special drug units often play an important role inimplementing task force strategies. Multiagency drug task forces may alsoattempt to reduce problems associated with the illegal drug trade by includingnot only law enforcement agencies but also other types of governmentagencies, nonprofit organizations, business firms, and community groups. Bycoordinating education and health initiatives these task forces attempt toreduce the harm that illegal drugs do to the community. Among agencies with drug enforcement responsibilities, abouthalf of the local police departments and two-thirds of the sheriffs'departments participated in a task force during the 12-month periodending on June 30, 1990. Overall, an estimated 6,500 local police and sheriffs'departments participated in multiagency drug enforcement task forcesduring this time period. Over 85% of the police and sheriffs' departments in eachpopulation category of 100,000 or more participated in a task force,including over 95% of the departments serving a population of 500,000 ormore. Approximately 80% of the police and sheriffs' departmentsserving a population of 25,000 to 99,999, 65% of those serving apopulation of 10,000 to 24,999, and over 40% of those serving fewer than 10,000residents participated in a task force. During the 12-month period ending June 30, 1990,approximately 6,100 local police officers were assigned to a multiagency drug taskforce full time. Although police departments serving a million or moreresidents had the most officers assigned to a task force on average (29), overhalf of all local police officers assigned to task forces nationwide wereemployed by departments serving a population of under 25,000. Sheriffs' departments had about 3,500 officers assigned fulltime to drug task forces, ranging from an average of 10 officers perdepartment in jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents, to an averageof 1 officer per department in jurisdictions with fewer than 50,000residents. In addition to multiagency task forces, another innovationfor drug enforcement in many jurisdictions is the use of drug assetforfeiture sanctions. Most States have laws that allow the government toseize convicted drug traffickers' cash, bank accounts, planes,boats, cars, homes, and other items purchased with proceeds from theillicit drug trade. State laws vary regarding the disposition of forfeitedassets. Most State statutes require that outstanding liens be paid first, andmany States require that all forfeited drug assets go to the State and/orlocal treasury. In some States, law enforcement agencies may keepproperty such as cars, planes, and boats for official use. In other States,the agencies can keep all property, cash, and proceeds from sales of whatis forfeited. About 4,700 local police and sheriffs' departments reportedthe receipt of money or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program duringfiscal 1990. This represented 41% of all local law enforcement agencieswith primary drug enforcement responsibilities. A higher percentage ofsheriffs' departments (51%) than police departments (38%) had suchreceipts. The percentage of local police departments with assetforfeiture receipts was over 95% in jurisdictions with 50,000 to 999,999residents. Among departments serving 1 million or more residents and thoseserving 25,000 to 49,999 residents, about 85% received money or goods from anasset forfeiture program. Receiving money or goods from an assetforfeiture program was least likely for police departments serving apopulation of under 2,500 (11%). About 95% of sheriffs' departments in jurisdictions with250,000 or more residents, and about 85% of those serving 50,000 to 249,999residents had asset forfeiture pro-gram receipts during fiscal 1990. In thesmallest jurisdictions (under 10,000 residents), an estimated 27% ofthe sheriffs' departments received money or goods from an asset forfeitureprogram. State police departments Thirty-four State police departments, employing approximately43,000 full- time officers, reported they had primary responsibility forthe enforcement of drug laws. Number of Full-time State police sworn officers departments employed Total 49 52,372 Departments with primary responsibility for drug enforcement 34 43,118 All 34 of these departments reported they made marijuana andcocaine seizures during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1990(table 6). A large majority of them also seized amphetamines (94%), heroin(91%), LSD (88%), methamphetamines (88%), barbiturates (85%), and PCP(74%). Like those of local law enforcement agencies, State policedrug enforcement strategies often involve the operation of special units,participation in multiagency drug enforcement task forces, and participationin a drug asset forfeiture program. Twenty-nine (85%) of the State police departments that hadresponsibility for enforcing drug laws were operating special drugenforcement units. These 29 departments had assigned a total of 2,138 officersto these units on a full-time basis--an average of 74 officers perdepartment. Most of these departments (82%) also operated special unitsfor drug education in schools, and 29% of them had special units forgangs. Thirty-one of the departments (91%) participated in amultiagency drug enforcement task force during fiscal 1990. These departmentshad 900 officers assigned to drug task forces, an average of 29 perdepartment. All but two of the departments (94%) responsible for drugenforcement reported they received money or goods from a drug assetforfeiture program during the year. Drug testing policies Local police and sheriffs' departments Nearly 40% of local police and sheriffs' departments reportedthat at least some of their arrestees were tested for illegal drugs. Drugtesting of arrestees was most likely to exist in police departmentsserving a population of 500,000 or more (56%) and in sheriffs'departments serving a population of 1 million or more (60%). Among local police departments that reported testing ofarrestees, about 1 in 8 were responsible for operation of the testing program.In sheriffs' departments with arrestee testing, about 1 in 4 operated thetesting program. About a fourth of both local police and sheriffs' departmentsrequired all applicants for sworn positions to submit to a drug test. Theprevalence of drug testing of applicants increased with the size of thepopulation served. Among local police departments, 80% of those servinga population of 250,000 or more required all applicants for swornpositions to be tested for illegal drugs. About 70% of those serving a population of50,000 to 249,999 and just under 50% of those serving a population of10,000 to 49,999 had such a requirement. The percentage of policedepartments with a mandatory drug testing policy for applicants was smallestamong those serving 2,500 to 9,999 residents (25%) and those servingfewer than 2,500 residents (14%). Slightly more than 40% of sheriffs' departments serving apopulation of 100,000 or more had a policy requiring drug testing of allapplicants for sworn positions. About 30% of departments serving from 25,000to 100,000 residents had such a policy. Sheriffs' departments serving apopulation of less than 25,000 (15%) were the least likely to require allapplicants for sworn positions to undergo tests for illegal drugs. Small percentages of all local police and sheriffs'departments had a mandatory drug testing requirement for probationary officers,regular field officers, candidates for promotion, officers in drug-relatedpositions, or civilian personnel. In every population category, less than25% of the police and sheriffs' departments had mandatory drug testingfor the above personnel types, except the following: Probationary officersand officers in drug-related positions in police departments serving apopulation of 500,000 or more. Small percentages of local police and sheriff's departmentswere also using random selection to test applicants or employees for illegaldrugs. An estimated 2% of all departments tested applicants throughthis method, and the percentage of departments with random drug testing was nomore than 5% for any personnel position. Random selection testing was mostcommon for officers in drug-related positions employed by policedepartments serving a population of 1 million or more (36%). About 10% of all local police and sheriffs' departmentsrequired regular field officers suspected of using illegal drugs to take adrug test. The percentage of departments with suspicion-based testing wassimilar for other types of employees. About 2% of the departments hadsuch a policy for applicants. Departments in larger jurisdictions were more likely thanthose in smaller jurisdictions to have a suspicion-based drug testing program.For example, among local police departments, about two-thirds of localpolice departments serving 250,000 or more residents authorizedtesting of regular field officers suspected of drug use, compared to about halfof those serving a population of 50,000 to 249,999, about a third ofthose serving a population of 25,000 to 49,999, and a ninth of those servingpopulation of 2,500 to 9,999. In police departments serving a population ofunder 2,500, roughly 1 in 30 authorized testing of regular field officerssuspected of illegal drug use. About 40% of the sheriffs' departments serving a populationof 1 million or more had a policy authorizing testing of regular fieldofficers suspected of illegal drug use. About 30% of the departments serving apopulation of 500,000 to 999,999, and 20% of those serving a population of100,000 to 499,999 had such a policy. Less than 10% of the sheriffs'departments located in jurisdictions with fewer than 100,000 residentshad a policy that authorized drug testing of officers suspected of druguse. Nationwide, the local police departments that had asuspicion-based drug testing program for regular field officers employed 50% ofall local police officers. The sheriffs' departments with such a testingprogram employed 31% of all sheriff's officers. An estimated 17% of all localpolice officers and 12% of sheriffs' officers worked for departmentsthat had a random selection program for regular field officers. About 3%of local police officers and 4% of sheriffs' officers were employed bydepartments that had a mandatory drug testing requirement for fieldofficers. Local police departments that tested civilian employeessuspected of drug use employed 45% of all such employees nationwide. About 30%of civilian employees in sheriffs' departments worked in department witha suspicion- based testing program for civilians. Civilian employees in sheriffs' departments were more likelyto be a part of a random selection drug testing program than theircounterparts in local police departments (9% versus 3%). About 5% of the civilianemployees in local police and sheriffs' departments were subject to amandatory drug testing requirement. For comparison, the results of a 1988 survey conducted by theDepartment of Labor showed that 3% of private nonagricultural businesseshad a drug testing program of some type, including 43% of those with1,000 or more employees. Overall, about 20% of private sector employeesworked for a company with a drug testing program. (Bureau of LaborStatistics, Survey of Employer Anti-drug Programs, Report 760, January 1990.) Among local law enforcement agencies with an employee drugtesting program, an estimated 61% of the police departments and 69% of thesheriffs' departments specified dismissal as a possible disciplinarysanction against nonprobationary officers after one positive drug test. Local police officers testing positive for the first timewere most likely to face dismissal as a possible sanction in largerjurisdictions. All police departments serving a population of 1 million or morehad a policy specifying dismissal as a possible sanction after onepositive drug test, and 83% of those serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999had such a policy. Suspension was the most serious disciplinary sanctionspecified for an initial positive drug test in 14% of the police and sheriffs'departments that tested employees for illegal drugs. After a second positive drug test by a nonprobationaryofficer, the percentage of local law enforcement agencies specifyingdismissal as the most serious disciplinary sanction increased to 93% forpolice departments and to 98% for sheriffs' departments. Treatment was specified as a possible alternative fornonprobationary officers with positive drug test results in almost half ofthe local police and sheriffs' departments with a testing program. The drugtesting policies of local police departments specified treatmentalternatives more often than those of sheriffs' departments (49% versus 39%).Treatment alternatives were generally limited to the first offense. Among police departments, treatment alternatives were mostlikely to exist in jurisdictions with a population of 50,000 to 249,999,where two-thirds of them had such a policy. Among sheriffs' departments, thoseserving 500,000 to 999,999 residents (62%) were the most likely tohave treatment alternatives specified in their drug testing policy. Police departments serving a population of 1 million or more(20%) were the least likely of all local law enforcement agencies to specifytreatment as a possible alternative for officers who test positive fordrugs. State police departments Thirty-three (67%) of the 49 primary State police departmentsreported that at least some of the persons they arrested were being testedfor illegal drugs. Four (8%) of the departments reported that they hadprimary responsibility for operation of the testing program. Percent of departments in which at least some arrestees are tested Total 67% Agency-operated program 8 Not agency-operated 59 Just over half (55%) of State police departments reportedthey required drug tests of all applicants for sworn positions. Two (4%) ofthe departments reported they required all regular field officersto undergo tests for illegal drugs, and five (10%) tested all officersworking in drug-related positions. None of the State police departmentsreported having a mandatory drug testing policy for civilianpersonnel. Some State police departments used a random selection processto test probationary officers (12%), regular field officers (8%),candidates for promotion (8%), and officers working in drug-relatedpositions (10%). One department (2%) had a random selection drug testing programfor applicants, and two departments (4%) required civilian personnel to beincluded in a random selection drug testing program. Although no State police departments had a mandatory drugtesting requirement for civilian employees, nearly half (45%) of allcivilian State police employees worked in departments that tested civilianemployees suspected of using illegal drugs. A similar proportion ofsworn State police employees (53%) were subject to suspicion-based drugtesting. About 7% of State police officers were employed by departments withrandom selection testing for regular field officers and an equalpercentage worked in departments with a mandatory drug testing requirement forsuch officers. About three-fourths (77%) of the State police departmentswith a drug testing program specified dismissal as a possible sanctionagainst probationary officers after one positive drug test. After asecond offense, dismissal was a possible sanction specified by 91%of the departments. Half of the departments with employee drug testing specifiedtreatment as a possible alternative after the first offense. As in local lawenforcement agencies, treatment alternatives were generally not availableto State police officers who tested positive for drugs a second time. Methodology The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics(LEMAS) survey collects data from a nationally representative sample of thenearly 17,000 publicly funded State and local law enforcement agencies inthe United States. All 780 State and local law enforcement agencies in theUnited States with 100 or more sworn officers (as reported in the 1986 DirectorySurvey of Law Enforcement Agencies) received the full-length LEMASquestionnaire. The 780 self-representing (SR) agencies were supplemented by anationally representative sample of all agencies with fewer than 100sworn officers. These nonself-representing (NSR) agencies were chosen using astratified random sample with cells based on the type of agency (localpolice, sheriff, or special police), size of population served, andnumber of sworn officers. The 2,338 NSR agencies received a slightlyabbreviated LEMAS questionnaire, which did not contain items about jobclassifications, residency requirements, special pay, collective bargaining,police membership organizations, special units, or written policydirectives. The initial mailing of the survey questionnaire was conductedin July 1990. The pay period containing June 15, 1990, was used as thereference date for personnel-related questions and June 30, 1990, for otherquestions. The data were collected by the Bureau of the Census for theBureau of Justice Statistics. After two followup mailings and additional telephone calls asneeded, a final total of 2,945 agencies responded to the LEMASquestionnaire, including 738 SR agencies and 2,207 NSR agencies. The overallresponse rate was 94.5%. The final data-base includes responses from1,830 local police departments, 840 sheriffs' departments, 226 specialpolice departments, and the 49 primary State police departments. The base weight for all SR agencies is 1. For NSR local andspecial police departments, the base weight is 8.128, and for NSR sheriffs'departments it is 4.09857. The final weight associated with every agency,both SR and NSR, is the product of the base weight and a factor thatadjusted for any nonresponding agencies in each sample cell. This agencynonresponse factor was based on number of sworn officers for SR agencies and onnumber of agencies for NSR agencies. Some responding agencies did not completely answer the LEMASquestionnaire. When an agency did not supply a response to an item, a donoragency was randomly selected from responding agencies in the same samplecell. The donor agency's value for the item was placed into thenonresponding agency's response field with an indicator that the value hadbeen imputed. Complete documentation regarding sampling procedures andnon-response adjustments is available upon request. Because the data from agencies with fewer than 100 swornpersonnel were collected from a sample, the results are subject to samplingerror. All statements of comparison in this report have been tested toensure that observed differences between values are significant at 2standard errors (the 95-percent confidence level) or higher. References Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 1990. National Institute of Justice, Local-level drug enforcement:New drug strategies, March 1989. National Institute of Justice, Multijurisdictional drug lawenforcement strategies: Reducing supply and demand, December 1990. National Institute of Justice, The police and drugs,September 1989. How to order the data set Data utilized in this report are available from the NationalArchive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, P.O. Box1248, Ann Arbor, MI 481 106; 1-800-999-0960. The dataset is archived asLaw Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics, 1990(ICPSR 9749). Brian Reaves, BJS Statistician, wrote this report. Tom Hesteredited it. Pheny Z. Smith provided statistical review. Lawrence A.Greenfeld and Richard W. Dodge reviewed the publication. It was produced byMarilyn Marbrook, Priscilla Middleton, Betty Sherman, and Jayne Pugh.The data were collected by the Governments Division, Bureau of theCensus. May 1992, NCJ-134505 The Assistant Attorney General is responsible for matters ofadministration and management with respect to the OJP agencies: Bureau ofJustice Assistance, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Instituteof Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, andOffice for Victims of Crime. The Assistant Attorney General establishespolices and priorities consistent with statutory purposes of the OJPagencies and the priorities of the Department of Justice. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-10IA031-000655-B043-356http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/fedconvs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114327 text/html 1104HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:43:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:54 GMTContent-length: 888 Federal Convictions of Public Officials 1970 - 1988 Federal Convictions of Public Officials 1970 - 1988 Excerpted from THE ECONOMICS OF PROHIBITION, by Mark Thornton. Reference Source: USDoJ "Report to Congress on theActivities and Operations of the Public Integrity Section" CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-11IA031-000655-B043-381http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/JLCROWD.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122114345 text/html 26418HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:43:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:21 GMTContent-length: 26200 Systemwide Strategies To Alleviate Jail Crowding Systemwide Strategies To Alleviate Jail Crowding Andy Hall U.S. Department of Justice National Institute of Justice January 1987 The words "jail" and "crowding" seeminseparable these days. A 1983 National Institute of Justicesurvey of more than 1,400 criminal justice officials from allparts of the country identified jail and prison crowding as themost serious problem facing criminal justice systems.(1) The reality of more prisoners than available beds creates adilemma for local justice officials. Crowded jails may compromisepublic safety through a lack of space to confine those who poseserious threats to the community. Lawsuits challenging crowdedconditions may constrain a community's ability to incarcerate, A recent Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin notesthat 22 percent (134) of the Nation's 621 largest jails (thosewith a capacity of more than 100) were under court order in 1984to expand capacity or reduce the number of inmates housed, and 24percent (150) were under court order to improve one ormore conditions of confinement. (2) Building or expanding facilities is often necessary to housethose who must be incarcerated. The time and costs ofconstruction and operation of new institutions, however, arguethat other options should not be overlooked. (3) For the local sheriff or jail administrator, jail crowdingcreates increased prisoner and staff tensions, increased wear andtear of facility and equipment, budgetary problems from overtimestaffing, and an inability to meet program and service standards.Less frequently recognized are the problems crowding creates forother justice system officials: Judges, prosecutors, probation and parole, and other officials often find crowding a severe constraint in cases where jailing offenders appears necessary but space is unavailable. Prosecutors, public defenders, and pretrial services officers find their functions impaired by delayed access to inmates caused by difficulty in processing large numbers of offenders. Court functions overall may suffer when crowding affects the movement of inmates to and from scheduled appearances. Too often, however, agencies outside jail management are notfully involved in efforts to cope with the problem. Many jurisdictions address the symptoms of jail crowding butleave the underlying causes unaddressed. Other jurisdictions,however, view jail crowding as a problem that demands thecooperative involvement of all key figures in the local justicesystem. Given the success of this systemwide approach in anumber of locations, the National Institute of Justice sponsoreddevelopment of Alleviating Jail Crowding: A SystemsPerspective (NCJ 99462, 1985), based on a survey of justicesystem officials and programs throughout the United States. Thereport stresses that while construction of new facilities may bepart of a community's solution to crowding, emphasis must also beplaced on ensuring that existing bed space is used effectively.Accordingly, the report highlights the role of each localcriminal justice agency in ensuring the effective use of jail bedspace to prevent crime and maintain public safety. This Researchin Brief summarizes the full report. Looking at the local justice system Virtually every decisionmaker in the local justice systemexercises discretion that can affect the jail population.Jurisdictions using a systemwide approach to jail crowding seethe local justice system as a screening mechanism that can bemodified to enhance the use of scarce jail space. These jurisdictions develop case-processing flowcharts tounderstand the details of their case-handling process from theinitial contact to final disposition. Flowchart, illustrate thestages of the legal process, specify the points at whichdecisionmaker actions affect the jail population, and identifyopportunities to alleviate crowding. Understanding the local flow of cases can help policymakersidentify program and process changes to reduce crowding. Programchanges frequently involve eliminating the jailing of personswhom a community deems inappropriate for criminal justiceprocessing, such as the mentally ill. Process changes improve system efficiency, eliminatingcase-handling "catch points" that unnecessarily prolongthe confinement of persons who might eventually be releasedthrough bail, probation, or transfer to the State prison. Reducing length of confinement often becomes the first focusof population reduction, because efficiency measures aregenerally less costly and more readily implemented than newprograms. Local analysis often reveals that the primaryunderlying cause of crowding is excessive length of confinementdue to inefficient case processing. How system decisionmakers can affect jail crowding System studies in a number of jurisdictions have suggested,as one judge said, "a lot of little ways" to halt orreverse jail population increases without releasing seriousoffenders. The following discussion highlights just a few of the"little ways" available at different parts of thesystem. Law enforcement - Decision, surrounding local arrestpractices whether to arrest, transport to jail or stationhouse, book or detain for bail setting - are criticaldeterminants of jail population size. Law enforcement practicesboth before and after arrest can be modified to reduce jailadmissions. Jurisdictions such as San Diego County, California,and Frederick County (Winchester), Virginia, use perhaps the mostcommon form of prearrest diversion through short-term"sobering up" facilities for public inebriates. San Diego has been successful in reducing crowding throughthe use of a privately operated detoxification reception programwhere inebriates must remain for a minimum 4-hour period. Thoughin a largely rural area, the Winchester, Virginia, detoxificationprogram, operated by the Division of Court Services, has alsodiverted a large number of persons from jail. Similar prearrest diversion programs are in effect forpersons involved in family disputes(4) and for homeless personsin a number of jurisdictions throughout the United States. Law enforcement officials in Galveston County, Texas, haveinstituted practices to divert the mentally ill-a population thatfrequently makes up 10 to 20 percent of a jail's population. Ateam of deputies receives special training to assist in meetingthe emergency needs of the mentally ill, thereby allowing theagency to take them directly to a mental health facility. Many agencies also use a number of postarrest practices suchas station-house release before booking, field citations, andcourt-delegated authority to release suspects according to a bailschedule to eliminate unnecessary confinement. Jail administrators - Elected sheriffs or appointed jailexecutives are often viewed as the managers most affected butleast powerful in dealing with jail crowding. While having littledirect control over admissions and length of confinement, jailadministrators nevertheless can help reduce crowding by assuringready access for pretrial release screening and bail review. Quick access to detainees tends to be a common characteristicof successful programs to reduce jail crowding. For example, thesheriff in Mecklenburg County (Charlotte), North Carolina, allowspretrial services staff to be present during the jail admissionsprocess, which gives them access to defendants and speedsdecisionmaking. Individual judges often lack feedback regarding prisoners injail awaiting or following adjudication. Yet such information isof interest to the court and critical to jail populationreduction. The Bexar County (San Antonio), Texas, administratorprovides data to help judges monitor the court status ofprisoners and prevent length of confinement from being extendedthrough oversight or inattention. In some other jurisdictions, jail administrators aredelegated authority to release defendants pretrial or divertdrunk drivers to treatment centers. Other administrators helpdevelop nonjail pretrial-release and sentencing options orcooperate with other jurisdictions to alleviate crowding on amulticounty basis. Prosecutors - Prosecutors act at more case-handlingdecision points than any other officials. This gives them anespecially important role in containing jail population growth. Early case screening by prosecutors reduces unnecessarylength of confinement by eliminating or downgrading weak cases assoon as possible. Assistant prosecutors in Milwaukee County,Wisconsin, review arrests around the clock by examining policerecords and conducting meetings between complainants andsuspects. This practice enables Milwaukee prosecutors to decideon the appropriate charge within 24 to 36 hours after arrest. Prosecutors in Milwaukee also use "vertical caseprocessing" - assigning the same attorney or team ofattorneys to prosecute a case from start to finish. Though notnecessarily the case in all jurisdictions, reassigning cases fromone assistant prosecutor to another while the matter is beforethe court "horizontal case processing" - may causestagnation in caseflow, increased requests for continuances, andlengthened time to trial. Prosecutor cooperation is essential for alternatives inarrest, pretrial confinement, and sentencing. Prosecutorparticipation and leadership are essential to the effectivenessof task forces dealing with jail crowding. Since the prosecutor"owns" cases on behalf of the State, others are rarelywilling to propose case-handling changes without the prosecutor'ssupport. Recognizing that a lack of space to confine dangerous personsis a threat to public safety, prosecutors in a number ofjurisdictions have taken an active role in reducing jail crowdingby serving on "key court officials" groups or chairingjail population reduction boards. Pretrial services - Providing background informationon defendants, release recommendations, and other pretrialassistance can be an important component of solutions tocrowding. Pretrial services can often help merely by adjustingstaff schedules to ensure timely screening and interviews for amaximum number of defendants. In Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, for example, pretrialservices and magistrate bail setting are available 24 hours, 7days a week. In Kentucky, pretrial staff are on call 24 hours aday to interview persons at rested, notify judges by phone of theprisoner's qualifications for release, and supervise the releaseprocess if nonfinancial bail is authorized. Limited release authority is delegated to pretrial servicesstaff in an increasing number of jurisdictions. In San MateoCounty (Redwood City), California, pretrial staff are authorizedto release misdemeanor suspects prior to their first courtappearance. Seattle, Washington, is experimenting with delegatedrelease on certain felony charges. Many pretrial programs respond to jail population pressuresby expanding the range of release options (conditional andsupervised release, third-party custody, unsecured bail, depositbail) and by conducting regular bail reviews for those detainedfor trial. A National Institute of Justice study found that supervisedrelease programs in Miami, Florida; Portland, Oregon; andMilwaukee, Wisconsin, significantly reduced the bail-heldpopulation without significantly increasing the risk to publicsafety. Judiciary - Judges make more decisions affecting jailpopulation than anyone else; this often makes them leaders inseeking jail-crowding solutions. Judges can issue summonsesinstead of arrest warrants; provide guidelines authorizing directrelease by police, jail, and pretrial staff; and provide bailsetting outside normal court hours. Evaluators of the 4-year JailOvercrowding Reduction Project of the former Law EnforcementAssistance Administration found that the project's mostsuccessful sites were those with strong judicial leadership. Many courts provide 24-hour bail-setting magistrates. TheKing County (Seattle), Washington, District Court has a"three-tier" release policy that reduces court time,jail admissions, and length of confinement. The court establishedguidelines specify the charges for which pretrial services staffmay (1) release without consulting the court, (2) release afterphoning a duty judge, or (3) make recommendations to the court inthe most serious felony cases. Reducing court delay is crucial to effective use of jailspace. Bexar County, Texas, seeks to eliminate "deadtime" by having the court administrator work with a jailcase coordinator to identify cases in need of special attentionand processing steps that can be shortened. Each judge receivesweekly a list of prisoners awaiting indictment, trial,sentencing, or revocation in his or her court. One result is a 50-percent time saving in disposing ofmisdemeanor charges and thus a significant cut in overall lengthof confinement. Many judges have worked to extend the range of nonjailsentencing options, using probation supervision, suspended sentences, fines, community service andrestitution, halfway house placements, and specialized treatmentfacilities as true alternatives to incarceration. A growing number of courts now defer service of jailsentences, when the jail is at capacity, in cases in which jailis believed an appropriate sentence but immediate jailing is notessential for the community's safety. Defense - The National Institute's field test on EarlyRepresentation by Defense Counsel found that early screening forindigency, defender appointment, and defendant contact candecrease length of confinement and thus yield substantial savingsof jail space.(6) Vertical case processing in defense officesalso helps cut length of confinement. In Mecklenburg County, pretrial conferences between defenseand prosecution help identify, eliminate, or downgrade marginalcases and facilitate plea negotiation. Both offices can thusbudget staff time efficiently and lessen pretrial confinement. In St. Louis, Missouri, efforts to reduce staggering defendercaseloads by appointing private attorneys in felony cases havealso reduced case disposition time, stimulated bail review, andresulted in shorter pretrial confinement. Probation and parole - Not only do probation andparole agencies provide nonjail alternatives for sentencing, theycan enhance case- processing efficiency by streamliningpresentence investigation (PSI) procedures and expeditingrevocation decisions. All this helps cut length of confinement. In Brevard County, Florida, the jail population oversightcommittee spotlighted PSI delays and worked with probation andparole officers to cut PSI preparation time from 90 days to 30 or35 days for jail cases. The county also cut to 24 hours the timerequired for decisions on probation revocation, thus decreasingthe use of jail beds for persons on probation "hold"orders. Outside the local level - State legislation, courtrules, executive orders, and other "external factors"can affect jail populations - Guidelines on diversion, bailpolicy, appointment of legal counsel, sentencing practices, andjail operation all can affect the range of solutions available. Other outside factors that need to be considered in localplanning for jail use include local -demographics, availabilityof State and Federal resources, public opinion and media coverageof criminal justice issues, activities of local civic groupsand community organizations, and political campaigns andreferendums. Outside the system-Organizations outside the justicesystem can be instrumental in alleviating shortages of jail space by providing emergency shelter, detoxification,and treatment facilities for the mentally disturbed, publicinebriates, and drunk drivers. Many jurisdictions use localmental health centers to provide prompt mental healthassessments, diversion, and outpatient treatment. Privateagencies in several jurisdictions provide temporary shelter forjuveniles, pretrial supervision, and community serviceplacements. Formulating solutions While individual parts of the system can help through suchpractices as those highlighted above, one or two agencies in thelocal justice system are not enough to bring about comprehensivesolutions to crowding. Jail crowding results from the actions ofmany, with their decisions interacting to determine jailadmissions and length of confinement. Effectively combatingcrowding requires taking into account the interactive nature ofthe problem. Jurisdictions that successfully implemented a systemwideapproach to jail crowding have identified as critical needs (1)the participation of key decisionmakers in formulating solutionsand (2) detailed information on case processing and on the actualcharacteristics of the jail population. Key decisionmaker participation - Whether it is a"jail population management board" or some other body,experience in many jurisdictions argues for a forum thatencourages communication and participation by judges,prosecutors, sheriffs, police, probation officials, and otherpolicymakers in developing solutions to crowding. Collective involvement provides increased awareness of theimpact of one agency's actions on another and of the otheragency's procedures. Also, recommendations of a broadlyconstituted planning group are more likely to gain systemwidesupport. Finally, the political pragmatism that may accompanycommittee action may permit some participants to support moreimaginative policies. Information - A systemwide approach to jailcrowding requires improved information about jail use. Inaddition to the detailed flowcharts that help assess thetimeliness of case-processing decisions and the availability ofnonjail options, planners need information on precisely who orwhat type of person is in jail and why and how long they stay.This permits administrators to learn the frequency of admissionsand the size and variation of distinct segments of the jailpopulation, as well as indicating sluggish case processing. Statistical analysis of the population identifies symptoms ofjail crowding, greatly enhancing the ability to identify andtreat the causes. But while jail population data are valuable,they should not overshadow case-processing information. Analysis of data on the jail population might show, forexample, that persons detained before trial are released onlyafter 7 to 10 days. Alone, this finding could indicate theneed for a special pretrial services program to expeditescreening and bail review. Information on caseflow, however,might reveal the actual cause to be inefficient case processing. Evaluation information is also critical to developingeffective strategies. Evaluation data should be collected andanalyzed to determine if planned modifications in decisionmakingare being made and the resulting positive or negativeimplications for crowding and public safety. Implementing strategies and conclusions Localities that take a systemwide approach to jail crowdinggenerally follow some important steps: Involve all key system decisionmakers; Collect all necessary data on jail population and caseprocessing; Identify, implement, and evaluate appropriate changesin programs or processes; and Inform the public of system changes when initiated andsuccessful strategies when confirmed. While many communities have taken great steps, experience hasalso confirmed the complexity of the jail crowding problem andthe futility of seeking a panacea through one or two changes.Long-term success requires a variety of solutions and, mostimportant, the time, patience, and attention of the entirecriminal justice community. Notes 1. Stephen Gettinger, "Assessing Criminal JusticeNeeds," National Institute of Justice Research in Brief,June 1984, NCJ 94072. 2. Jail Inmates 1984. 3. Those jurisdictions that must build or expand jails canlearn from the experiences of others through the NationalInstitute of Justice Corrections Construction Initiative. Forinformation, call 800-851-3420 or 301-251-5500 and ask to speakwith a corrections specialist. 4. In violent family disputes, however, research nowindicates that arrest is the preferred police response. Thisresearch, now being replicated under NIJ sponsorship, wasreported in Lawrence W. Sherman and Richard A. Berk,Minneapolis Domestic Violence Experiment, Washington, D.C.,Police Foundation, 1984, NCJ 98905. 5. James Austin, Barry Krisberg, and Paul Litsky,Evaluation of the Field Test of Supervised Release - Final Report,1984 NCJ 95220. 6. An executive summary of the Early Reprensentation byDefense Counsel evaluation, by E.J. Fazio, Jr., et al., isavailable in microfiche as NCJ 97595. Andy Hall is an associate of the Pre-Trial ServicesResource Center, Washington, D.C., and principal author of theNIJ publications Alleviating Jail Crowding: A SystemsPerspective and Pretrial Release Program Options (NCJ94612). From theDirector Communities throughout the Nation face the problem of jailcrowding: Having more prisoners than space to house them. Despiteconstruction innovations that may help cities or counties expandtheir confinement capacity both more quickly and at less expense,a host of problems, including fiscal pressures sometimes, mayindicate solutions other than construction. Some consequences of jail crowding are well known: Increasedvictimization and fear, decreased public confidence thatdangerous persons can be locked up, lawsuits, court-imposedlimits on the number of prisoners, damage to facilities andequipment. Crowding increases both tension in the institution andthe strain on correctional budgets. Less obvious but equally worrisome are delays in caseprocessing due to cumbersome access to prisoners and the limitsput on such necessary judicial options as pretrial release andsentencing. National Institute of Justice surveys have shown thatofficials in law enforcement, courts, corrections, and otherparts of the justice system were virtually unanimous in namingprison and jail crowding their number one concern. Recognition of the gravity of jail crowding, however, offersa glimmer of hope. Officials in a growing number of jurisdictionshave concluded that if each part of the local justice system doeswhat it can to ease crowding, the sum of all these smallsolutions has a notable cumulative effect. The separate decisions of law enforcement, judicialprosecution, defense, pretrial services, probation, corrections,and other officials can interact to influence the number of jailadmissions and length of confinement. Jurisdictions taking thissystemwide approach find that seemingly minor modifications incase processing can both reduce crowding and, more important,improve the overall administration of justice. Jail crowding is a local problem that must be dealt withlocally. The National Institute of Justice hopes to contribute tosuch endeavors, however, by assessing and synthesizinginformation on the program and process changes that localjurisdictions may want to consider. Without information on theexperience of other jurisdictions, informed policy decisions arehard to come by. At the Institute, our role is one articulated byPresident Reagan and Attorney General Meese: To support, not todirect, local responsibilities. Experience demonstrates that wehave many useful tools to deal with jail crowding. ThisResearch in Brief offers local jurisdictions their choiceamong such options. James K. Stewart Director National Institute of Justice CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-12IA031-000655-B044-1http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/crimhi93.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114355 text/html 7158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:43:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:41 GMTContent-length: 6941 Highlights of the Crime Problem, 1993 Highlights of the Crime Problem, 1993 From the Bureau of Justice Statistics ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EST BJS SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 1993 202-307-0784 20 YEARS OF MEASURING CRIME SHOWS FEWER OFFENSES OVERALLBUT INCREASED VIOLENCE AGAINST MINORITIES AND THE YOUNG WASHINGTON, D.C. -- After 20 years of asking Americans whattheir actual experiences with crime have been, the JusticeDepartment's Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) today identifiedseveral long-term trends: --Overall, the number of criminal victimizations dropped 6percent since the annual National Crime Victimization Surveybegan in 1973. --The steepest declines are in household burglary and theft.--Blacks are substantially more likely to be violent crimevictims than are whites. --Young minority males in central cities are violent crimevictims at the highest rates the survey ever recorded. The dataare from the survey's 20th anniversary report, which noted thatmore than 4.4 million interviews were conducted from 1973 throughlast year. "While the overall trends are positive, somegroups of Americans are disproportionately the victims ofincreasing crime," observed Lawrence A. Greenfeld, theacting BJS director. "For example, last year blacksexperienced the highest per capita rates of violent crime in thesurvey's history." "The survey also documented thegrowing ratio of violent crime," Greenfeld pointed out."In 1973 about 15 percent of all crimes were violentcompared to 20 percent in 1992. Moreover, about a third of allvictims of violence report an injury." During the last twodecades an estimated 37 million victims were injured, and morethan one-third of those injured had no health insurance or werenot eligible for public health benefits. Among other reporthighlights: --Handguns are used in about 10 percent of all violentcrimes. Handgun crime rates are above the 1986 low but have notreturned to the highest rate reached in 1982. --During 1991 an estimated $19.1 billion were lost directlyfrom personal and household crimes. --Males are much more likely to be victims of violenceinflicted by strangers than by family members or other closeassociates, whereas females are as likely to be hurt by familymembers and close associates as by strangers. --About 30 percent of all violent crimes and 25 percent ofhome burglaries occur when the victim or victims are away fromhome on a leisure activity. --In approximately half of all female rapes the victim knewthe offender. Strangers used some type of weapon in 29 percent ofthe offenses, compared to 17 percent by non-stranger rapists. --In robberies during which the offender threatened thevictim before the attack, those victims who defended themselvesin some way were less likely to lose property but were morelikely to be injured than were victims who took no action. Whenthe offender had a handgun, the victim was seriously injured in 1percent of the incidents in which self- protective measures werenot taken, compared to 7 percent when such action was taken. --Households earning more than $30,000 annually are generallymore likely than are households in most other income categoriesto experience theft of a motor vehicle, but as household incomerises, burglary rates fall. --Black male teenagers (that is boys and young men from 12through 19 years old) are more likely to be violent crime victimsthan any other group of people. Their average annual rate is 113victimizations per 1,000 residents--or almost one in nine blackteenagers. For white male teenagers the rate was 90 per 1,000--orabout one in 11. --For adult black males (35 through 64 years) the violentvictimization rate was 35 per 1,000. For adult white males, 18per 1,000; adult white females, 15; adult black females 13;elderly (65 years or more) black males 12; elderly black females,10; elderly white males, 6 and elderly white females, 3 per1,000. The rate of criminal victimizations for all U.S. residentscompared to other life experiences is as follows: Occurrences Yearly rate per 1,000 adults Accidental injury, all circumstances 220 Accidental injury at home 66 Personal theft 61 Accidental injury at work 47 Violent victimization 31 Assault (aggravated and simple) 25 Motor vehicle accident injury 22 Death, all causes 11 Victimization with injury 11 Aggravated assault 8 Robbery 6 Death from heart disease 5 Death from cancer 3 Rape (women only) 1 Accidental death, all circumstances 0.4 Death from pneumonia or influenza 0.4 Death in motor vehicle accident 0.2 Suicide 0.2 Death from HIV infection 0.1 Homicide and capital punishment executions 0.1 The survey measures rape, robbery, assault, burglary,personal and household larceny and motor vehicle theft. It doesnot measure murder, kidnapping or commercial crimes. Last year 39 percent of all these crimes were reported topolice--the highest since 1973, when it was 32 percent. Theincreased reporting rate was consistent with the fact thatviolent crime and motor vehicle theft have made up an increasingproportion of total crime during the last two decades. Thehighest reporting rate last year was for completed motor vehicletheft--92 percent. The lowest was for personal larceny withoutcontact--15 percent. Single copies of the BJS special report, "Highlightsfrom 20 Years of Surveying Crime Victims" (NCJ-144525), aswell as other BJS statistical bulletins and reports may beobtained from the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,Box 6000, Rockville, Maryland 20850. The telephone number is 1-800-732-3277. Data from the tables and graphs used in many BJS reports canbe made available to news organizations in spreadsheet files on 51/4" and 3 1/2" diskettes by calling 202-307-0784. # ## 93-76 After hours contact: Stu Smith 301-983-9354 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-13IA031-000655-B044-38http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/fax1994.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114417 text/html 80160HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:43:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:11 GMTContent-length: 79942 DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994 DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994 A summary of drug data published in 1994 by the Bureau of JusticeStatistics Drug data produced by BJS 2 Access to current drug data 4 Drug use by offenders at the time of offense 5 Prior drug use by offenders 8 Drug-related crime 9 Drug control budget 11 Drug law enforcement 12 Drug enforcement operations 14 Pretrial release of drug defendants 18 Prosecution and sentencing of Federal drug law violators 20 of drug law violators in State courts 22 Drug offenders in correctional populations 24 Drug enforcement in correctional facilities 26 Recidivism of drug law violators 29 Drugs and youth 31 Gangs 34 Drug use in the general population 35 Public opinion about drugs 36 ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse 38 Source notes 40 For more information call or write: ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse National Criminal Justice Reference Service Box 6000 Rockville, MD 20849-6000 1-800-666-3332 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D. Director This report was prepared for the Bureau of Justice Statistics(BJS) by the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) Drugs& Crime Clearinghouse under Contract Number OJP-94-C-006. TheONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse is a component of theNational Criminal Justice Reference Service. At the ONDCP Drugs& Crime Clearinghouse, Anita Timrots prepared the report. InBJS, Benjamin H. Renshaw III and Sue A. Lindgren directed theproject. Single copies of any report cited here or any other BJSpublication can be ordered from the ONDCP Drugs & CrimeClearinghouse, National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Box6000, Rockville, MD 20849-6000, toll-free 800-666-3332. Please order using NCJ numbers listed in the source notes,pages 36-37. Public-use tapes for BJS data sets and other criminal justicedata are available from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, P.O. Box 1248, AnnArbor, MI 48106 (1-800-999-0960 or 1-313-763-5010). Pleasespecify the ICPSR number shown in the source notes, pages 36-37,when ordering. NCJ-154043 June 1995 DRUG DATA PRODUCED BY BJS Many Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) programs produce dataon drug law enforcement, drug offenders, and drugs and crime. Forexample -- * the BJS National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)asks victims of personal crimes if they believed the offendershad been using drugs * the BJS Law Enforcement Management andAdministrative Statistics (LEMAS) program produces information ondrug-related programs of State and local police agencies * the BJS National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) examinesdrug law violators' criminal histories and status at time ofarrest, pretrial release/detention status, trial appearance, anddisposition * the BJS National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP) comparessentences given to drug offenders with those given to otheroffenders * BJS reports on Federal and State prisoners, jail inmates,and incarcerated youth including data on their histories of druguse and drug offenses the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program collects and publishes detailed data on drug law violators in the Federal justice system * the annual BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics presents data on drug use in the general population and on public opinion toward drugs and enforcement of drug laws. Drugs and crime facts, 1994 presents the most currentinformation available relating to drugs and crime published byBJS in over two dozen different reports through the end ofcalendar 1994. This publication also highlights other drug datasources frequently used by the Office of National Drug ControlPolicy (ONDCP) Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse in responding torequests. Among other BJS reports published in calendar 1994 were thefollowing: * Pretrial release of Federal felony defendants, 1990 (BJSSpecial Report, February 1994) examines the likelihood ofpretrial release, type of release, and pretrial misconduct ofFederal defendants, including Federal drug offenders. * Women in prison (BJS Special Report, March 1994) reports onfemale inmates in State prisons in 1991 including prior drug andalcohol use, needle sharing behaviors, treatment, and priorphysical or sexual abuse of drug offenders. * Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991 (September1994) describes the results of the first joint survey ofprisoners held in State and Federal prisons, including data onthe proportion of inmates incarcerated for a drug offense, priordrug use, sentence length, prior treatment, use of a weapon, andHIV infection. * Felony sentences in the United States, 1990 (BJS Bulletin,September 1994) compares sentencing statistics on State andFederal courts, including the number of convictions for drugoffenses, type of sentence, sentence length, and estimated timeto be served. * National Corrections Reporting Program, 1992 (October 1994)is part of an annual series detailing the characteristics ofpersons, including drug offenders, admitted to and released fromthe prison and parole systems in the United States. * Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992 (BJS Bulletin,November 1994) reports on criminal history, pretrial processing,pretrial misconduct, adjudication, and sentencing of felonydefendants, including drug offenders, in State courts in largeurban counties. * Federal law enforcement officers, 1993 (BJS Bulletin,December 1994) reports on the number of Federal law enforcementofficers authorized to carry firearms and arrest offenders,including Federal drug law violators. Felony sentences in State courts, 1992 (BJS Bulletin, December 1994) reports on the number of felony drug convictions, sentence type and length, and case processing time for drug offenders. * Felony defendants in large urban counties, 1992 (December 1994) describes demographic characteristics, criminal history, pretrial release information, and sentencing for felony offenders, including drug offenders, in the Nation's 75 most populous counties. ACCESS TO CURRENT DRUG DATA This issue of Drugs and crime facts summarizes drug datapublished by BJS in 1994 or earlier. For updated analyses of drugdata or more recently released reports, readers may contact theONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse or send the order form atthe end of this report. The Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse was established in 1987by BJS, with funding from the Bureau of Justice Assistance, toprovide policymakers, criminal justice practitioners,researchers, and the general public with ready access tounderstandable information on drug law violations anddrug-related law enforcement. In October 1994, the Clearinghousebecame a component of the National Criminal Justice ReferenceService (NCJRS). ONDCP began funding the Clearinghouse inNovember 1994. Clearinghouse products and services are describedin detail on pages 34-35. The toll-free line is 1-800-666-3332. Many of the reports cited in this publication are accessiblethrough the Internet or the NCJRS Electronic Bulletin BoardSystem (*BBS). The NCJRS Gopher provides information from the Office ofJustice Programs agencies, as well as the Office of National DrugControl Policy, and provides a direct link to the NCJRS*BBS. Thegopher address is: ncjrs.aspensys.com 71 Through the World WideWeb, NCJRS provides a graphical interface to NCJRS information,as well as to information from other criminal justice resourcesaround the world. The address for the NCJRS World Wide Web pageis: http://ncjrs.aspensys.com:81/ncjrshome.html First-time users of NCJRS can send an e-mail message toreceive a reply outlining the services of NCJRS to:look@ncjrs.aspensys.com For technical assistance or specific questions on drugs andcrime or other criminal or juvenile justice topics, please sendan e-mail to: askncjrs@aspensys.com To access the NCJRS*BBS through the Internet-- * telnet to:ncjrsbbs.aspensys.com or * gopher to: ncjrs.aspensys.com 71 To access the NCJRS*BBS directly, dial: (301) 738-8895.Modems should be set up to 9600 baud at 8-N-1. DRUG USE BY OFFENDERS AT THE TIME OF OFFENSE The BJS National Crime Victimization Survey asks victims ofthe violent crimes of rape, robbery, and assault about theirperceptions of the offender's use of alcohol and drugs. In 30% ofviolent crime victimizations in 1992, victims reported that theybelieved their assailants were under the influence of drugs oralcohol. In half of violent crime victimizations, the victim didnot know whether the offender was under the influence. Violent offenders under the influence of drugs or alcohol, asperceived by victims, 1992 Percent of violent crime victimizations where victimperceived the offender to be: Not known Type of Not under if under crime Total the influence the influence __________________________________________________ Crimes of 100% 20.8% 49.9% violence Rape 100 23.1* 38.3 Robbery 100 15.2 59.9 Aggravated assault 100 12.7 55.9 Simple assault 100 27.2 41.8 __________________________________________________ (continued) Percent of violent crime victimizations where victimperceived the offender to be: Under the influence ________________________________________ Not Type of Alcohol Drugs sure which crime Total only only Both substance __________________________________________________ Crimes of violence 30.2% 18.0% 4.3% 6.1% 1.6% Rape 38.6 18.2* 8.0* 12.4* 0.0* Robbery 24.9 10.8 5.4 6.1 2.6* Aggravated assault 31.4 16.7 4.3 8.2 1.8* Simple assault 31.1 21.3 3.7 4.7 1.2 __________________________________________________ Note: Percents may not total 100% because of rounding. *Estimate is based on 10 or fewer sample cases Source: Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992. Data from BJS corrections surveys show that a quarter ofconvicted jail inmates, a third of State prisoners, andtwo-fifths of youths in long-term, State-operated facilitiesadmit that they were under the influence of an illegal drug atthe time of their offense. Among jail inmates in 1989-- * 44% used drugs in the month before the offense * 30% used drugs daily in the month before the offense * 27% used drugs at the time of the offense. Jail inmates convicted of drug offenses most frequentlyreported having been under the influence of drugs at the time oftheir offense (39%), followed by convicted burglars (38%) androbbers (36%). Jail inmates convicted of driving whileintoxicated (DWI) (12%), assault (14%), and homicide (18%) werethe least likely to report having been under the influence ofdrugs at the time of the offense. Reported drug use by convicted prison and jail inmates Percent who used Percent who used drugs at the time drugs inthe month of the offense before the offense 1989 1991 1989 1991 Drug Type Jail Prison Jail Prison inmates inmates inmates inmates __________________________________________________ Any drug 27% 31% 44% 50% Marijuana 9 11 28 32 Cocaine/crack 14 14 24 25 Heroin/opiates 5 6 7 10 __________________________________________________ Sources: Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prisoninmates, 1991. In 1991, 49% of all State prison inmates reported that theywere under the influence of drugs or alcohol or both at the timethey committed the offense for which they were currentlysentenced: 17% were under the influence of drugs only, and 14%were under the influence of drugs and alcohol. Half of the State prisoners said they had taken illegal drugsduring the month before committing the crime. Among violent offenders in State prisons-- * 61% said that they or their victims were under theinfluence of drugs or alcohol at the time of the offense * 50% reported being under the influence of alcohol or drugsat the time of the offense * 30% said their victims were under the influence of alcoholor drugs. Nearly 40% of the youth incarcerated in long-term,State-operated facilities in 1987 said they were under theinfluence of drugs at the time of their offense. Data from the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) Drug UseForecasting (DUF) program revealed that of a sample of adultmales arrested in 23 U.S. cities in 1993, the percent testingpositive for any drug ranged from 54% in Omaha and San Jose to81% in Chicago. Among the 20 cities reporting data on femalearrestees, the percent of females testing positive for any drugranged from 42% in San Antonio to 83% in Manhattan. Sources: Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992.Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Survey of youth incustody, 1987. U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute ofJustice, Drug Use Forecasting 1993 Annual Report on AdultArrestees. PRIOR DRUG USE BY OFFENDERS Data from BJS surveys show that 78% of jail inmates in 1989,79% of State prisoners in 1991, 60% of Federal prisoners in 1991,and 83% of youth in long-term public juvenile facilities in 1987had used drugs at some point in their lives. Although drug use by State prison inmates in the month beforethe offense fell between 1986 and 1991, a higher proportion ofinmates reported use of cocaine or crack in 1991 than 1986. Onein three inmates who ever used drugs in the past used a needle toinject drugs. Fifteen percent of inmates who had ever used drugshad shared a needle at least once. Prior drug use by State prison inmates Percent of inmates who had ever used drugs Type of drug 1986 1991 Any drug 80% 79% Marijuana 76 74 Cocaine/crack 44 50 Heroin/opiates 26 25 Among 1989 jail inmates who used drugs, the median age atwhich they began to use-- * any drug was 16 * a major drug (including heroin, crack, cocaine, PCP, LSD,and methadone) was 18 * a major drug regularly was 20. Sixty percent of jail inmates who ever used any drug reportedthey had done so more than a year before their first arrest. Ofinmates who reported using a major drug regularly, 55% had notdone so until after their first arrest. Almost 83% of youth in long-term, State-operated juvenilefacilities in 1987 reported use of an illegal drug in the past,and 63% had used an illegal drug on a regular basis. The mostcommonly mentioned drugs were marijuana, cocaine, andamphetamines. Among drug-using youth in long-term, State- operated juvenilefacilities, 19% said they first used drugs before age 10; 38%reported their first use was before age 12. Sources: Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prisoninmates, 1991. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.Survey of youth in custody, 1987. DRUG-RELATED CRIME Overall, 10% of Federal prison inmates in 1991, 17% of Stateprison inmates in 1991, and 13% of convicted jail inmates in 1989said they committed their offense to obtain money for drugs.Twenty percent of Hispanic State prison inmates said theycommitted their offense to get money for drugs, compared to 15%of white inmates and 17% of black inmates. Twenty-four percent offemale inmates said they committed their offense to get money tobuy drugs, compared to 16% of male inmates. Inmates incarcerated for robbery, burglary, larceny, and drugtrafficking most often committed their crime to obtain money fordrugs. Inmates who committed homicide, sexual assault, assault, andpublic-order offenses were least likely to commit their offenseto obtain money for drugs. Percent of inmates who committed their offense for money tobuy drugs Most Federal State serious prison prison Jail current inmates inmates inmates offense 1991 1991 1989 __________________________________________________ All offenses 10% 17% 13% Violent offenses 18% 12% 12% Homicide(a) 3 5 3 Sexual assault(b) 0 2 2 Robbery 27 27 32 Assault 2 6 3 Property offenses 9 26 24 Burglary 32 30 31 Larceny/theft 13 31 28 Motor vehicle theft -- -- 7 Drug offenses 9 22 14 Possession 7 16 10 Trafficking 10 25 19 Public-order offenses 6 5 3 (a) Includes murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, and negligent manslaughter. (b) Includes rape. -- Not reported The Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) of the FederalBureau of Investigation (FBI) reported that in 1993, 5.5% of the23,271 homicides in which circumstances were known werenarcotics- related. This includes only those murders thatoccurred specifically during a narcotics felony, such as drugtrafficking or manufacturing. Those homicides that involved anarcotics felony and a more serious felony, such as armedrobbery, were not tabulated as drug-related. Drug-related homicides Number Percent Year of homicides drug-related 1986 19,257 3.9% 1987 17,963 4.9 1988 17,971 5.6 1989 18,954 7.4 1990 20,273 6.7 1991 21,676 6.2 1992 22,716 5.7 1993 23,271 5.5 Note: Includes only those homicides where circumstances wereknown. Table constructed by ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghousestaff from Crime in the United States, 1991 through 1993 (FBI),p. 21. A study of murder cases disposed in the Nation's 75 mostpopulous counties in 1988 found that circumstances involvingillegal drugs, such as a drug scam or dispute over drugs,accounted for 18% of the defendants and 16% of the victims. In 7%of cases, victims and their killers were both at the murder scenebecause of drugs. Of victims, 12% were involved with the killerin a drug relationship. Sources: Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Drugs and jail inmates,1989. Women in jail 1989. Murder in large urban counties, 1988.Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 1991through 1993. DRUG CONTROL BUDGET According to the Office of National Drug Control Policy(ONDCP),the Federal drug control budget increased from $1.5billion in fiscal 1981 to $13.2 billion in fiscal 1995. Total Federal drug control budget FY 1981 actual $ 1,531,800 FY 1989 actual 6,663,700 FY 1990 actual 9,758,900 FY 1991 actual 10,957,600 FY 1992 actual 11,910,100 FY 1993 actual 12,265,300 FY 1994 estimate 12,136,200 FY 1995 requested 13,179,800 Fiscal 1995 Federal drug control budget by function Total $13,179,800 Drug treatment $ 2,874,400 Education, community action, and the workplace 2,050,700 Criminal justice system 5,926,900 International 427,800 Interdiction 1,205,600 Research 531,600 Intelligence 162,800 ONDCP also reported that State and local governments spent$15.9 billion on drug control activities during fiscal 1991, a13% increase over the $14.1 billion spent during fiscal 1990. State and local spending for drug control, fiscal years 1990and 1991 FY FY 1990 1991 Total $14,075,000 $15,907,000 Justice $11,525,000 $12,619,000 Police protection 4,035,000 4,223,000 Judicial and legal services 1,346,000 1,449,000 Corrections 6,045,000 6,827,000 Other 100,000 120,000 Health and hospitals $ 2,184,000 $ 2,784,000 Education $ 366,000 $ 503,000 Source: Office of National Drug Control Policy, as reportedin Fact sheet: Drug data summary. DRUG LAW ENFORCEMENT Federal, State, and local agencies share responsibility forenforcing the Nation's drug laws, although most arrests are madeby State and local authorities. State and local police made anestimated 1.1 million arrests for drug law violations in 1993,according to the FBI. Estimated number of arrests for drug violations reported byState and local police, 1984-93 Year Sale/manufacture Possession Total 1984 155,848 552,552 708,400 1985 192,302 619,098 811,400 1986 206,849 617,251 824,100 1987 241,849 695,551 937,400 1988 316,525 838,675 1,155,200 1989 441,191 920,509 1,361,700 1990 344,282 745,218 1,089,500 1991 337,340 672,660 1,010,000 1992 338,049 728,351 1,066,400 1993 334,511 791,789 1,126,300 Percent change 1984-93 114.6% 43.3% 59.0% Note: Table constructed by ONDCP Drugs & CrimeClearinghouse staff from Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crimein the United States, 1984 through 1993. As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics-- * the Federal Government seized 6,605 clandestine druglaboratories between fiscal years 1975 and 1993 * in fiscal year 1993, of the 286 labs seized, 237 (83%)manufactured methamphetamines * in 1993 the Drug Enforcement Administration's (DEA) programfor eradicating domestic marijuana resulted in the destructionof393 million plants in 64,132 plots, 12,397 arrests, 6,062weapons seized, and assets seized valued at $52 million * in fiscal year 1993 DEA confiscated 133,665 pounds ofcocaine, 1,590 pounds of heroin, 39 pounds of opium, 314,054pounds of marijuana, 2.8 million dosage units of hallucinogens,and 80.5 million dosage units of stimulants * in fiscal year 1993 the DEA completed 16,690 asset seizuresvalued at $680 million * in fiscal year 1993 the U.S. Customs Service seized 507,249pounds of marijuana, 175,318 pounds of cocaine, and 17.9 milliondosage units of drugs such as LSD and barbiturates * in 1993 the U.S. Coast Guard confiscated 48,441 pounds ofmarijuana and 32,313 pounds of cocaine * in fiscal year 1993 the U.S. Postal Service made 2,193arrests for mailing controlled substances * in 1992 State and Federal courts authorized wiretaps in 634narcotics cases. Drug seizure data from different Federal agencies should notbe added together because in many instances more than one agencyparticipated in the operations. The Federal-wide Drug SeizureSystem (FDSS) reflects the combined drug seizure efforts of theDEA, FBI, and the U.S. Customs Service within the jurisdiction ofthe United States, as well as maritime seizures by the U.S. CoastGuard. FDSS eliminates duplicate reporting of a seizure involvingmore than one Federal agency. Preliminary data indicate that the following amounts of drugswere seized in fiscal 1993 by the Federal agencies participatingin FDSS: Pounds Drug seized Heroin 3,345 Cocaine 238,053 Marijuana 752,114 Hashish 26,080 Sources: Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the UnitedStates, 1984 through 1993. The Drug Enforcement Administration,the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Customs Service, the FederalBureau of Investigation, the U.S. Postal Service, and theAdministrative Office of the U.S. Courts; all as reported in theBJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993. ONDCP Drugs& Crime Clearinghouse, Fact sheet: Drug data summary. DRUG ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS As reported in Federal law enforcement officers, 1993, as ofDecember 1993, Federal agencies employed about 69,000 full-timepersonnel authorized to make arrests and carry firearms. The DEAemployed 2,813 full-time agents. These officers investigate majornarcotics violators, enforce regulations governing themanufacture and dispensing of controlled substances, and performa variety of other functions in support of drug traffickingprevention and control. The FBI employed 10,075 full-time agents. These agentsinvestigate more than 250 types of Federal crimes. The FBI hasconcurrent jurisdiction with the DEA over drug offenses under theControlled Substances Act. According to the BJS Law Enforcement Management andAdministrative Statistics (LEMAS) program, in 1990, about 9,300local police departments, 2,500 sheriffs' departments, and 34State police departments, employing over 500,000 full-timeofficers, had primary responsibility for drug law enforcement. Drug-related law enforcement activities include makingarrests and seizing drugs as well as laboratory testing of drugs,drug education, and drug testing of arrestees and agencyemployees. Most agencies serving 50,000 or more residentsoperated a special drug enforcement unit, participated in amultiagency task force, and received money or goods from an assetforfeiture program: * Special drug units focus on conducting investigations ondrug traffickers and drug-related activities in the community. * To coordinate efforts with other law enforcement agenciesto accumulate evidence, most large agencies participate in amultiagency task force. These task forces develop enforcementstrategies such as the use of informants, surveillance, andundercover operations. * Most States have laws that allow the government to seizeconvicted drug traffickers' assets, such as cash, bank accounts,planes, boats, cars, and homes. Many State laws require that allforfeited assets go to the State and/or local treasury uponpayment of outstanding loans. In some States, law enforcementagencies can keep all property, cash, and proceeds from sales ofwhat is forfeited. Drug-related participation by agencies with primary drugenforcement responsibilities, 1990 Percent of agencies with primary responsibility for drugenforcement that: ________________________________ Receive money Type of Participate or goods from agency and Operate in adrug asset population special multiagency forfeiture served drugunit task force program __________________________________________________ State police departments 85% 91% 94% Police departments All sizes 25% 51% 38% 1,000,000 or more 93 93 86 500,000-999,999 95 100 96 250,000-499,999 100 87 100 100,000-249,999 96 86 98 50,000-99,999 94 81 95 25,000-49,999 62 82 85 10,000-24,999 36 65 62 2,500-9,999 19 55 33 Under 2,500 5 28 11 Sheriffs' departments All sizes 39% 68% 51% 1,000,000 or more 92 95 95 500,000-999,999 90 97 97 250,000-499,999 86 91 94 100,000-249,999 77 86 88 50,000-99,999 75 72 81 25,000-49,999 44 80 53 10,000-24,999 28 66 42 Under 10,000 11 49 27 __________________________________________________ Note: Table includes only agencies with primaryresponsibility for drug enforcement. Source: Drug enforcement bypolice and sheriffs' departments, 1990. In 1990-- * 45% of State police agencies had primary responsibility forlaboratory testing of drugs, but only the largest municipal andcounty agencies tended to have such responsibility * 90% of municipal police departments with 100 or moreofficers had special units for drug education in the schools,while 60% operated special gang units * 94% of State police departments, 38% of local police, and51% of sheriffs' departments received money or goods from anasset forfeiture program. More than 1 in 3 local police andsheriffs' departments and 2 in 3 State police departmentsreported that at least some of their arrestees were tested forillegal drug use. One of four local police and sheriffs' departments and 1 of 2State police departments required applicants for sworn positionsto submit to a drug test. Employees tested for drugs in a mandatory testing program inState and local police and sheriffs' departments, by size ofpopulation served, 1990 Percent of agencies with a mandatory testing program for: ____________________________________ Type of agency and Regular population Probationary field served Applicants* officers officers __________________________________________________ State police departments 55% 6% 4% Police departments All sizes 26% 4% 2% 1,000,000 or more 79 29 0 500,000-999,999 71 29 8 250,000-499,999 85 8 5 100,000-249,999 63 7 1 50,000-99,999 71 7 1 25,000-49,999 52 7 4 10,000-24,999 44 7 3 2,500-9,999 25 4 1 Under 2,500 14 3 2 Sheriffs' departments All sizes 23% 4% 3% 1,000,000 or more 46 0 0 500,000-999,999 42 5 4 250,000-499,999 40 7 0 100,000-249,999 44 3 2 50,000-99,999 33 5 3 25,000-49,999 26 7 7 10,000-24,999 15 2 1 Under 10,000 14 2 1 ________________________________________________ (continued) Percent of agencies with a mandatory testing program for: _______________________________ Type of agency Candidates Officers in and population fordrug-related served promotion* positions __________________________________________________ State police departments 2% 10% Police departments All sizes 2% 3% 1,000,000 or more 21 43 500,000-999,999 18 25 250,000-499,999 14 13 100,000-249,999 7 10 50,000-99,999 9 14 25,000-49,999 6 6 10,000-24,999 2 5 2,500-9,999 1 2 Under 2,500 1 1 Sheriffs' departments All sizes 3% 4% 1,000,000 or more 4 10 500,000-999,999 0 7 250,000-499,999 0 6 100,000-249,999 3 6 50,000-99,999 3 5 25,000-49,999 6 7 10,000-24,999 1 2 Under 10,000 1 2 ________________________________________________ Note: Mandatory programs are those in which all are tested. *Sworn positions only. Sources: Federal law enforcement officers, 1993. Drug enforcement by police and sheriffs' departments, 1990.State and local police departments, 1990. Sheriffs' departments1990. PRETRIAL RELEASE OF DRUG DEFENDANTS The National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) revealed thatof persons charged with a felony drug offense in 1992 in the 75most populous counties-- * 68% were released prior to case disposition * 27% were held with bail set * 5% were held without bail. The median amount of bail set for a person charged with adrug offense was $5,000. Defendants charged with a drug offensewere more likely to secure release (29%) when bail was set at$20,000 or more than those charged with a violent offense (17%),public-order offense (18%), or a property offense (11%). Of felony drug defendants released prior to the dispositionof their case, 51% were released within 1 day of their arrest,79% within 1 week, and 93% within 1 month. Of felony drug defendants released before case disposition,27% failed to make a scheduled court appearance within 1 year.Seventy percent of the defendants who failed to appear returnedto court by the end of the 1-year study period, while 30%remained fugitives. Sixteen percent of released drug defendants were known tohave been rearrested while on pretrial release. Of all released defendants rearrested for a drug offense, 59%were once again granted pretrial release. Pretrial status of defendants charged with drug offenses,1988-92 Pretrial status and type of release 1988 1990 1992 Total 100% 100% 100% Released 72% 65% 68% Financial total 36% 28% 27% Surety 19 18 15 Full cash 10 7 7 Deposit 6 3 5 Other 1 1 1 Nonfinancial total 36% 35% 39% Detained 28% 35% 32% Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding. Percent of felony defendants released before trial, by typeof offense, 1988-92 Most serious felony Percent released prior arrest charge tocase disposition 1988 1990 1992 All offenses 66% 65% 63% Murder 39 37 24 Rape 55 54 48 Robbery 52 51 50 Assault 69 75 68 Burglary 53 56 51 Theft 64 67 67 Drug offenses 72 65 68 Sales/trafficking 69 61 66 Other 75 70 71 Public-order 70 69 65 Data from the Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP)showed that in 1990, 54% of Federal drug defendants were releasedprior to case disposition. About half of these releases occurredwithin 1 day of arrest, 76% within 1 week, and 89% within 1month. Pretrial status of Federal defendants charged with drugoffenses, 1990 Pretrial status and type of release Total 100% Released 54% Financial* 23 Unsecured bond 23 Recognizance 7 Conditional 1 Detained 46% Held on bail 10 Denied bail 37 * Includes deposit bond, surety bond, and property bond. Of Federal drug defendants released prior to casedisposition, 18% committed pretrial misconduct-- * 4% failed to appear in court as scheduled 4% were rearrested for a new offense 11% committed a technical violation, including reporting violations and violations of conditions involving the use of illegal drugs. Sources: Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992.Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1990. Pretrial release offelony defendants, 1988. Pretrial release of Federal felonydefendants, 1990 . PROSECUTION AND SENTENCING OF FEDERAL DRUG LAW VIOLATORS The number of suspects prosecuted for drug offenses increasedfrom 7,697 in 1981 to 25,663 in 1991. U.S. attorneys declined toprosecute 22.3% (7,814) of suspected drug offenders who wereinvestigated in matters closed in 1991, a lower percentage thanfor offenders suspected of violent offenses (29.5%), propertyoffenses (48.5%), and public-order offenses (36%). The number of persons convicted of violating Federal druglaws rose to 17,349 in 1991 from 5,981 in 1981. This 190%increase exceeded the 53% growth in U.S. district courtconvictions for all Federal offenses during the same years andaccounted for over 67% of the total increase in Federalconvictions. The number of defendants convicted of drug possessionoffenses increased from 498 in 1981 to 1,163 in 1991 -- a 134%increase. Drug possession convictions were 7% of all drugconvictions in 1991. Drug offenses accounted for 19% of all defendants convictedin 1981 and 35% of all defendants convicted in 1991. Drugtrafficking offenses alone accounted for 33% of all defendantsconvicted in 1991. The conviction rate for drug defendantsincreased from 76% in 1981 to 84% in 1991. The percentage of offenders convicted of drug offensessentenced to prison rose from 73% in 1981 to 87% in 1991. The average prison sentence for persons charged with Federaldrug violations was longer than for all other offenses exceptviolent crimes in 1991. Average sentence length for persons sentenced to Federalprisons for drug and nondrug offenses, 1991 All offenses 62 mos. Violent offenses 91 Property offenses 21 Federal drug offenses 86 Trafficking 87 Possession 22 Public-order offenses 38 Drug offenders are receiving longer sentences and are servinga larger percentage of their sentence than in the past. Theaverage Federal prison sentence for drug offenses rose from 62months in 1986 to 86 months in 1991. The average percent ofsentence served until first release increased from 60% in 1985 to68% in 1990. Contributing to these increases are the sentencingguidelines that went into effect in 1987 and the 1986 and 1988anti-drug abuse laws which prescribed stiffer sentences andmandatory minimum incarceration terms for Federal offenders. Sources: Federal drug case processing 1985-91: With preliminary data for 1992. Federal criminal caseprocessing, 1982-91: With preliminary data for 1992. Federalsentencing in transition, 1986-90. Federal criminal caseprocessing, 1980-1987. PROSECUTION AND SENTENCING OF DRUG LAW VIOLATORS IN STATECOURTS In the United States in 1990 there were an estimated-- * 324,235 adults arrested for drug trafficking * 168,360 felony drug trafficking convictions * 129,637 drug traffickers sentenced to incarceration * 82,496 drug traffickers sentenced to State prison or 25 forevery 100 drug trafficking arrests. According to data from theBJS National Prosecutor Survey Program, in 1992, 1 in 5 Stateprosecutors' offices had a specialized narcotics unit. Based onstatutes enacted in the previous 3 years-- * 23% of the offices prosecuted cases based on recentlyenacted statutes addressing controlled substances, such asanabolic steroids and precursor chemicals * 21% prosecuted cases addressing illegal drugs in a schoolzone 9% prosecuted cases for drug possession. The number of drug trafficking convictions in State courts more than doubled between 1986 and 1990. Ofpersons convicted of drug trafficking in State courts in 1990-- * 85% were male * 42% were white, 57% black, and 1% of other races * the average age was 30 * 50% were between ages 20 and 29. Ninety percent of drug trafficking convictions in 1990resulted from guilty pleas; 4% resulted from jury trials; and 4%resulted from bench trials. Drug offenders comprised a third of all persons convicted ofa felony in State courts in 1990. Drug traffickers accounted for 20% of all convicted felons;drug possessors also accounted for 13% of all convicted felons. Seventy-seven percent of persons convicted of drugtrafficking in 1990 were sentenced to some kind of incarceration:28% to jail and 49% to prison; 23% were sentenced to probation.The average prison sentence for persons convicted of drugtrafficking was 6 years 2 months, of which the estimated time tobe served was 1 year 11 months. Disposition of felony arrests in State courts In the UnitedStates, 1990 For 100 arrests: ________________________________ Sentenced to incarceration ____________________ Arrest State offense Convicted Total Prison __________________________________________________ Murder* 55 52 50 Rape 54 47 36 Robbery 37 33 27 Aggravated assault 13 10 6 Burglary 38 28 20 Drug trafficking 52 40 25 __________________________________________________ *Includes nonnegligent manslaughter. Source: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. Of persons convicted of drug possession, 29% were sentencedto jail, 35% to prison, and 36% to probation. The average prisonsentence was 4 years 1 month, of which the estimated time to beserved was 13 months. Mean State prison sentence and estimated time to be served inprison, 1990 Most Mean serious State Estimated conviction prison time to be offense sentence served(a) __________________________________________________ Murder(b) 243 mos. 104 mos. Rape 160 62 Robbery 115 45 Aggravated assault 78 26 Burglary 80 26 Larceny(c) 49 13 Drug offenses 66 19 Trafficking 74 23 Possession 49 13 __________________________________________________ (a)Derived by multiplying percentage of sentence actuallyserved by the mean sentence imposed. Percentage of sentenceactually served was estimated by the source from table 2-8,National corrections reporting program, 1989 (NCJ-138222),November, 1992. (b)Includes nonnegligent manslaughter. (c)Includes motor vehicle theft. Source: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. The average (mean) time from arrest to sentencing was 223days for a drug trafficking case resulting in a State courtconviction in 1990. The average time was 286 days for jurytrials, 219 days for bench trials, and 221 days for guilty pleas.Of 27,052 drug offenders sentenced to probation in 1986 in 32counties across 27 States-- * 61% had a probation sentence combined with a jail term * 20% were not recommended for probation by the probationdepartment * 11% were assigned to intensive supervision * 38% were required to participate in a drug treatmentprogram * 48% were required to be tested for drug use. According to probation records, among probationers with knowndrug problems, 42% were not required to submit to drug testing orparticipate in drug treatment. Sources: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. Prosecutors in State courts, 1992. Recidivism of felons onprobation, 1986-89. DRUG OFFENDERS IN CORRECTIONAL POPULATIONS Drug law violators make up a growing share of the prison andjail population: * drug offenders accounted for 61% of sentenced inmates inFederal prisons in 1993, up from 38% in 1986 and 25% in 1980 * the proportion of drug offenders in State prisons increasedfrom 9% in 1986 to 21% in 1991 * the proportion of drug offenders in local jails increasedfrom 9% in 1983 to 23% in 1989. Of State prisoners in 1991: * 8% were sentenced for drug possession and 13% weresentenced for drug trafficking * women were more likely to be incarcerated for a drugoffense than men (33% versus 21%) * inmates serving time for drug trafficking accounted for 3%of inmates sentenced to life or death * blacks were more likely to be serving time for a drugoffense than whites (25% versus 12%), but less than Hispanicinmates (33%). ....... *Obtained by ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse fromBureau of Prisons Key Indicators Strategic Support System,January 25, 1994. In 1991, 10% of the 57,661 juveniles detained in publicjuvenile facilities were committed for drug-related offenses,according to the Office of Juvenile Justice and DelinquencyPrevention, as presented in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of CriminalJustice Statistics. Juveniles held in facilities, by type ofoffense, 1991 Juveniles detained or committed for: Male Female Delinquent offenses 97% 81% Offenses against persons 33 20 Property offenses 37 30 Alcohol offenses 1 1 Drug-related offenses 10 5 Public-order offenses 4 5 Other delinquent offenses 12 19 Nondelinquent reasons 3 19 The BJS 1990 Census of State and Federal CorrectionalFacilities reported on drug treatment and intervention programsfor 1,024 correctional facilities. Prisons may offer many typesof drug intervention or treatment: detoxification, counseling,education and or awareness programs, urine surveillance, andtreatment in special residential units within the facility-- * Federal facilities reported they could test 33% of inmatesfor drugs; State confinement facilities, 10%; and community-basedfacilities, 57%. * Counseling was available for 14% of inmates in Federalfacilities, 12% in State, and 48% in community-based facilities. * Residential treatment program capacity was from 1% to 2% ofinmate population for all types of institutions. Of all Federal inmates, 9% were enrolled in some form of drugtreatment on June 29, 1990. Among State prisoners, 14% inconfinement facilities were enrolled and 37% in community-basedfacilities were enrolled. The two most common types of programsfor both Federal and State correctional facilities were educationand counseling. According to data from the 1991 Survey of Inmates in StateCorrectional Facilities, 43% of all inmates had participated in adrug treatment program; 36% received their most recent treatmentwhile incarcerated. Group counseling was the most frequent typeof treatment program. In 1991, about 57% of Federal drug offenders and 52% of drugoffenders in state prisons were tested for the humanimmunodeficiency virus (HIV). In Federal prisons, property (1.4%)and violent (1.1%) offenders had higher positive HIV rates thandrug (0.6%) and public-order offenders (0.6%). In State prisons,drug (3.2%) and property (2.7%) offenders had higher rates thanpublic-order (1.9%) and violent (1.4%) offenders. Drug using offenders have a higher risk for infection withAIDS-- * 3.2% of Federal inmates and 4.9% of State inmates who useda needle to inject drugs, tested positive * 5.5% of Federal inmates and 7.1% of State inmates whoshared needles to inject drugs, tested positive. About 4% of drugoffenders in Federal prisons and 15% of drug offenders in Stateprisons who had shared needles, were HIV positive. Sources: Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Profile of State prison inmates, 1986. Profile of jailinmates, 1989. Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Office of JuvenileJustice and Delinquency Prevention, as reported in the BJSSourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993. Drug enforcementand treatment in prisons, 1990. Comparing Federal and Stateprison inmates, 1991. DRUG ENFORCEMENT IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES Data from the BJS 1990 Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities describe the various methodsused to prevent illegal entry of drugs into prisons and to stopthe use of illegal drugs by those under correctional supervision.These methods include drug testing, questioning, patdowns,clothing exchanges, and body cavity searches. Most prison facilities required new admissions and inmatesreturning from temporary release to be patted down and requiredthem to exchange their clothing for prison-furnished clothing. Drug interdiction activities for prison inmates/residents, bytype of facility, June 1990 Type of facility Drug inter- ____________________________ diction Federal State activity, by confine- Confine- Community inmate group ment ment based __________________________________________________ Inmates at admission Verbal questioning 83.8% 74.9% 79.2% Patdown 87.5 77.7 71.2 Clothing exchange 87.5 59.0 26.0 Body cavity search 61.3 45.1 14.4 Inmates returning from temporary release Verbal questioning 72.5% 66.5% 68.0% Patdown 81.3 79.7 81.6 Clothing exchange 72.5 54.5 29.2 Body cavity search 63.8 47.6 20.4 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. Interdiction efforts were more stringent in maximum securityprisons than in medium or minimum security facilities. AllFederal maximum security prisons required clothing exchanges,compared to 81% of Federal medium security prisons and 78% ofFederal minimum security facilities. Prison visitors are alsosubjected to interdiction activities. Most visitors werequestioned verbally and were subjected to searches of theirbelongings. Patdowns and body cavity searches were usuallyconducted if visitors were suspected of carrying drugs orparaphernalia. Drug interdiction activities for prison visitors, by type offacility, June 1990 Type of facility ______________________________ Federal State Interdiction confine- Confine- Community- activity ment ment based __________________________________________________ Verbal questioning 97.5% 78.7% 82.4% Patdown 51.3 69.4 39.6 Belongings search 92.5 87.4 75.6 Body cavity search 27.5 22.4 5.2 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. To prevent drugs from being brought into facilities, prisonstaff are subjected to interdiction activities, particularly whenunder suspicion of drug smuggling. Staff were questioned in 45%of Federal facilities and 23% of State facilities upon suspicionof drug involvement. Staff were patted down on suspicion in 19%of Federal facilities and 14% of State facilities. The 1990 Census revealed that 7 out of 8 institutions conducturine tests on inmates to detect drug use. Of the tests conductedbetween July 1, 1989, and June 30, 1990, evidence of drug useamong State prison inmates was detected in about-- * 1 in 16 tests for marijuana * 1 in 28 tests for cocaine * 1 in 50 tests for methamphetamines * 1 in 75 tests for heroin. Among tests conducted among Federal prison inmates, positivetest results were found in approximately-- * 1 in 100 tests for marijuana * 1 in 250 tests for cocaine * 1 in 250 tests for heroin * 1 in 1,000 tests for methamphetamines. Most facilities conducted urine tests upon suspicion of druguse. One in five facilities systematically conducted urine testson all inmates at least once during their confinement. Percent of inmates tested for drug use, by criteria fortesting and type of facility, June 1990 Criteria for All Federal inmate drug tests facilities confinement __________________________________________________ Total 87% 100% Systematically on everyone at least once during stay 20 31 Randomly on samples 63 96 On indication of possible drug use 76 94 __________________________________________________ (continued) Criteria for State State inmate drug tests confinement community-based __________________________________________________ Total 83% 98% Systematically on everyone at least once during stay 12 46 Randomly on samples 57 76 On indication of possible drug use 74 76 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. Jail inmates, 1992. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails revealed that 308 out of 503large jail jurisdictions conducted urinalysis on inmates. Of the308 jurisdictions testing for drug use, 219 reported testinginmates upon suspicion of drug use, 159 conducted random tests,153 tested inmates on return from the community, and 35 testedall inmates at least once. Sources: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990.Jail inmates, 1992. RECIDIVISM OF DRUG LAW VIOLATORS Of 27,000 drug offenders sentenced to probation in 32counties across 17 States in 1986, 49% were rearrested for afelony offense within 3 years of sentencing. Percent of drug Rearrest offense probationers rearrested Total 48.9% Violent offenses 7.4 Property offenses 10.3 Drug offenses 26.7 Trafficking 14.9 Possession 11.8 Weapons offenses 1.0 Other offenses 3.5 Of all probationers rearrested within the 3-year period, 1out of 3 were arrested for a drug offense. Drug abusers were more likely to be rearrested thannon-abusers: Percent of probationers Drug abuse rearrested within 3 years Non-abuser 36% Occasional abuser 44 Frequent abuser 55 Compliance with drug testing or drug treatment while onprobation indicates a lower likelihood of rearrest: Percent of probationers rearrested Did not Special Satisfied satisfy conditions Total condition condition Testing or treatment 51% 38% 66% Testing and treatment 51 36 65 Testing only 53 34 67 Treatment only 47 42 67 No testing or treatment 48 -- -- -- Not applicable. In a separate study, BJS gathered 3 years of criminal historyrecords for a sample of persons released from prison in 1983 in11 States. The percentage of offenders rearrested within 3 yearswas: * 50.4% of drug offenders * 54.6% of public-order offenders * 59.6% of violent offenders * 68.1% of property offenders. Drug offenses accounted for 14% of new charges against allthose rearrested. Among drug violators released from prison,24.8% were rearrested for a drug offense. Percent of drug law violators released from prison in 1983who within 3 years were Rear- Recon- Reincar- Offense rested victed cerated Drug offenses 50.4% 35.3% 30.3% Possession 62.8 40.2 36.7 Trafficking 51.5 34.5 29.4 Other drug offenses 45.3 34.5 29.1 Sources: Recidivism of felons on probation, 1986-89. Recidivism of prisoners released in 1983. DRUGS AND YOUTH The National Institute on Drug Abuse has sponsored a surveyof high school seniors each year since 1975. As reported in the1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, of 1993 highschool seniors-- * 35.3% reported having ever used marijuana/hashish * 6.1% reported having ever used cocaine * 1.1% reported having ever used heroin. 1993 High school seniors reporting they could obtain drugsfairly easily or very easily Marijuana 83.0% Amphetamines 61.5 LSD 49.2 Cocaine powder 45.4 Barbiturates 44.5 Crack 43.6 Tranquilizers 41.1 Heroin 33.7 PCP 31.7 Crystal metham- phetamine (ice) 26.6 Amyl and butyl nitrates 25.9 In 1993, 26% of high school seniors reported use of marijuanawithin the previous 12 months, up from 21.9% in 1992. Marijuanause within the last 30 days increased from 11.9% in 1992 to 15.5%in 1993. Reported illegal drug use by high school seniors, 1993 Used within the last Drugs 12 months(a) 30 days Marijuana 26.0% 15.5% Cocaine (other than crack) 2.9 1.2 Crack 1.5 .7 Hallucinogens 7.4 2.7 Heroin .5 .2 Other opiates(b) 3.6 1.3 Inhalants 7.0 2.5 Stimulants(b) 8.4 3.7 Sedatives(b) 3.4 1.3 Tranquilizers(b) 3.5 1.2 Steroids 1.2 0.7 (a)Including the last 30 days. (b)Includes only drug use which was not under a doctor's orders. Cocaine use among high school seniors peaked in 1985: Used cocaine within the last: Year 12 months* 30 days 1975 5.6% 1.9% 1976 6.0 2.0 1977 7.2 2.9 1978 9.0 3.9 1979 12.0 5.7 1980 12.3 5.2 1981 12.4 5.8 1982 11.5 5.0 1983 11.4 4.9 1984 11.6 5.8 1985 13.1 6.7 1986 12.7 6.2 1987 10.3 4.3 1988 7.9 3.4 1989 6.5 2.8 1990 5.3 1.9 1991 3.5 1.4 1992 3.1 1.3 1993 3.3 1.3 *Including the last 30 days. Self-reports of drug use among high school seniors mayunderrepresent drug use among youth of that age because highschool dropouts and truants are not included, and these groupsmay have more involvement with drugs than those who stay inschool. The 1993 high school seniors were asked, "How much doyou think people risk harming themselves?" Those students answering "great risk" in regularuse accounted for the following percentages-- * marijuana, 72.5%, up from a low of 34.9% in 1978, but downfrom 76.5% in 1992 * cocaine, 90%, up from a low of 68.2% in 1977 and 1978 * heroin, 88.3%, virtually stable since 1975 * LSD, 79.4%, following a low of 79.1% in 1977 and a high of84.5% in 1990. Data from the National Crime Victimization Survey School Crime Supplement show that in the first half of 1989,2 out of 3 students ages 12 to 19 reported availability of drugsat their school. Availability of drugs was reported more often by-- * public school students (70%) than by private schoolstudents (52%) * students in grades 9 to 12, compared to students in grades6 to 8. Similar rates of drug availability were reported by-- * white students (69%) and black students (67%) * students residing in cities (66%), suburban areas (67%),and nonmetropolitan areas (71%). The survey also showed that most drugs, while available, weredifficult to obtain. As reported in the 1991 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, a 1990 national survey of fifth and sixth gradersfound that-- * 15% knew adults or older kids who tried or who usemarijuana; 5% knew kids their own age who tried or who usemarijuana * 10% knew adults or older kids who tried or who use cocaine;2% knew kids their own age who use cocaine or crack * 90% agreed with the statement "drugs bought on thestreet are not safe to use" * 7% said they will probably have tried drugs by the timethey enter high school. Sources: School crime. Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman, Smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use among Americansecondary school students, college students, and young adults,1975-1993 and NFO Research Inc., Final report, drug awareness andattitude study as reported in BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, various editions. GANGS About 6% of State prison inmates belonged to a gang prior toincarceration, according to data from the 1991 Survey of Inmatesin State Correctional Facilities. Among inmates who were gang members . 81% reported past drug use . 69% said they manufactured, imported, or sold drugs as agroup . 92% reported their gang fought other groups. Of inmates who reported belonging to a gang before enteringprison, 32% were still members at the time of incarceration. Onaverage, they had joined a gang at age 14. Half reported thattheir gang had 60 or more members. In 1991, among Federal offenders who had trafficked in,grown, or manufactured illegal drugs or who had managed drugmoney, 25% said they were a member of a group or organizationthat engaged in illegal drug activities. About 11% were leadersor middle men in a drug organization. About 9% belonged toorganizations with 11 or more members. Fifteen percent of students ages 12 to 19 reported thepresence of street gangs at their school, according to 1989 datafrom the National Crime Victimization Survey School CrimeSupplement. Seventy-eight percent of students who reported gang presenceat their school said drugs were available compared to 66% ofstudents who reported gangs were not present. Students at schools with gangs were more likely to fear anattack both at school and on the way to school and were morelikely to avoid certain areas inside the school. Sources: Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.School crime. DRUG USE IN THE GENERAL POPULATION According to data from the 1993 Substance Abuse and MentalHealth Administration (SAMHSA) National Household Survey on DrugAbuse-- * 77 million Americans age 12 or older (37% of thepopulation) reported use of an illicit drug at least once intheir lifetime * 12% reported use of a drug within the past year * 6% reported use of a drug within the past month. Preliminary data from the 1993 survey show that marijuana andcocaine use is most prevalent among those ages 18 to 34. Age of respondent Drug use 12-17 18-25 26-34 35+ Marijuana Last month 4.9% 1.1% 6.7% 1.9% Last year 10.1 22.9 13.8 4.0 Lifetime 11.6 47.4 59.2 26.6 Cocaine Last month .4% 1.5% 1.0% .4% Last year 0.8 5.0 4.4 1.1 Lifetime 1.1 12.5 25.6 8.5 As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, rates of drug use by college students were among thelowest during the past 10 years. Marijuana and cocaine use among college students, 1984-93 Drug use 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 __________________________________________________ Marijuana Daily within last month 3.6% 3.1% 2.1% 2.3% 1.8% Last month 23.0 23.6 22.3 20.3 16.8 Last year 40.7 41.7 40.9 37.0 34.6 Cocaine Daily within last month .4% .1% .1% .1% .1% Last month 7.6 6.9 7.0 4.6 4.2 Last year 16.3 17.3 17.1 13.7 10.0 __________________________________________________ (continued) Drug use 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 __________________________________________________ Marijuana Daily within last month 2.6% 1.7% 1.8% 1.6% 1.9% Last month 16.3 14.0 14.1 14.6 14.2 Last year 33.6 29.4 26.5 27.7 27.9 Cocaine Daily within last month 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Last month 2.8 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.7 Last year 8.2 5.6 3.6 3.0 2.7 __________________________________________________ Source: Drug use among American high school seniors, collegestudents, and young adults as reported in the BJS Sourcebook ofcriminal justice statistics, 1993. Another measure of drug use in the general population is thenumber of drug-related emergency room episodes and drug-relateddeaths. The SAMHSA Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) reported anestimated 433,493 drug-related episodes in hospital emergencyrooms nationwide in 1992, an 10% increase from 393,968 in 1991. Atotal of 7,532 deaths related to drug abuse were reported in 1992by medical examiners in 38 metropolitan areas. Sources: Substance Abuse and Mental Health ServicesAdministration, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, asreported in ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse, Fact Sheet:Drug data summary. Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, andJerald G. Bachman, Smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use amongAmerican secondary school students, college students, and youngadults, 1984-1993 as reported in the BJS Sourcebook of criminaljusticestatistics, 1993. Drug Abuse Warning Network, as reportedin Fact sheet: Drug data summary. PUBLIC OPINION ABOUT DRUGS As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justicestatistics, the percentage of Gallup Poll respondents describingdrug abuse as the single most important problem facing ourcountry peaked in 1989: Drug abuse most serious Date of poll problem January 1985 2% July 1986 8 April 1987 11 September 1988 11 May 1989 27 November 1989 38 April 1990 30 July 1990 18 March 1991 11 March 1992 8 January 1993 6 January 1994 9 Among Gallup Poll respondents, the use of drugs was mostoften mentioned as one of the biggest problems for schools intheir communities. Giving that response in 1993 were-- * 14% of public school parents * 9% of nonpublic school parents * 17% of those with no children in school * 16% of all surveyed. When asked about spending for various social problems, 60% ofthe respondents to a 1993 National Opinion Research Center (NORC)Poll said this country is spending too little to deal with drugaddiction. In 1990 Gallup Poll respondents were asked how best thegovernment should allocate its resources in its fight againstdrugs: * 40% said "teaching young people about the dangers ofdrugs" * 28% said "working with foreign governments to stop theexport of drugs to this country" * 19% said "arresting people in this country who selldrugs" * 5% said "helping drug users to overcome theiraddiction to drugs" * 4% said "arresting the people who use drugs." Gallup Poll respondents were asked, "What is the mostimportant thing that can be done to help reduce crime?" In1989, the most frequent response was to cut the drug supply(25%), followed by harsher punishment (24%). In 1981, 3% ofrespondents mentioned cutting the drug supply, while harsherpunishment was mentioned by 38% of respondents. NORC has asked adults (age 18 or older) about legalization ofmarijuana since 1973. In 1993, 22% believed that marijuana shouldbe made legal, down from a peak of 30% in 1978. College freshmen have been surveyed by NORC since 1968. In1993, 28.2% of those surveyed agreed strongly or somewhat thatmarijuana should be legalized, down from a high of 52.9% in 1977and up from a low of 16.7% in 1989. Of 1993 high school seniors-- * 22.8% felt using marijuana should be legal, down from 32.9%feeling that way in 1978 and up from a low of 14.9% in 1986 * 75.5% reported worrying often or sometimes about drugabuse, up from 65.5% in 1978 and down from 82.6% in 1990. In 1990 a Gallup Poll asked what respondents felt would bethe effect of legalizing drugs: Effect of legalization would increase: Drug use in public schools 65% The number of addicts 67 The number of drug overdoses 63 Drug-related crime 52 Sources: The Gallup report; National Opinion Research Centerdata made available through the Roper Center for Public OpinionResearch; Alexander W. Astin, et al., The American freshman:Twenty year trends;Lloyd D. Johnston, Jerald G. Bachman, andPatrick M. O'Malley, Monitoring the future 1975-1992; Lloyd D.Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman, Drug use,drinking, and smoking: National survey results from high school,college, and young adult populations, 1975-1988; all as reportedin the BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993 andearlier editions. ONDCP DRUGS & CRIME CLEARINGHOUSE The ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse serves thedrugs-and-crime information needs of-- Federal, State, and local policy-makers * criminal justice and public health practitioners * researchers and universities * private corporations * the media * the public. The Clearinghouse was established in 1987 to provide specialattention to the needs of State and local government agencies,especially those seeking data to meet the statisticalrequirements of the Anti-Drug Abuse Grant Program of the Bureauof Justice Assistance (BJA). In 1994, the Clearinghouse became acomponent of the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,with funding from the Office of National Drug Control Policy. The ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse responds torequests for current data on-- * illegal drugs * drug-related crime * drug law violations * drug-using offenders in the criminal justice system * drug treatment for offenders * the impact of drugs on criminal justice administration. The clearinghouse component-- * disseminates ONDCP, BJS and other Department of Justicepublications relating to drugs and crime * prepares and distributes fact sheets and selectedbibliographies on specific drugs-and- crime topics * responds to information requests utilizing a bibliographicdatabase of statistical and research reports, books, and journalarticles on drugs and crime * searches the bibliographic database to fill requests fordata on specific topics * advises requesters on data availability and usefulness andon data sources that may meet their needs * provides statistics and bibliographic citations by mail ortelephone * maintains a reading room where visitors can use theclearinghouse collection of library documents and vertical fileitems on drugs and crime * coordinates with Federal, State, and local agencies inidentifying other data resources and makes referrals. During 1994 the Clearinghouse-- * handled nearly 10,000 requests for information * expanded the bibliographic database to about 4,500documents and total library holdings to about 13,000 items * distributed about 75,000 drugs-and-crime documents, 33% ofwhich were Clearinghouse products, 12% were BJS publications, and7% were other Office of Justice Programs publications * attended seven conferences * distributed nine publications of the Office of NationalDrug Control Policy including the 1994 National Drug ControlStrategy, Pulse Check, and Marijuana Situation Assessment prepared Drugs and crime facts, 1993 (August 1994), which presents existing BJS data on the subject from diverse BJS reports * prepared State drug resources: 1994 National directory (September 1994), a guide to State and Federal agencies that address drug abuse concerns. * prepared the fact sheets Drug-Related Crime, Drug Data Summary, and Drug Use Trends, summarizingup-to-date statistics on the relationship between drugs andcrime. The toll-free line for the ONDCP Drugs & CrimeClearinghouse is 1-800-666-3332. The clearinghouse is located atAspen Systems Corporation, 1600 Research Boulevard, Rockville,MD, 20850. SOURCE NOTES Single copies of any report with an NCJ number can beobtained from the ONDCP Drugs & Crime Clearinghouse, 1600Research Blvd., Rockville, MD 20850; 800-666-3332. Most titlesare free of charge. Sources with an ICPSR number have a data set available ondata tape, CD-ROM, or diskette. For more information, contact theNational Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University ofMichigan, P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor, MI 48106, 1-800-999-0960. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991, September,1994, NCJ-145864 Crime in the United States, 1993, Federal Bureau ofInvestigation, December 1994 Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992, April1994, NCJ-145125, ICPSR 8864 Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990 (BJS Special Report), July 1992, NCJ-134724 Drug enforcement by police and sheriffs' departments, 1990(BJS Special Report), May 1992, NCJ-134505, ICPSR 9749 Drug Use Forecasting 1993 annual report on adult arrestees,National Institute of Justice, November, 1994, NCJ-147411 Drugs and jail inmates, 1989 (BJS Special Report), August1991, NCJ-130836, ICPSR 9419 Fact sheet: Drug data summary, Drugs & Crime Data Center& Clearinghouse, July 1994, NCJ-148213 Federal criminal case processing, 1982-1991: With preliminarydata for 1992, November 1993, NCJ-144526, ICPSR 9296 Federal criminal case processing, 1980-1987, May 1990,NCJ-120069, ICPSR 9296 Federal drug case processing, 1985-91: With preliminary datafor 1992, March 1994, NCJ-144392 Federal law enforcement officers, 1993 (BJS Bulletin),December 1994, NCJ-151166 Federal sentencing in transition, 1986-90 (BJS SpecialReport), June 1992, NCJ-134727 Felony sentences in State courts, 1990 (BJS Bulletin), March1993, ICPSR 6038 Jail inmates 1992 (BJS Bulletin), August 1993, NCJ-143284 Murder in large urban counties, 1988 (BJS Special Report),May 1993, NCJ-140614, ICPSR 9907 National Corrections Reporting Program, 1989, November 1992,NCJ-138222, ICPSR 9849 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Population estimates1992, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, SubstanceAbuse and Mental Health Services Administration, October 1993 Pretrial release of Federal felony defendants (BJS SpecialReport), February 1994, NCJ-145322 Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1988 (BJS Bulletin),February 1991, NCJ-127202, ICPSR 9508 Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992 (BJS Bulletin),November 1994, NCJ-148818, ICPSR 9508 Profile of jail inmates, 1989 (BJS Special Report), April1991, NCJ-129097, ICPSR 9419 Profile of State prison inmates, 1986 (BJS Special Report),January 1988, NCJ-109926, ICPSR 8711 Prosecutors in State courts, 1992 (BJS Bulletin), December1993,NCJ-145319, ICPSR 6273 Recidivism of felons on probation, 1986-89 (BJS SpecialReport), February 1992, NCJ-134177, ICPSR 9574. Recidivism of prisoners released in 1983 (BJS SpecialReport), April 1989, NCJ-116261, ICPSR 8875 School crime, September 1991, NCJ-131645, ICPSR 9394 Sheriffs' departments 1990 (BJS Bulletin), February 1992,NCJ-133283, ICPSR 9749 Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993, September1994,NCJ-148211 Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1991, September1992, NCJ-137369 State and local police departments, 1990 (BJS Bulletin),February 1992, NCJ-133284, ICPSR 9749 Survey of State prison inmates, 1991, March 1993, NCJ-136949,ICPSR 6068 Survey of youth in custody, 1987 (BJS Special Report),September 1988, NCJ-113365, ICPSR 8992 Women in jail 1989 (BJS Special Report), March 1992,NCJ-134732, ICPSR 9419 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-14IA031-000655-B044-69http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/prsn90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114432 text/html 24275HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:44:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:42 GMTContent-length: 24057 Prisoners in 1990 Prisoners in 1990 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report Prisoners in 1990 May 1991 NCJ-129198 Full text with tables available from: BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 1-800-732-3277 Box 6000 Rockville, MD 10850 ----------------------------------------------------------------- This Bulletin presents counts of the Nation's prisoners atthe end of 1990. The 1990 increase of nearly 59,000 prisonersequals a demand for approximately 1,100 new prison beds per weeknationwide. Prisons were estimated to be operating from 18% to29% above their capacities at yearend. Strong evidence exists that during the 1980's there was anincreasing probability that a convicted offender would go toprison. The ratio of prison admissions to reported serious crimesand arrests for serious crimes increased to levels unequalled inalmost 30 years of reporting. The Bureau of Justice Statistics expresses its appreciationto the departments of corrections in the 50 States, the Districtof Columbia, and the Federal Prison System, that make it possiblefor us to gather and report data on the Nation's prisoners. Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director ----------------------------------------------------------------- PRISONERS IN 1990 By Robyn L. Cohen BJS Statistician The number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of Federal orState correctional authorities at yearend 1990 reached a recordhigh of 771,243. The States and the District of Columbia added52,331 prisoners; the Federal system, 6,355. The increase for1990 brings total growth in the prison population since 1980 to441,422 - an increase of about 134% in the 10-year period. The 1990 growth rate (8.2%) was less than the percentageincrease recorded during 1989 (13.5%), and the number of newprisoners added during 1990 was 26,271 less than the number addedduring the preceding year (84,957). The 1990 increase translatesinto a nationwide need for approximately 1,100 prison bedspacesper week, compared to 1,600 prison bedspaces per week needed in1989. Prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year (referred to as"sentenced prisoners") accounted for 96% of the totalprison population at the end of 1990, growing by 8.6% during theyear. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less orwere unsentenced (like those, for example, awaiting trial inStates with combined prison-jail systems). The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased at afaster rate than sentenced prisoners in the States during theyear (10.7% versus 8.5%). For States, the rate of increase in thenumber of sentenced prisoners was lower than in 1989 (13%). Among the 13,318 Federal prisoners with no sentences orsentences of a year or less were 1,910 under the jurisdiction ofthe Immigration and Naturalization Service, a decrease of 45 fromthe number held at the end of 1989 (1,955). The number of Federalprisoners with no sentences or sentences of less than a yearincreased by 1,315 during 1990 (from 12,003 to 13,318), while thenumber of sentenced prisoners increased by 5,040. Total prison populations in Alaska, the District of Columbia,Oregon, Rhode Island, and Tennessee altogether decreased by 1,675inmates during 1990. The District of Columbia accounted for morethan half of this decline. The percentage of growth was thehighest during 1990 in Vermont (15.9%), Washington (15.4%), andNew Hampshire (15.1%). Thirteen States reported total prisonerincreases of 10% or more since yearend 1989. California'sincrease of more than 10,000 prisoners during the year was thelargest gain in the number of prisoners for any singlejurisdiction. At the end of 1990, about 1 in 8 prisonersnationwide were confined in a California institution. Californiaaccounted for more than 17% of the increase nationwide during theyear. Rates of Incarceration Increase On December 31, 1990, the number of sentenced prisoners per100,000 residents was 293, also setting a new record. Ten of the16 jurisdictions with rates equal to or greater than the rate forthe Nation were located in the South, 4 were in the West, 1 wasin the Midwest, and 1 was in the Northeast. Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000residents has risen nearly 111%, from 139 to 293. During thisperiod, per capita incarceration rates have grown most rapidly inthe Northeast, increasing by 167% (from 87 to 232) and the West,up by nearly 163% (from 105 to 276). The per capita number ofsentenced prisoners in the Midwest climbed 119% (from 109 to239), and the rate rose 68% in the South (from 188 to 315). Thenumber of sentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residentshas increased 133% (from 9 to 21) over the same period. Prison Populations in Western States Grow the Fastest Regionally, during 1990 the percentage increase in the numberof sentenced prisoners was highest in the Western States, with again of 9.2%. The number of sentenced prisoners grew by 8.8% inthe Northeast, 8.8% in the South, and 6.9% in the MidwesternStates. The sentenced Federal prison population grew by 10.7%. In 13 States the percentage change in the number of sentencedprisoners during 1990 was equal to or higher than that of 1989.Among these jurisdictions, four had increases of at least 10%,led by New Hampshire (15.1%), Texas (13.7%), Alabama (13.2%), andGeorgia (10.1%). From the end of 1985 to December 31, 1990, net gains in thenumber of sentenced prisoners have averaged about 1,000 prisonersper week - a weekly gain of about 922 State prisoners and 75Federal prisoners per week over the period. The largest net gainshave occurred in the South (306 inmates per week) followed by theWest (243), the Midwest (194), and the Northeast (179). During1990 average growth in the number of sentenced State and Federalprisoners was equal to a demand for 1,131 additional bed- spacesper week, about 354 fewer than the average weekly growth in 1989. The sentenced prisoner population had increased in fourStates by 90% or more since 1985: California (94%), Colorado(107%), Michigan (93%), and New Hampshire (97%). California'sincrease of 45,796 sentenced prisoners since 1985 accounts for72% of the increase for the West and 19% of the increase amongall States over the period. In 1985, 10.8% of the Nation'ssentenced State prisoners were in California; in 1990, 13.7%. Male Prisoner Population Growth Outpaces that of Females The number of male inmates (727,398) increased at a fasterrate during 1990 (8.3%) than the number of female inmates (7.9%).This is the first year since 1981 that the number of male inmateshas increased at a faster rate than the number of female inmates.The rate of incarceration for sentenced males (566 per 100,000males in the resident population) was about 18 times higher thanfor sentenced females (31 per 100,000 females in the residentpopulation). At the end of 1990, women accounted for 5.7% ofprisoners nationwide. The 1990 growth rate (7.9%) for female inmates was less thanthe percentage increase recorded during 1989 (24.4%). As shownbelow, the percentage change was lower in 1990 across all theregions and at the Federal level. Percent Increase in Female Inmate Population 1989-90 1988-89 Total 7.9% 24.4% Federal 13.0 36.8 State 7.2 23.1 Northeast 9.2 29.8 Midwest 7.1 19.5 South 7.2 23.6 West 6.3 22.3 In 1990, 22 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federalsystem had more than 500 female inmates. Among thesejurisdictions, 10 had increases of at least 10%, led by NewJersey's increase of 17.5% (from 886 in 1989 to 1,041 in 1990).California's increase during 1990, 502 inmates, accounted for15.7% of the nationwide increase of 3,199. Local Jails Held More than 18,000 Because of State PrisonCrowding At the end of 1990, 21 jurisdictions reported a total of18,380 State prisoners held in local jails or other facilitiesbecause of crowding in State facilities. The number of Stateprisoners held locally decreased by 3.6% over that of yearend1989. Three States - Louisiana, New Jersey, and Virginia -accounted for more than half of the prisoners sentenced to prisonbut incarcerated locally. Five States - Arkansas, Louisiana, NewJersey, Tennessee, and Virginia - held more than 10% of theirState- sentenced prisoners in local jails because of Statefacility crowding. Overall, 2.4% of the State prison populationwas confined in local jails on December 31, 1990, because ofprison crowding. Prison Capacity Estimates are Difficult to Compare The extent of crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficultto determine precisely because of the absence of uniform measuresfor defining capacity. A wide variety of capacity measures is inuse among the 52 reporting jurisdictions because capacity mayreflect both available space to house inmates and the ability tostaff and operate an institution. To estimate the capacity of theNation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked to supply up to threemeasures for yearend 1990 - rated, operational, and designcapacities. These measures were defined as follows: - Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned bya rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. - Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can beaccommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, andservices. - Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners orarchitects intended for the facility. Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 32 supplied ratedcapacities, 42 provided operational capacities, and 38 submitteddesign capacities. As a result, estimates of total capacity andmeasures of the relationship to population are based on thehighest and lowest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-sixjurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figurefor each capacity measure they reported.) Most Jurisdictions are Operating Above Capacity Prisons generally require reserve capacity to operateefficiently. Prison dormitories and cells need to be maintainedand repaired periodically, special housing is needed forprotective custody and disciplinary cases, and space may beneeded to cope with emergencies. At the end of 1990, nine Statesreported they were operating below 95% of their highest capacity. Forty-two jurisdictions and the Federal prison systemreported operating at 100% or more of their lowest capacity; 34of these held populations that met or exceeded their highestreported capacities. Overall, at the end of 1990 State prisons were estimated tobe operating at 115% of their highest capacities and 127% oftheir lowest capacities. Prisons in Southern States were found tobe operating closest to their reported capacity on each measure. The Federal system was estimated to be operating at 51% overcapacity. Between 1989 and 1990, State and Federal prisoncapacities were estimated to have increased by approximately20,000-50,000 beds. At the end of 1990, prisons nationwide wereestimated to be from 18% to 29% over their capacities. Prison Population Growth may Reflect Increasing Certainty ofPunishment There is some evidence that during the period 1980-89 changesin criminal justice policies have increased a criminal'sprobability of being incarcerated from levels existing in prioryears. Murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, rape, robbery, aggravatedassault, and burglary are among the most serious crimes andaccount for approximately half of prison commitments from courts.In 1960 there were 62 prison commitments for every 1,000 of thesecrimes reported to law enforcement agencies. During the rest ofthe decade this ratio steadily declined reaching 23 in 1970 andwas relatively stable during the 1970's. Between 1980 and 1989the ratio increased from 25 commitments per 1,000 reported crimesto 62. Similarly, between 1960 and 1970 the ratio of prisoncommitments to adult arrests for the selected crimes declinedfrom 299 per 1,000 to 170. This ratio was relatively stableduring the 1970's, but it increased between 1980 and 1989, from196 commitments per 1,000 adult arrests to 332. (SeeMethodological note for more detail on these data.) Prison-admissions-to-crime ratios for individual Statesprovide an alternative measure of prison use to population-basedrates. Population-based incarceration rates take into account thenumber of sentenced prisoners and the size of the residentpopulation in a jurisdiction. The crime-based rate measures entryinto prison relative to the number of crimes reported to lawenforcement agencies during a year. Between 1980 and 1989 the ratio of court commitments toprison and reported crimes increased 148%, from 25 commitmentsper 1,000 crimes to 62. Over the same period the number of prisoncommitments per 100,000 adult residents went up 115%, from 80 to172. The Northeast had the largest percentage increase in thenumber of commitments relative to reported crime and experiencedthe largest gain in prison commitments relative to population.However, in both 1980 and 1989 the South had the largest numberof court commitments to prison relative to reported crime and topopulation. Besides the increased use of prison relative to reportedcrime, arrests, and resident population, prison population hasalso been affected by changes in the extent of the illegal drugproblem. An estimated two-thirds of those in State prisons for a drugoffense were convicted of trafficking or manufacturing illegaldrugs. (For additional information on drug offenders in Stateprisons, see Profile of State Prison Inmates, 1986, BJS SpecialReport, NCJ-109926, January 1988 and Drug Use and Crime, BJSSpecial Report, NCJ-111940, July 1988.) Since 1985 the number ofadult arrests for drug violations has increased by 74%, and thenumber of arrests for sales or manufacturing of illegal drugs hasgrown by 137%. Methodological Note This bulletin is based upon an advance count of prisonersconducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) programimmediately after a calendar year ends. A detailed, final countcontaining any revisions to the jurisdictions' advance count willbe published later. Explanatory Notes Alabama. Capacity in community programs is not included inthe reported capacity figures. Alaska. In this State, prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Arizona. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude inmates housed in local jails becauseof crowding. California. Population counts are based on custody data. Colorado. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Populationcounts exclude 652 male inmates and 1 female inmate housed inlocal jails awaiting pickup. Connecticut. In this State, prisons and jails form oneintegrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail andprison populations. Delaware. Population counts are based on custody data. Inthis State, prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include, therefore, both jail and prison populations. District of Columbia. Population counts are based on custodydata. In the District of Columbia, prisons and jails form oneintegrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail andprison populations. Population counts exclude those inmateshoused in Federal Bureau of Prisons facilities. Population countsexclude 826 male inmates housed in other States as a result ofcrowding. Female capacities are included in the male capacitiesreported. Federal. Population counts for "Unsentencedinmates" include 1,886 males and 24 females who come underthe jurisdiction of the U.S. Immigration and NaturalizationService. Capacity figures apply to Bureau of Prisons institutionsonly and do not include capacity provided by contract facilities.Female capacities are included in the male capacities reported. Florida. Population counts are based on custody data. Georgia. Population counts are based on custody data. Hawaii. In this State, prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Illinois. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of inmates with amaximum sentence of 1 year. Indiana. Population counts are based on custody data andexclude inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. Iowa. Population counts are based on custody data. Kansas. Female capacities are included in the male capacitiesreported. Maine. Population counts are as of January 1, 1991. Femalecapacities are in the male capacity figures reported. Maryland. While population totals are actual manual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates based on theactual sentence length breakdowns of Maryland's automated datasystem. Massachusetts. Starting with December 31, 1990, Massachusettsis reporting "unsentenced Inmates." Population countsare based on custody data. Population counts exclude 418 male and12 female inmates housed in local jails because of crowding.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith a sentence of 1 year or less." Population totals areactual counts; however, the male/female breakdown is an estimatebelieved to be within 0.1% of the actual counts. By law,offenders in Massachusetts may be sentenced to terms of up to 21/2 years in locally operated jails and correctionalinstitutions. Such populations are excluded from the State countbut are included in published population counts and rates forlocal jails and correctional institutions. Michigan. Population counts are based on custody data.Capacity figures exclude the capacities of the CommunityResidential Program. Mississippi. Female capacities are included in the malecapacities reported. Montana. Starting with the December 31,1990, data, Montana now reports "Inmates with a sentence of1 year or less." Montana is currently operating underemergency capacity; therefore, they are reporting emergencyrather than operational capacity. Nevada. Female capacities include the Nevada Women's Facilityand the Reno Correctional Facility but exclude space at Nevada'sRestitution Centers. Capacity for women at Nevada's RestitutionCentersis included with the male capacity. New Jersey. Rated, operational, and design capacities include568 bedspaces in county facilities. North Carolina. While population totals are actual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates believed to beaccurate within 1% of the actual counts. Ohio. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 yearmaximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Oklahoma. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" may include a small undeterminednumber of inmates with a sentence of 1 year. Rhode Island. In this State, prisons and jails form oneintegrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail andprison populations. Tennessee. Population counts for"Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence" include anundetermined number of "Inmates with a sentence of 1 year orless." Population counts include 1,854 males and 15 femaleshoused in local jails because of overcrowding of State prisonfacilities and exclude 2,593 felons sentenced to serve their timein local jails. (The State pays to house these 2,593 felons, butthe local court maintains jurisdiction.) Texas. Population countsare based on custody data. The courts have ordered that the TexasDepartment of Criminal Justice Institutional Division (TDCJ-ID)cannot house more inmates than 95% of capacity. Approximately2,928 beds are exempt from this rule, and the inmates in thesebeds do not count toward the calculation of 95% capacity. Thepopulation counts include all inmates within TDCJ-ID; however,the capacity figures exclude the 2,928 exempt beds. Vermont. Population counts are as of December 6, 1990. Inthis State, prisons and jails form an almost completelyintegrated system. However, some county and municipal authoritiesdo operate local lockups. NPS data include both jail and prisonpopulations. The counts for jail crowding include 34 male inmateshoused in local lockups. The capacity figures exclude the 34 maleinmates housed in local lockups. Washington. Capacity figures exclude space in Statework-release facilities that housed 609 male and 69 femaleinmates on December 31, 1990. West Virginia. The female population counts are based oncustody data. Population counts exclude 87 male and 15 femaleinmates housed in local jails because of overcrowding. Wyoming. The operational capacity figure is the absolutetotal bedspace available to Wyoming's Department of Corrections,and it includes 60 bedspaces in community centers. -----------------------------------------------------------------Bureauof Justice Statistics Bulletins are prepared principally by BJSstaff. Robyn L. Cohen, statistician, under the supervision ofLawrence A. Greenfeld, corrections unit chief, wrote this report.Thomas Hester edited it. Darrell Gilliard provided statisticalassistance. Marilyn Marbrook, publications unit chief,administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, YvonneBoston, and Jayne R. Pugh. Collection and processing of NationalPrisoner Statistics data were conducted under the generalsupervision of Lawrence S. McGinn and Gertrude B. Odom, assistedby Carol Spivey, U.S. Bureau of the Census. May 1991, NCJ-129198 The Assistant Attorney General, Office of Justice Programs,coordinates the activities of the following program offices andbureaus: Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Institute ofJustice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, Office of Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention, and Office for Victims of Crime CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-15IA031-000655-B044-104http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/prsnr92.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114449 text/html 22143HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:44:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:35 GMTContent-length: 21925 Prisoners in 1992 Prisoners in 1992 Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statistician The number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of Federal orState correctional authorities at yearend 1992 reached a recordhigh of 883,593. The States and the District of Columbia added50,809 prisoners; the Federal system, 8,651. The increase for1992brings total growth in the prison population since 1980 to553,772, an increase of about 168% in the 12-year period. The 1992 growth rate (7.2%) was greater than the percentageincrease recorded during 1991 (6.6%), and the number of newprisoners added during 1992 was 8,451 more than the number addedduring the preceding year (51,009). The 1992 increase translatesinto nationwide need for approximately 1,143 prison bedspaces perweek, compared to the nearly 981 prison bedspaces per week neededin 1991. Prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year (referred to as"sentenced prisoners") accounted for 96% of the totalprison population at the end of 1992, growing by 7.3% during theyear. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less orwere unsenenced (for example, those awaiting trial in States withcombined prison-jail systems). The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased at afaster rate than sentenced prisoners in the States during 1992(15.9% versus 6.8%). These annual rates of increase were higherthan in 1991 when the Federal system grew 12.5%, and Statesystems, 6.4. The number of Federal prisoners with no sentences orsentences of less than a year decreased during 1992 (from 14,912to 14,553), while the number of sentenced prisoners increased by9,010. Prison populations in Maine, New Jersey, North Dakota,Oregon, and Wyoming decreased during 1992. The decrease in these5 States totaled 1,135 inmates. The highest percentages of growthduring 1992 were reported in Texas (18.4%), West Virginia(16.2%), Nw Hampshire (15.9%), Idaho (15.5%), and Wisconsin(15.4%). Eight States reported total prisoner populationincreases of 10% or more since yearend 1991. Texas' increase of 9,501 prisoners during the year was thelargest gain in the number of prisoners for any singlejurisdiction, followed by California (7,688), New York (3,874),and Michigan (2,596). Texas accounted for about 16% of theincrease in prisonpopulation nationwide. Rates of incarceration increase On December 31, 1992, the number of sentenced prisoners per100,000 residents was 329, a new record. Twelve of the 19jurisdictions with rates greater than the rate for the Nationwere located in the South, 4 were in the West, 2 were in theMidwest, and 1was in the Northeast. Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000residents has risen nearly 137%, from 139 to 329. During thisperiod, per capita incarceration rates have grown most rapidly inthe Northeast, increasing by 198% (from 87 to 259), and the West,up by184% (from 105 to 298). The per capita number of sentencedprisoners in the Midwest climbed 149% (from 109 to 271), and therate rose 89% in the South (from 188 to 355). The number ofsentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents hasincreased 18% (from 9 to 26) over the same period. Prison populations in Southern States grow the fastest Regionally, during 1992 the percentage increase in the numberof sentenced prisoners was highest in the Southern States, with again of 7.8% (table 3). The number of sentenced prisoners grew by6.7% in the Midwest, 5.9% in the West, and 4.6% in the Northest.The sentenced Federal prison population grew by 15.9%. In 22States and the District of Columbia the percentage change in thenumber of sentenced prisoners during 1992 was higher than that of1991. Among these jurisdictions, eight had increases of a least10%, led by Texas (18.4%), Vermont (18.3%), West Virginia(16.2%), New Hampshire (15.9%), Wisconsin (15.5%), and Idaho(15.5%). Since December 31, 1986, net gains in the number of sentencedprisoners have averaged about 1,039 prisoners per week -- aweekly gain of about 946 State prisoners and 94 Federal prisonersper week over the period. The largest net gains have occurred inte South (344 inmates per week) followed by the West (223), theMidwest (202), and the Northeast (176). During 1992, the averagegrowth in the number of sentenced State and Federal prisoners wasequal to a demand for 1,103 additional bedspaces per week, abut139 more than the average weekly growth in 1991. In 1992 the 10 States with the largest prison populationsaccounted for 52% of the total prison population nationwide --California, New York, and Texas accounting for over 25%.Louisiana had the highest incarceration rate with 478 prisonersper 100,000 esidents. Male prisoner population grows at a faster pace The number of male inmates (833,184) increased at a fasterrate during 1992 (7.3%) than the number of female inmates(50,409, 5.9%). The rate of incarceration for sentenced males(636 per 100,000 males in the resident population) was over 18times higher han for sentenced females (35 per 100,000 females inthe resident population). At the end of 1992, women accounted for5.7% of all prisoners nationwide. Overall, the 1992 growth rate (5.9%) for female inmates wasless than the 1991 growth rate (8.4%). The growth rate declinedin the Northeast, from 14.6% in 1991 to 1.7% in 1992, and in theSouth, from 10.0% to 3.6%. These declines in 1992 offset thehighr growth rates in the Midwest and West. Percent increase in female inmate population 1991-92 1990-91 U.S. total 5.9% 8.4% Federal 13.2% 12.8% State 5.0% 7.8% Northeast 1.7 14.6 Midwest 8.2 7.6 South 3.6 10.0 West 7.0 .4 In 1992, 26 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federalsystem had more than 500 female inmates. Among thesejurisdictions, 8 had increases of at least 10%, led by Colorado'sincrease of 16.3% (from 453 in 1991 to 527 in 1992). The Federalprison sstem's increase during 1992, 745 inmates, accounted for26.4% of the nationwide increase of 2,826. Local jails held more than 18,000 because of State prisoncrowding At the end of 1992, 21 jurisdictions reported a total of18,191 State prisoners held in local jails or other facilitiesbecause of crowding in State facilities (table 7). Four States,Louisiana, New Jersey, Virginia, and Tennessee, accounted foralmost 60 of the prisoners sentenced to prison but incarceratedlocally. Four States, Louisiana, West Virginia, New Jersey, andMississippi, held more than 10% of their prison populationlocally. Overall, 2.1% of the State prison population wasconfined in local ails on December 31, 1992, because of prisoncrowding. Prison capacity estimates are difficult to compare The extent of crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficultto determine precisely because of the absence of uniform measuresfor defining capacity. A wide variety of capacity measures is inuse among the 52 reporting jurisdictions because capacity mayrflect both available space to house inmates and the ability tostaff and operate an institution. To estimate the capacity of theNation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked to supply up to threemeasures for yearend -- rated, operational, and design capaciies.These measures were defined as follows: Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by arating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can beaccommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, andservices. Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners orarchitects intended for the facility. Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 38 supplied ratedcapacities, 42 provided operational capacities, and 35 submitteddesign capacities. As a result, estimates of total capacity andmeasures of the relationship to population are based on thehighest and lwest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-fourjurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figurefor each capacity measure they reported.) Most jurisdictions are operating above capacity Prisons generally require reserve capacity to operateefficiently. Prison dormitories and cells need to be maintainedand repaired periodically, special housing is needed forprotective custody and disciplinary cases, and space may beneeded to cope with mergencies. At the end of 1992, 11 Statesreported they were operating at 95% or below their highestcapacity. Forty-three jurisdictions and the Federal prison systemreported operating at 100% or more of their lowest capacity. At the end of 1992, the Federal system was estimated to beoperating at 52% over capacity. State prisons were estimated tobe operating at 118% of their highest capacities and 131% oftheir lowest capacities. Rise in prison population linked to changes in prisonadmissions Underlying the dramatic growth in the State prison populationduring the 1980's were changes in the composition of prisonadmissions. Since 1977 the relative sizes of the two principalsources of admissions to prison, court commitments and returnedconditonal release violators, have changed. Court commitmentsaccount for a decreasing share of all prison admissions: 68.0% in1991, down from 84.3% in 1977 (table 10). As a percentage of alladmissions, those returning to prison after a conditional releasemre than doubled, from 14.5% to 30.5%. These conditional releaseviolators had originally left prison as parolees, mandatoryreleases, and other types of releases involving communtysupervision. The absolute number of conditional release violators returnedto prison grew 7-fold, from 19,617 in 1977 to 142,100 in 1991,while the number of new court commitments nearly tripled, from114,230 to 317,237. Overall, the increase in the number ofconditioal release violators accounted for more than a third ofthe growth in the total admissions to State prisons. An increasing percentage of court commitments sentenced fordrug offenses In 1990, the latest year for which data are available, thenumber of new court commitments for drug offenses reached arecord high, an estimated 103,800. For the first time, the numberof persons admitted for drug offenses was greater than the numberadmited for property offenses (102,400), violent offenses(87,200), or public-order offenses (26,200). An estimated 32.1%of all new court commitments in 1990 were drug offenders, up from11.5% in 1977 (figure 2). In 1990 an estimated 31.7% wereproperty offnders; 27.0%, violent offenders; and 8.1%,public-order offenders. The increase in drug offenders admittedto prison accounted for more than 40% of the total growth in newcourt commitments since 1977. Growth in the number of persons arrested for drug lawviolations and an increase in the rate of incarceration for drugoffenses account for the change in the prison offensedistribution. Between 1977 and 1990, the estimated number ofadult arrests for dru law violations increased by 104.4%, from493,300 to 1,008,300 (table 11). Compounding the impact of moredrug arrests, the rate of drug offenders sent to State prisonrose from 27 per 1,000 adult arrests for drug violations in 1977to 103 admissions per ,000 in 1990. An increasing number of arrests and a rise in the probabilityof incarceration for serious crimes Growth in the prison population was not solely the result ofmore commitments of drug offenders. Between 1977 and 1990 thenumber of persons admitted to prison for selected seriousoffenses, such as murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, sexualassault, robbey, aggravated assault, and burglary, also rose bymore than 50,000. Regardless of the type of offense, the number of adultsarrested and the ratio of prison admissions to arrests increasedbetween 1977 and 1990. The total number of arrests for seriouscrimes rose by 48.8%, from 592,400 to 881,300, while the ratio ofpriso admissions to adult arrests for these crimes increased from121 commitments per 1,000 arrests to 143. Although the prisoncommitment ratio was higher in 1990 than in 1977, it changed fromyear-to-year: increasing from 1978 to 1984, fluctuating between195 and 1988, and then increasing after 1988. Although the number of persons admitted to prison grew foreach of the five selected serious offenses, increases in thenumber arrested for aggravated assault and in the probability ofincarceration for burglary accounted for much of the totalgrowth. Growth in the number of arrests for aggravated assaultaccounted for more than two-thirds of the total increase inarrests for serious crimes. In 1990 an estimated 410,800 adultswere arrested for aggravated assault, up from 209,300 in 1977.When combine with an increase in the probability of going toprison from 32 per 1,000 arrests to 56 per 1,000, aggravatedassault accounted for nearly a third of the total increase inprison admissions for serious offenses. A rise in the prison admissions to arrest ratio for burglaryaccounted for an additional 24% of the total increase in prisonadmissions for serious offenses. While the annual number ofadults arrested for burglary grew by 42,000 between 1977 and1990, thenumber of admissions to prison per 1,000 arrestsincreased from 115 to 160. At least 13,000 more admissions toprison for burglary occurred in 1990 than in 1977 because of thehigher rate of imprisonment. Methodological note This Bulletin is based upon an advance count of prisonersconducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) programimmediately after the end of each calendar year. A detailed,final count containing any revisions to the jurisdictions'advance count ill be published later. Explanatory notes Alabama. Capacity in community programs is not included inthe reported capacity figures. Alaska. Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include, therefore, both jail and prison populations. Arizona. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude 95 males housed in local jails becauseof crowding. California. Population counts are based on custody data. Colorado. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Connecticut. Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Delaware. Population counts are based on custody data.Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS datainclude, therefore, both jail and prison populations. District of Columbia. Prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Florida. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith a sentence of 1 year or less." Georgia. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude an undetermined number of inmateshoused in local jails solely to ease crowding, awaiting pick-up. Hawaii. Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include, therefore, both jail and prison populations.Capacities of female facilities are included in those reportedfor male facilities. Idaho. Population counts are from December 30, 1992. Illinois. Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith sentence of 1 year or less." Indiana. Population counts are based on custody data andexclude 761 male and 18 female inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding. Iowa. Population counts are based on custody data. Maryland. While population totals are actual manual counts,breakdowns for sentence length are estimates based on the actualsentence length data from Maryland's automated system. Massachusetts. Population counts are based on custody data asof January 1, 1993. Population counts exclude 957 male inmateshoused in local jails because of crowding. Population totals areactual counts; however, the totals by sex are estimates believdto be within 0.1% of the actual counts. Michigan. Population counts are based on custody data.Capacity figures exclude the capacities of the CommunityResidential Program. Population totals are estimates believed tobe accurate within 5% of the actual numbers. New Jersey. Each capacity figure includes 788 beds in countyfacilities. North Carolina. While population totals are actual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates believed to beaccurate to within 1% of the actual counts. Population countsexclude inmates housed in county jails for which the Stategovernmen had parole authority. These inmates are not under thejurisdiction of the North Carolina Division of Prisons. Ohio. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 yearmaximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Oklahoma. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Populationcounts exclude 442 male and 29 female inmates housed in localjails because of crowding Rhode Island. Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prisonpopulations. Populations of inmates given partially suspendedsentences (part served in prison and part on probation) areincluded with th "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" only if the prison portion of the sentence exceeds1 year. As a result, the "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" populations are understated and the "Inmateswith a sentence of 1 year or less" are overstted. Tennessee. Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number of"Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less." Populationcounts include 1,064 male and 56 female inmates housed in localjails because of crowdng and exclude 2,680 felons sentenced toserve their time in local jails. The State pays to house these2,680 felons, but the local court maintains jurisdiction. Texas. Population counts are based on custody data. Vermont. Prisons and jails form an almost completelyintegrated system. However, some county and municipal authoritiesdo operate "local lockups." NPS data include both jailand prison populations. The capacity figures exclude the 18 maleinmates housd in "local lockups." Washington. Capacity figures exclude State work releasefacilities which housed 785 male and 169 female inmates onDecember 31, 1992. State pre-release and work release facilitieshave beds reserved for 336 male State inmates and 90 female Stateinmates The remaining capacity of these facilities is forparolees, probationers, and offenders serving partial confinementsentences. West Virginia. Population counts exclude 362 male and 19female inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. Wyoming. The male operational capacity figure is the absolutetotal bed space available to Wyoming's Department of Corrections,and it includes 150 bed spaces in community centers notdesignated as exclusively male or female. Darrell K. Gilliard wrote this report, under the supervisionof Allen J. Beck. Statistical assistance provided by DanielleMorton and Nneka Shelton. Corrections statistics are preparedunder the general direction of Lawrence Greenfeld. Tom Hester andPrscilla Middleton edited the report. Betty Sherman, Jayne Pugh,and Yvonne Boston, under the general supervision of MarilynMarbrook, produced the report. Data collection and processingwere carried out by Carol Spivey under the supervision ofGerturde Odm and N. Gail Hoff, Demographics Surveys Division,U.S. Bureau of the Census. May 1993, NCJ-141874 The Bureau of Justice Statistics, an agency of the U.S.Department of Justice, is part of the Office of Justice Programs,which also includes the Office for Victims of Crime, the NationalInstitute of Justice, the Bureau of Justice Assistance, and theOffie of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-16IA031-000655-B044-140http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/jailin92.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114459 text/html 62533HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:44:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:46 GMTContent-length: 62315 Jail Inmates 1992 Jail Inmates 1992 August 1993 NCJ-143284 Full text with tables available from: Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 800-732-3277 Box 179 Annapolis Junction, MD. 20701-0179 In 1992, for the first time in its 9-year history, the Annual Survey of Jails collected information from the large jurisdictions about the programs that their jails administer -- boot camps, work release, alternatives to incarceration, educational and treatment programs for inmates, and drug testing. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails and this Bulletin would not have been possible without the generous cooperation of jail administrators and staff whose facilities were selected for the survey. Lawrence A. Greenfeld Acting Director By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. Thomas P. Bonczar and Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statisticians At midyear 1992 local jails held an estimated 444,584 persons. From July 1991 to June 1992, the number in jail grew 4%, about the same rate as for the previous 12 months. In 1992 overall jail occupancy was 99% of the rated capacity. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails provides these findings from data reported by 795 jurisdictions for 1,113 jails, about a third of all jails. Local officials administer these facilities which are able to hold persons for more than 48 hours but usually for less than 1 year. Other survey findings include: *About 1 in every 428 adult U.S. residents were in jail on June 30, 1992. *A majority of jail inmates were black or Hispanic. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non- Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and non- Hispanic inmates of other races, 1%. *An estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails on June 30, 1992. The average daily juvenile population for the year was 2,527. *Based on the most recent census (1988) 503 jurisdictions had an average daily population of at least 100 jail inmates. In 1992, these jurisdictions operated 814 jail facilities, which held 362,217 inmates, or about 81% of all jail inmates in the country. One-day counts On June 30, 1992, the estimated number of inmates held in local jails was 444,584, an increase of 4.2% over the number held on June 28, 1991. About 1 in every 428 adult residents of the United States was in jail on June 30, 1992. Fewer than 1% of the inmates of the Nation's jails in 1992 were juveniles. As estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails across the country on June 30, 1992. Most juveniles in correctional custody are housed in juvenile facilities. (For a definition of juveniles and discussion of their detention, see Methodology, page 5.) Since 1970 the number of jail inmates per 100,000 residents has risen 120%, from 79 to 174. During the period, the number of jail inmates at midyear increased more than 2 + times, from 160,863 to 444,584. The rates of incarceration in local jails have risen more rapidly for blacks than whites. In 1984, the earliest year for which data are available, the incarceration rate for blacks was 339 jail inmates per 100,000 residents; by 1992, the rate was 619. For whites, the rates increased from 68 to 109 per 100,000. On June 30, 1992, local jails held an estimated 195,200 blacks and 233,000 whites. Average daily population The average daily population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 441,889, an increase of 4.6% from 1991. The average daily population for males increased 4.7% from the number in 1991; during the same period, the female average daily population increased 2.8%. The average daily juvenile population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 2,527. Adult conviction status At midyear 1992, convicted inmates made up 49% of all adult inmates. The number of convicted inmates increased 6% since June 28, 1991. Convicted inmates include those awaiting sentencing or serving a sentence and those returned to jail because they had violated the conditions of their probation or parole. From 1991 to 1992 the number of unconvicted inmates increased 3%. Unconvicted inmates include those on trial or awaiting arraignment or trial. Demographic characteristics Males accounted for 91% of the jail inmate population. The adult male inmate population increased 4% from 1991 to 1992. An estimated 1 in every 226 men and 1 in every 2,417 women residing in the United States were in a local jail on June 30, 1992. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and other races (Native Americans, Aleuts, Alaska Natives, Asians, and Pacific Islanders), 1%. Daily population movements On June 30, 1992, local jails had more than 46,000 new admissions and discharges, about equally divided between the two categories. Discharges include sentence completions, bail, and deaths. These data exclude transfers among facilities and readmissions or other departures on June 30, 1992, which can only be estimated to have been within the range of 10,733 and 13,367. (For a discussion on reporting practices, see Methodology.) Occupancy The number of jail inmates increased 4% from 1991, while the total rated capacity of the Nation's jails rose 7%. Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, the percentage of rated capacity which was occupied fell 2 percentage points to 99%. Facilities with the largest average daily populations reported the highest occupancy rates. Occupancy was 114% of rated capacity in facilities with an average daily population of 1,000 or more, compared to 53% in those with fewer than 20 inmates. Size of Number of Percent of rated facilitya facilities capacity occupied Fewer than 20 1,017 53% 20-49 773 77 50-99 559 82 100-199 370 91 200-999 405 103 1,000 or moreb 76 114 aBased on the average daily population between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992. bIncludes an unspecified number of facilities for Cook County, Ill., and Orleans Parish, La., each counted as having 1 facility. Jurisdictions with large jail populations Characteristics In 1992 , an estimated 81% of the total annual number of inmates in the Nation's local jails were housed in the facilities of 503 jurisdictions, each with an average daily population of at least 100 incarcerated persons at the time of the 1988 Census of Jails. Population of large Number jail jurisdictions of large June 30, Daily average jurisdictions 1992 1991-92 Region All 503 362,217 356,471 Northeast 85 68,026 68,384 Midwest 91 44,514 43,329 South 229 152,061 147,644 West 98 97,616 97,114 Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, these jurisdictions held on average 356,471 inmates. On the day of the survey, June 30, 1992, these large jurisdictions held 362,217. Including an unspecified number of facilities counted as 1 in both Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, and Orleans Parish (New Orleans), Louisiana, these jurisdictions reported data on 814 separate jail facilities -- 73% of all facilities surveyed. Nearly half of these large jurisdictions maintained an average daily population of between 100 and 299 inmates. Although these jurisdictions represented 47% of all large jurisdictions, they held only 13% of the total annual number of inmates in large jurisdictions. Twenty-nine jurisdictions reported an average daily population of between 2,000 and 22,220 inmates. With an average of more than 4 facilities per jurisdiction, they accounted for 16% of all facilities and 41% of the total average daily population in large jurisdictions. 25 largest jail jurisdictions Within the group of jurisdictions that have an annual number of inmates between 2,000 and 22,220 are the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions. These 25 jurisdictions were in 11 States: 9 in California, 4 in Texas, 4 in Florida, and 1 each in New York, Illinois, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, Arizona, Louisiana, Maryland, and Georgia. These jurisdictions had between 1 and 16 jail facilities in their systems. Six of the jurisdictions had a smaller average daily population in 1992 than in 1991, and six had a smaller population on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Harris County (Houston), Texas, reported the largest growth during the year, an increase of 4,919 inmates on the day of the survey. New York City reported the sharpest decline, a decrease of 2,136 inmates. On June 30, 1992, the 25 largest jurisdictions held 32% of all jail inmates nationwide. The two largest jurisdictions, Los Angeles County and New York City, had more than 40,700 inmates, 9% of the national total. Overall, the number of inmates in the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions on June 30, 1992, was 5% greater than on June 28, 1991. The number of jail inmates in these jurisdictions totalled 143,604, up from 132,506. Inmates held for other authorities Local jail jurisdictions frequently house inmates for other authorities, because of crowding elsewhere or routine needs of other jurisdictions, such as housing detainees pending their transfer or holding convicted inmates while awaiting transfer to State or Federal prison. Among the 503 jurisdictions with 100 or more inmates in 1988, 425 were holding inmates for other authorities in 1992. Approximately 84% of these large jurisdictions had one or more jail facilities holding inmates for other authorities on June 30, 1992. Two-thirds of the large jurisdictions were holding inmates for State authorities; half for Federal authorities. The number of jail inmates being held for other authorities by these large jurisdictions increased by 9,063, up 23% from 1991. The number of State prisoners in local jails grew the most (31%), followed by the number of Federal prisoners (22%). Prisoners held for other local authorities decreased 26%, from 4,548 to 3,355. Court orders to reduce population and improve conditions At midyear 1992 more than a quarter of the 503 large jurisdictions reported that 1 or more of their jail facilities were under court order or consent decree to reduce the inmate population. On June 30, 1992, 131 jurisdictions were under court orders to limit the number of inmates, down from 135 in 1991. Jail administrators in these 131 jurisdictions reported an increase of 13% in their rated capacity during the year, or an increase of 20,160 beds. On average these jurisdictions were operating at about 105% of their rated capacities. Administrators in the 372 jurisdictions not under orders to reduce population or crowding reported less than 1% rise in their rated capacity, and a slight increase in the occupancy rate, from 104% to 105%. Judges intervened most often in the operation of jails with orders to reduce population or crowding, but they also cited other elements of the jail facility, staff, operation, or programs. Overall, 157 of the large jurisdictions were under court order to limit population or to correct a specific condition of confinement. Ninety-four were cited for two or more conditions of confinement: Number of Large jurisdictions conditions with a facility cited by a court under court order 1 63 2-3 33 4-5 11 6 or more 50 Nearly a third of the large jurisdictions with a facility under court order in 1992 were cited for six or more conditions. Forty-one of the 503 jurisdictions were cited for the totality of conditions (that is, the cumulative effect of several conditions). The most frequent condition cited was crowded living units (118 jurisdictions), followed by inadequate recreation facilities (62), medical facilities or services (57), and staffing (53). Fourteen fewer jurisdictions were under court order for specific conditions of confinement on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Six fewer jurisdictions were under court order for administrative segregation procedures or policies; three fewer for recreation; and four fewer for food service. Nine more jurisdictions were cited for grievance procedures or policies; eight more for staffing patterns. Jail programs and alternatives to incarceration In 1992, for the first time in the history of the survey, jurisdictions were asked if any of their jail facilities operated a boot camp or daily work release program and if any operated alternative-to-incarceration programs, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, and day reporting. (Jail jurisdictions reported only for the programs that they operated. Within some counties other agencies may have operated similar types of programs). These programs are defined as follows: boot camp -- a program having a chain of command, highly regimented activity schedules, drill and ceremonies, and stressing physical challenges, fitness, discipline and personal appearance. Work-release -- a program that allows an inmate to work in the community unsupervised by correctional staff during the day and return to jail at night. Electronic monitoring -- a program in which offenders are supervised by correctional authorities outside of the jail facility by use of an electronic signalling device or programmed contact device attached to a telephone. House arrest (without electronic monitoring) -- a program in which offenders are legally ordered to remain confined in their own residence except for medical reasons and employment but are not subject to any electronic surveillance. Day reporting -- a program that permits offenders to remain in their residence at night and weekends while reporting to a correctional official one or more times daily. On June 30, 1992, 9 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating a boot camp program. About 4% of the jail inmates (1,463) in these jurisdictions with boot camps were participating in the program. Among inmates in all large jurisdictions, fewer than half of one percent were in a boot camp. Daily work release programs were available to inmates in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 17,887 inmates in 359 jail jurisdictions were in a work release program. On that day, 7% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in work release programs. On June 30, 1992, 180 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating an alternative-to-incarceration program, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, or day reporting. Offenders in these programs are not considered jail inmates to be included in the midyear count because they are not in physical custody. They do not serve time in a jail facility but would if not for these programs. Of the differing types of alternative programs, electronic monitoring was the most widely available and had the most participants (118 jurisdictions and 4,582 offenders). Day- reporting programs were offered in fewer jurisdictions (43) and had fewer than 2,445 participants. House arrest programs without electronic monitoring were operated by 18 jail jurisdictions with a total of 602 participants. Other types of alternative programs, such as community service and weekend reporting, were available in 57 jurisdictions. More than 6,100 offenders were participating in these other alternatives. About three-quarters of all jail inmates in boot camps were in two jurisdictions -- Tarrant County (Fort Worth), Texas, and New York City. Each of these jurisdictions had more inmates in a boot camp than the other seven jurisdictions combined. Santa Clara and Los Angeles counties in California had the largest number of jail inmates in daily work release programs. Each of these jurisdictions had more than 1,000 work release participants. Riverside County, California, stretching to the Nevada border east of Los Angeles, had the most offenders (1,435) participating in some type of alternative program. Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, had the second largest number of participants (1,223), and Orange County, California, containing Anaheim and Santa Ana, the third largest number, 1,050 offenders. More than 10% of offenders under the supervision of these jail jurisdictions were in an alternative-to-incarceration program. Drug testing The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails asked the largest jurisdictions if and on whom they conducted urinalysis tests for drugs. Of all large jurisdictions, 308 said that they did test. Jurisdictions were more likely to test upon suspicion (219 jurisdictions) than testing all inmates at least once (35 jurisdictions). The number of jurisdictions that tested at random or on an inmate's return from the community was about the same (159 and 153, respectively). Jurisdictions holding between 2,000 and 3,999 inmates were more likely to have at least 1 facility testing for drugs than any other group, 93%. Those jurisdictions that had from 100 to 199 inmates were least likely to test, 47%. Selected jail programs In the 1992 survey, the 503 largest jurisdictions were asked to report on inmate participation in drug treatment, alcohol treatment, psychological counseling or psychiatric care, and educational programs offered by their jail facilities. On June 30, 1992, at least 1 jail facility in 420 of these jurisdictions reported operating these types of programs. A total of 127 jurisdictions reported operating all 4 types of programs. Educational programs (including literacy, basic education, and GED programs) were offered in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. About 9% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in an education program at the time of the survey. Alcohol and drug treatment programs were offered in more than half of the large jail jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 20,100 jail inmates were receiving alcohol treatment; 18,052 were receiving drug treatment. In the jurisdictions operating alcohol or drug treatment programs, the inmate participation rate was lower than 10%. Psychological or psychiatric counseling programs were provided in 212 of the large jurisdictions. More than 14,000 jail inmates were participating in these programs. Inmate deaths A total of 178 large jail jurisdictions (35%) reported one or more jails with an inmate death during the year ending June 30, 1992, compared to 190 (38%) the previous year . Natural causes other than AIDS were the leading cause of death among inmates in large jail jurisdictions (38%), followed by suicide (28%). AIDS-related deaths accounted for 24% of the total, injury by another person, 3%, and accidents or undetermined causes, 7%. Methodology The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails was the ninth such survey in a series sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. The first was conducted in 1982. Complete enumerations of the Nation's jails are conducted every 5 years. Annual surveys - - which collect data on all jails in jurisdictions with 100 or more jail inmates and on a sample of all other jails -- are carried out in each of the 4 years between the full censuses. The reference date for the 1992 survey was June 30, 1992. Full censuses were done on February 15, 1978, June 30, 1983, and June 30, 1988. A local jail is a facility that holds inmates beyond arraignment, usually for more than 48 hours, and is administered by local officials. Specifically excluded from the count were temporary lockups that house persons for less than 48 hours, physically separate drunk tanks, and other holding facilities that did not hold persons after they had been formally charged, Federal- or State-administered facilities, and the combined jail-prison systems of Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Included in the universe were five locally operated jails in Alaska and eight jails that were privately operated under contract for local governments. The 1992 survey included 1,113 jails in 795 jurisdictions. A jurisdiction is a county, municipality, township, or regional authority that administers one or more local jails. The jails in 503 jurisdictions were automatically included in the survey because the average daily inmate population in these jurisdictions was 100 or more in the 1988 census. The jurisdictions with large jail populations, referred to as certainty jurisdictions, accounted for 814 jails and 362,217 inmates, or 81% of the estimated inmate population on June 30, 1992. The other jurisdictions surveyed constituted a stratified probability sample of those jurisdictions whose average daily population was less than 100 in the 1988 jail census. Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. Two followup mailings and phone calls were used to encourage reporting. The response rate was 99% for all jails. For the eight jails in certainty jurisdictions and the one jail in a noncertainty jurisdiction not responding to the survey, data were adjusted by applying the average growth factor for facilities in the same stratum and region with the same type of inmates (men, women, or both sexes). National estimates for the inmate population on June 30, 1992, were produced by sex, race, legal status, and conviction status and for the average daily population during the year ending June 30, 1992, by sex and legal status. National estimates were also produced for rated capacity. Administrators of jails in jurisdictions with large jail populations provided counts of inmates held for other authorities, inmate deaths, and jails under court order. Sampling error National estimates have an associated sampling error because jurisdictions with an average daily population of less than 100 were sampled for the survey. Estimates based on a sample survey are apt to differ somewhat from the results of a survey canvassing all jurisdictions. Each of the samples that could have been selected using the same sample design could yield somewhat different results. Standard error is a measure of the variation among the estimates from all possible samples, stating the precision with which an estimate from a particular sample approximates the average result of all possible samples. The estimated relative sampling error for the total inmate population of 444,584 on June 30, 1992, was 0.47%. Results presented in this Bulletin were tested to determine whether statistical significance could be associated with observed differences between values. Differences were tested to ascertain whether they were significant at the 95-percent confidence level or higher. Differences mentioned in the text meet or exceed this 95-percent confidence level. Measures of population Two measures of inmate population are used: the average daily population for the year ending June 30 and the inmate count on June 30 of each year. The average daily inmate population balances out any extraordinary events that may render the 1-day count atypical. The 1-day count is useful because some characteristics of the inmate population -- such as race, Hispanic origin, and detention status -- can be obtained for a specific date, but may not be available on an annual basis. Population movement In contrast with prior years, admission and discharge data were collected for the single day, June 30, 1992, rather than for the entire year preceding the census date to improve data quality and to ease reporting burdens. Intrasystem transfers within jail systems have been removed from counts of admissions and discharges and included with a combined estimate of transfers between jails and long-term medical and mental health facilities and readmissions/other departures. Because some jurisdictions do not maintain separate records for returning inmates who were on temporary transfers to other facilities or readmissions resulting from weekend sentences, medical appointments, and court appearances, it was only possible to provide an estimate of the volume of this movement. Juveniles State statutes and judicial practices allow juveniles to be incarcerated in adult jails and prisons under a variety of circumstances. Juveniles are persons who are defined by State statute as being under a certain age, usually 18 years, and who are initially subject to juvenile court authority even if tried as adults in criminal court. The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 requires sight and sound separation from adults for those juveniles not tried as adults in criminal court but held in adult jails. A 1980 amendment to that 1974 act requires the removal of juveniles from local jails, except those juveniles who are tried as adults for criminal felonies. The proportion of juveniles who were housed in adult jails in accordance with these guidelines is not available. This report was written by Allen J. Beck, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Darrell K. Gilliard. Corrections statistics are prepared under the general direction of Lawrence A. Greenfeld. James Stephan reviewed the statistics. Tom Hester edited the report. Marilyn Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, Jayne Pugh, and Yvonne Boston. Collection and processing of the 1992 Jail Survey were conducted by Margaret Ferguson and Linda Huang under the supervision of Alan Stevens, Governments Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census. August 1993, NCJ-143284 Data used in this report will be available from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, 1-800-99-0960. The data sets will be archived as the Sample Survey of Jails. Jail Inmates 1992 August 1993 NCJ-143284 Full text with tables available from: Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 800-732-3277 Box 179 Annapolis Junction, MD. 20701-0179 In 1992, for the first time in its 9-year history, the Annual Survey of Jails collected information from the large jurisdictions about the programs that their jails administer -- boot camps, work release, alternatives to incarceration, educational and treatment programs for inmates, and drug testing. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails and this Bulletin would not have been possible without the generous cooperation of jail administrators and staff whose facilities were selected for the survey. Lawrence A. Greenfeld Acting Director By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. Thomas P. Bonczar and Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statisticians At midyear 1992 local jails held an estimated 444,584 persons. From July 1991 to June 1992, the number in jail grew 4%, about the same rate as for the previous 12 months. In 1992 overall jail occupancy was 99% of the rated capacity. The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails provides these findings from data reported by 795 jurisdictions for 1,113 jails, about a third of all jails. Local officials administer these facilities which are able to hold persons for more than 48 hours but usually for less than 1 year. Other survey findings include: *About 1 in every 428 adult U.S. residents were in jail on June 30, 1992. *A majority of jail inmates were black or Hispanic. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non- Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and non- Hispanic inmates of other races, 1%. *An estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails on June 30, 1992. The average daily juvenile population for the year was 2,527. *Based on the most recent census (1988) 503 jurisdictions had an average daily population of at least 100 jail inmates. In 1992, these jurisdictions operated 814 jail facilities, which held 362,217 inmates, or about 81% of all jail inmates in the country. One-day counts On June 30, 1992, the estimated number of inmates held in local jails was 444,584, an increase of 4.2% over the number held on June 28, 1991. About 1 in every 428 adult residents of the United States was in jail on June 30, 1992. Fewer than 1% of the inmates of the Nation's jails in 1992 were juveniles. As estimated 2,804 juveniles were housed in adult jails across the country on June 30, 1992. Most juveniles in correctional custody are housed in juvenile facilities. (For a definition of juveniles and discussion of their detention, see Methodology, page 5.) Since 1970 the number of jail inmates per 100,000 residents has risen 120%, from 79 to 174. During the period, the number of jail inmates at midyear increased more than 2 + times, from 160,863 to 444,584. The rates of incarceration in local jails have risen more rapidly for blacks than whites. In 1984, the earliest year for which data are available, the incarceration rate for blacks was 339 jail inmates per 100,000 residents; by 1992, the rate was 619. For whites, the rates increased from 68 to 109 per 100,000. On June 30, 1992, local jails held an estimated 195,200 blacks and 233,000 whites. Average daily population The average daily population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 441,889, an increase of 4.6% from 1991. The average daily population for males increased 4.7% from the number in 1991; during the same period, the female average daily population increased 2.8%. The average daily juvenile population for the year ending June 30, 1992, was 2,527. Adult conviction status At midyear 1992, convicted inmates made up 49% of all adult inmates. The number of convicted inmates increased 6% since June 28, 1991. Convicted inmates include those awaiting sentencing or serving a sentence and those returned to jail because they had violated the conditions of their probation or parole. From 1991 to 1992 the number of unconvicted inmates increased 3%. Unconvicted inmates include those on trial or awaiting arraignment or trial. Demographic characteristics Males accounted for 91% of the jail inmate population. The adult male inmate population increased 4% from 1991 to 1992. An estimated 1 in every 226 men and 1 in every 2,417 women residing in the United States were in a local jail on June 30, 1992. White non-Hispanic inmates made up 40% of the jail population; black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and other races (Native Americans, Aleuts, Alaska Natives, Asians, and Pacific Islanders), 1%. Daily population movements On June 30, 1992, local jails had more than 46,000 new admissions and discharges, about equally divided between the two categories. Discharges include sentence completions, bail, and deaths. These data exclude transfers among facilities and readmissions or other departures on June 30, 1992, which can only be estimated to have been within the range of 10,733 and 13,367. (For a discussion on reporting practices, see Methodology.) Occupancy The number of jail inmates increased 4% from 1991, while the total rated capacity of the Nation's jails rose 7%. Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, the percentage of rated capacity which was occupied fell 2 percentage points to 99%. Facilities with the largest average daily populations reported the highest occupancy rates. Occupancy was 114% of rated capacity in facilities with an average daily population of 1,000 or more, compared to 53% in those with fewer than 20 inmates. Size of Number of Percent of rated facilitya facilities capacity occupied Fewer than 20 1,017 53% 20-49 773 77 50-99 559 82 100-199 370 91 200-999 405 103 1,000 or moreb 76 114 aBased on the average daily population between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992. bIncludes an unspecified number of facilities for Cook County, Ill., and Orleans Parish, La., each counted as having 1 facility. Jurisdictions with large jail populations Characteristics In 1992 , an estimated 81% of the total annual number of inmates in the Nation's local jails were housed in the facilities of 503 jurisdictions, each with an average daily population of at least 100 incarcerated persons at the time of the 1988 Census of Jails. Population of large Number jail jurisdictions of large June 30, Daily average jurisdictions 1992 1991-92 Region All 503 362,217 356,471 Northeast 85 68,026 68,384 Midwest 91 44,514 43,329 South 229 152,061 147,644 West 98 97,616 97,114 Between June 28, 1991, and June 30, 1992, these jurisdictions held on average 356,471 inmates. On the day of the survey, June 30, 1992, these large jurisdictions held 362,217. Including an unspecified number of facilities counted as 1 in both Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, and Orleans Parish (New Orleans), Louisiana, these jurisdictions reported data on 814 separate jail facilities -- 73% of all facilities surveyed. Nearly half of these large jurisdictions maintained an average daily population of between 100 and 299 inmates. Although these jurisdictions represented 47% of all large jurisdictions, they held only 13% of the total annual number of inmates in large jurisdictions. Twenty-nine jurisdictions reported an average daily population of between 2,000 and 22,220 inmates. With an average of more than 4 facilities per jurisdiction, they accounted for 16% of all facilities and 41% of the total average daily population in large jurisdictions. 25 largest jail jurisdictions Within the group of jurisdictions that have an annual number of inmates between 2,000 and 22,220 are the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions. These 25 jurisdictions were in 11 States: 9 in California, 4 in Texas, 4 in Florida, and 1 each in New York, Illinois, Tennessee, Pennsylvania, Arizona, Louisiana, Maryland, and Georgia. These jurisdictions had between 1 and 16 jail facilities in their systems. Six of the jurisdictions had a smaller average daily population in 1992 than in 1991, and six had a smaller population on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Harris County (Houston), Texas, reported the largest growth during the year, an increase of 4,919 inmates on the day of the survey. New York City reported the sharpest decline, a decrease of 2,136 inmates. On June 30, 1992, the 25 largest jurisdictions held 32% of all jail inmates nationwide. The two largest jurisdictions, Los Angeles County and New York City, had more than 40,700 inmates, 9% of the national total. Overall, the number of inmates in the Nation's 25 largest jurisdictions on June 30, 1992, was 5% greater than on June 28, 1991. The number of jail inmates in these jurisdictions totalled 143,604, up from 132,506. Inmates held for other authorities Local jail jurisdictions frequently house inmates for other authorities, because of crowding elsewhere or routine needs of other jurisdictions, such as housing detainees pending their transfer or holding convicted inmates while awaiting transfer to State or Federal prison. Among the 503 jurisdictions with 100 or more inmates in 1988, 425 were holding inmates for other authorities in 1992. Approximately 84% of these large jurisdictions had one or more jail facilities holding inmates for other authorities on June 30, 1992. Two-thirds of the large jurisdictions were holding inmates for State authorities; half for Federal authorities. The number of jail inmates being held for other authorities by these large jurisdictions increased by 9,063, up 23% from 1991. The number of State prisoners in local jails grew the most (31%), followed by the number of Federal prisoners (22%). Prisoners held for other local authorities decreased 26%, from 4,548 to 3,355. Court orders to reduce population and improve conditions At midyear 1992 more than a quarter of the 503 large jurisdictions reported that 1 or more of their jail facilities were under court order or consent decree to reduce the inmate population. On June 30, 1992, 131 jurisdictions were under court orders to limit the number of inmates, down from 135 in 1991. Jail administrators in these 131 jurisdictions reported an increase of 13% in their rated capacity during the year, or an increase of 20,160 beds. On average these jurisdictions were operating at about 105% of their rated capacities. Administrators in the 372 jurisdictions not under orders to reduce population or crowding reported less than 1% rise in their rated capacity, and a slight increase in the occupancy rate, from 104% to 105%. Judges intervened most often in the operation of jails with orders to reduce population or crowding, but they also cited other elements of the jail facility, staff, operation, or programs. Overall, 157 of the large jurisdictions were under court order to limit population or to correct a specific condition of confinement. Ninety-four were cited for two or more conditions of confinement: Number of Large jurisdictions conditions with a facility cited by a court under court order 1 63 2-3 33 4-5 11 6 or more 50 Nearly a third of the large jurisdictions with a facility under court order in 1992 were cited for six or more conditions. Forty-one of the 503 jurisdictions were cited for the totality of conditions (that is, the cumulative effect of several conditions). The most frequent condition cited was crowded living units (118 jurisdictions), followed by inadequate recreation facilities (62), medical facilities or services (57), and staffing (53). Fourteen fewer jurisdictions were under court order for specific conditions of confinement on June 30, 1992, than on June 28, 1991. Six fewer jurisdictions were under court order for administrative segregation procedures or policies; three fewer for recreation; and four fewer for food service. Nine more jurisdictions were cited for grievance procedures or policies; eight more for staffing patterns. Jail programs and alternatives to incarceration In 1992, for the first time in the history of the survey, jurisdictions were asked if any of their jail facilities operated a boot camp or daily work release program and if any operated alternative-to-incarceration programs, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, and day reporting. (Jail jurisdictions reported only for the programs that they operated. Within some counties other agencies may have operated similar types of programs). These programs are defined as follows: boot camp -- a program having a chain of command, highly regimented activity schedules, drill and ceremonies, and stressing physical challenges, fitness, discipline and personal appearance. Work-release -- a program that allows an inmate to work in the community unsupervised by correctional staff during the day and return to jail at night. Electronic monitoring -- a program in which offenders are supervised by correctional authorities outside of the jail facility by use of an electronic signalling device or programmed contact device attached to a telephone. House arrest (without electronic monitoring) -- a program in which offenders are legally ordered to remain confined in their own residence except for medical reasons and employment but are not subject to any electronic surveillance. Day reporting -- a program that permits offenders to remain in their residence at night and weekends while reporting to a correctional official one or more times daily. On June 30, 1992, 9 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating a boot camp program. About 4% of the jail inmates (1,463) in these jurisdictions with boot camps were participating in the program. Among inmates in all large jurisdictions, fewer than half of one percent were in a boot camp. Daily work release programs were available to inmates in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 17,887 inmates in 359 jail jurisdictions were in a work release program. On that day, 7% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in work release programs. On June 30, 1992, 180 of the 503 large jurisdictions were operating an alternative-to-incarceration program, such as electronic monitoring, house arrest, or day reporting. Offenders in these programs are not considered jail inmates to be included in the midyear count because they are not in physical custody. They do not serve time in a jail facility but would if not for these programs. Of the differing types of alternative programs, electronic monitoring was the most widely available and had the most participants (118 jurisdictions and 4,582 offenders). Day- reporting programs were offered in fewer jurisdictions (43) and had fewer than 2,445 participants. House arrest programs without electronic monitoring were operated by 18 jail jurisdictions with a total of 602 participants. Other types of alternative programs, such as community service and weekend reporting, were available in 57 jurisdictions. More than 6,100 offenders were participating in these other alternatives. About three-quarters of all jail inmates in boot camps were in two jurisdictions -- Tarrant County (Fort Worth), Texas, and New York City. Each of these jurisdictions had more inmates in a boot camp than the other seven jurisdictions combined. Santa Clara and Los Angeles counties in California had the largest number of jail inmates in daily work release programs. Each of these jurisdictions had more than 1,000 work release participants. Riverside County, California, stretching to the Nevada border east of Los Angeles, had the most offenders (1,435) participating in some type of alternative program. Cook County (Chicago), Illinois, had the second largest number of participants (1,223), and Orange County, California, containing Anaheim and Santa Ana, the third largest number, 1,050 offenders. More than 10% of offenders under the supervision of these jail jurisdictions were in an alternative-to-incarceration program. Drug testing The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails asked the largest jurisdictions if and on whom they conducted urinalysis tests for drugs. Of all large jurisdictions, 308 said that they did test. Jurisdictions were more likely to test upon suspicion (219 jurisdictions) than testing all inmates at least once (35 jurisdictions). The number of jurisdictions that tested at random or on an inmate's return from the community was about the same (159 and 153, respectively). Jurisdictions holding between 2,000 and 3,999 inmates were more likely to have at least 1 facility testing for drugs than any other group, 93%. Those jurisdictions that had from 100 to 199 inmates were least likely to test, 47%. Selected jail programs In the 1992 survey, the 503 largest jurisdictions were asked to report on inmate participation in drug treatment, alcohol treatment, psychological counseling or psychiatric care, and educational programs offered by their jail facilities. On June 30, 1992, at least 1 jail facility in 420 of these jurisdictions reported operating these types of programs. A total of 127 jurisdictions reported operating all 4 types of programs. Educational programs (including literacy, basic education, and GED programs) were offered in more than two-thirds of the large jurisdictions. About 9% of the inmates in these jurisdictions were participating in an education program at the time of the survey. Alcohol and drug treatment programs were offered in more than half of the large jail jurisdictions. On June 30, 1992, 20,100 jail inmates were receiving alcohol treatment; 18,052 were receiving drug treatment. In the jurisdictions operating alcohol or drug treatment programs, the inmate participation rate was lower than 10%. Psychological or psychiatric counseling programs were provided in 212 of the large jurisdictions. More than 14,000 jail inmates were participating in these programs. Inmate deaths A total of 178 large jail jurisdictions (35%) reported one or more jails with an inmate death during the year ending June 30, 1992, compared to 190 (38%) the previous year . Natural causes other than AIDS were the leading cause of death among inmates in large jail jurisdictions (38%), followed by suicide (28%). AIDS-related deaths accounted for 24% of the total, injury by another person, 3%, and accidents or undetermined causes, 7%. Methodology The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails was the ninth such survey in a series sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. The first was conducted in 1982. Complete enumerations of the Nation's jails are conducted every 5 years. Annual surveys - - which collect data on all jails in jurisdictions with 100 or more jail inmates and on a sample of all other jails -- are carried out in each of the 4 years between the full censuses. The reference date for the 1992 survey was June 30, 1992. Full censuses were done on February 15, 1978, June 30, 1983, and June 30, 1988. A local jail is a facility that holds inmates beyond arraignment, usually for more than 48 hours, and is administered by local officials. Specifically excluded from the count were temporary lockups that house persons for less than 48 hours, physically separate drunk tanks, and other holding facilities that did not hold persons after they had been formally charged, Federal- or State-administered facilities, and the combined jail-prison systems of Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Included in the universe were five locally operated jails in Alaska and eight jails that were privately operated under contract for local governments. The 1992 survey included 1,113 jails in 795 jurisdictions. A jurisdiction is a county, municipality, township, or regional authority that administers one or more local jails. The jails in 503 jurisdictions were automatically included in the survey because the average daily inmate population in these jurisdictions was 100 or more in the 1988 census. The jurisdictions with large jail populations, referred to as certainty jurisdictions, accounted for 814 jails and 362,217 inmates, or 81% of the estimated inmate population on June 30, 1992. The other jurisdictions surveyed constituted a stratified probability sample of those jurisdictions whose average daily population was less than 100 in the 1988 jail census. Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. Two followup mailings and phone calls were used to encourage reporting. The response rate was 99% for all jails. For the eight jails in certainty jurisdictions and the one jail in a noncertainty jurisdiction not responding to the survey, data were adjusted by applying the average growth factor for facilities in the same stratum and region with the same type of inmates (men, women, or both sexes). National estimates for the inmate population on June 30, 1992, were produced by sex, race, legal status, and conviction status and for the average daily population during the year ending June 30, 1992, by sex and legal status. National estimates were also produced for rated capacity. Administrators of jails in jurisdictions with large jail populations provided counts of inmates held for other authorities, inmate deaths, and jails under court order. Sampling error National estimates have an associated sampling error because jurisdictions with an average daily population of less than 100 were sampled for the survey. Estimates based on a sample survey are apt to differ somewhat from the results of a survey canvassing all jurisdictions. Each of the samples that could have been selected using the same sample design could yield somewhat different results. Standard error is a measure of the variation among the estimates from all possible samples, stating the precision with which an estimate from a particular sample approximates the average result of all possible samples. The estimated relative sampling error for the total inmate population of 444,584 on June 30, 1992, was 0.47%. Results presented in this Bulletin were tested to determine whether statistical significance could be associated with observed differences between values. Differences were tested to ascertain whether they were significant at the 95-percent confidence level or higher. Differences mentioned in the text meet or exceed this 95-percent confidence level. Measures of population Two measures of inmate population are used: the average daily population for the year ending June 30 and the inmate count on June 30 of each year. The average daily inmate population balances out any extraordinary events that may render the 1-day count atypical. The 1-day count is useful because some characteristics of the inmate population -- such as race, Hispanic origin, and detention status -- can be obtained for a specific date, but may not be available on an annual basis. Population movement In contrast with prior years, admission and discharge data were collected for the single day, June 30, 1992, rather than for the entire year preceding the census date to improve data quality and to ease reporting burdens. Intrasystem transfers within jail systems have been removed from counts of admissions and discharges and included with a combined estimate of transfers between jails and long-term medical and mental health facilities and readmissions/other departures. Because some jurisdictions do not maintain separate records for returning inmates who were on temporary transfers to other facilities or readmissions resulting from weekend sentences, medical appointments, and court appearances, it was only possible to provide an estimate of the volume of this movement. Juveniles State statutes and judicial practices allow juveniles to be incarcerated in adult jails and prisons under a variety of circumstances. Juveniles are persons who are defined by State statute as being under a certain age, usually 18 years, and who are initially subject to juvenile court authority even if tried as adults in criminal court. The Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 requires sight and sound separation from adults for those juveniles not tried as adults in criminal court but held in adult jails. A 1980 amendment to that 1974 act requires the removal of juveniles from local jails, except those juveniles who are tried as adults for criminal felonies. The proportion of juveniles who were housed in adult jails in accordance with these guidelines is not available. This report was written by Allen J. Beck, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Darrell K. Gilliard. Corrections statistics are prepared under the general direction of Lawrence A. Greenfeld. James Stephan reviewed the statistics. Tom Hester edited the report. Marilyn Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, Jayne Pugh, and Yvonne Boston. Collection and processing of the 1992 Jail Survey were conducted by Margaret Ferguson and Linda Huang under the supervision of Alan Stevens, Governments Division, U.S. Bureau of the Census. August 1993, NCJ-143284 Data used in this report will be available from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, 1-800-99-0960. The data sets will be archived as the Sample Survey of Jails. . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-17IA031-000655-B044-174http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/prs94as.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114529 text/html 37560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:45:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:52 GMTContent-length: 37342 Prisoners in 1994 Prisoners in 1994 August 1995, NCJ-151654 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin (Note: This file does not contain data tables or figures. Thefull text with tables is available from the Bureau of JusticeStatistics Clearinghouse, 800-732-3277; use the title and NCJnumber to order.) By Allen J. Beck, Ph.D. and Darrell K. Gilliard BJS Statisticians The total number of prisoners under the jurisdiction ofFederal or State correctional authorities was 1,053,738 atyearend 1994. During the year the States and the District ofColumbia added 78,847 prisoners; the Federal system, 5,447.Although the 1994 growth rate (8.6%) nearly equaled the averageannual percent increase since 1980, the total increase of 83,294was the second largest yearly increase on record. Highlights Prisoners Population housed per 100,000 as a percent residentof highest Number of inmates population capacity ------------------------------------------------- Year Federal State Federal State Federal State -------------------------------------------------------- 1980 24,363 305,458 9 130 -- -- 1985 40,223 462,284 14 187 123% 105% 1990 65,526 708,393 20 272 151 115 1991 71,608 754,011 22 287 146 116 1992 80,259 802,241 26 305 137 118 1993 89,587 880,857 29 330 136 118 1994 95,034 958,704 30 356 125 117 ------------------------------------------------------- --Not available. -------------------------------------------------------- * California (125,605) and Texas (118,195) together held morethan 1 in every 5 inmates in the Nation. Seventeen States, eachholding fewer than 5,000 inmates, together held 4% of allprisoners. * At yearend 1994, State prisons were operating at between17% and 29% above capacity, while the Federal system wasoperating at 25% over capacity. * Since 1980 the Nation's prison population more than doubledon a per capita basis. On December 31, 1994, the number ofsentenced prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents was 387-up from139 in 1980. * States with the highest incarceration rates were Texas(636), Louisiana (530), and Oklahoma (508). North Dakota (78) hadthe lowest rate, followed by Minnesota (100), West Virginia(106), and Maine (118). * In 1993 (the latest available data), the incarceration rateof blacks was 7 times that of whites. At yearend there were 1,471black inmates per 100,000 black U.S. residents compared to 207white inmates per 100,000 white residents. The percentage of State prisoners serving a drug sentence increased almost 3-fold from 1980 to 1993 (6% to 22%). The percentage of Federal prisoners serving a drug sentence more than doubled, from 25% in 1980 to 60% in 1993. In recent years, although the number of drug offenders in the Nation's prisons grew dramatically (55,500 from 1990 to 1993), the number of violent offenders grew the most (up 82,100). ------------------------------------- Table 1. Changes in the State and Federal prison populations,1980-94 Annual increase ----------------Year Number Percentof inmates Number change -------------------------------------1980 329,821 -- -- 1981 369,930 40,109 12.2%1982 413,806 43,876 11.9 1983 436,855 23,049 5.6 1984 462,002 25,147 5.8 1985 502,507 40,505 8.8 1986 544,972 42,465 8.5 1987 585,084 40,112 7.4 1988 627,600 42,516 7.3 1989 712,364 84,764 13.5 1990 773,919 61,555 8.6 1991 825,619 51,700 6.7 1992 882,500 56,881 6.9 1993* 970,444 64,992 7.4 1994 1,053,738 83,294 8.6 Annual average 50,069 8.7% ------------------------------------- Note: All counts are for December 31 of each year and mayreflect revisions of previously reported numbers. --Not applicable. *Includes the jurisdiction populations of Massachusetts andTexas for the first time. For comparisons the final 1993 count(947,492), which excludes the noncustody population in Texas andMassachusetts, may be used. -------------------------------------- State and Federal prisons housed two-thirds of all personsincarcerated in the United States--the other third were in localjails. The 1994 growth rate of 8.6% was greater than the percentageincrease recorded during 1993 (7.4%). The 1994 increasetranslates into a nationwide need to confine an additional 1,602inmates each week. Prisoners with a sentence of more than 1 year (referred to as"sentenced prisoners") accounted for 96% of the totalprison population at the end of 1994, growing by 8.6 % during theyear. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less orwere unsentenced (for example, those awaiting trial in Stateswith combined prison-jail systems). The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased less thanthat of sentenced State prisoners during 1994 (7.3% versus 8.7%).The rate of increase slowed to about half the 1993 growth rate. During 1994 prison populations increased in 16 States by atleast 10%. Texas reported the largest increase (28.5%), followedby Georgia (20.3%), Nevada (16.0%), Virginia (14.6%), andWisconsin (14.1%). Three States and the District of Columbiaexperienced less than 2% growth. The District had the smallestpercentage growth (.9%), followed by Oklahoma (1.4%), SouthCarolina (1.6%), and Massachusetts (1.6%). Fifty-six percent of the increase during 1994 was accountedfor by Texas (26,182), California (5,654), Georgia (5,642), theFederal system (5,447), and Florida (4,091). These jurisdictionsincarcerate over 40% of the Nation's prison population. * At yearend 1980, 1 in every 453 U.S. residents wereincarcerated; by yearend 1993, that figure grew to 1 in every189. * From 1980 to 1993, the total number of persons held in thecustody of State, Federal, and local jail jurisdictions grew byabout 863,000 persons. Sixty-two percent of the growth can beattributed to the growth in number of State prisoners (533,000). Between 1980 and 1993, the Federal prison population grew at faster rate (an average of 9.9% per year) than the combined State populations (8.2%) and the Nation's local jail populations (7.3%). Despite the higher growth rate, only 5.9% of all inmates were held in Federal prisons in 1993, up from 4.7% in 1980. * On December 31, 1993, almost 4.9 million persons were under some form of correctional supervision, including 2.8 million adults on probation and 671,000 on parole. The percentage distribution of the total corrections population was-- Confinement 28.0% Federal prisons 1.7 State prisons 17.0 Local jails 9.3 Community supervision 72.0% Parole 13.7 Probation 58.3 * Between 1980 and 1993, the number of persons undercorrectional supervision increased by more than 3 million. About19% of this increase occurred because of the growth in the Stateand Federal prison populations. * * * Rates of incarceration increase On December 31, 1994, the number of sentenced prisoners per100,000 U.S. residents was 387. Of the 14 States with ratesgreater than the rate for the Nation, 11 were in the South, 2were in the West, and 1 was in the Midwest. Four States, NorthDakota (78), Minnesota (100), West Virginia (106), and Maine(118) had rates that were less than a third of the national rate. The District of Columbia, a wholly urban jurisdiction, held1,583 sentenced prisoners per 100,000 residents at yearend 1994.Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000 residentshas risen from 139 to 387. During this period, per capitaincarceration rates rose the most in the South (from 188 to 451)and West (from 105 to 333). The rate in the Northeast rose from87 to 285, and the rate in the Midwest from 109 to 297. Thenumber of sentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 residentsincreased from 9 to 30 over the same period. Prison populations in Southern States grew the fastest During 1994 the average growth in the number of sentencedState and Federal prisoners was equal to a demand for 1,542additional bed spaces per week, about 179 more than the averageweekly growth in 1993. Regionally, during 1994 the percentage increase in the numberof sentenced prisoners was highest in the Southern States, a gainof 13.1%. The number of sentenced prisoners grew by 6.2% in theWest, 5.8% in the Midwest, and 4.1% in the Northeast. In 29States the percentage change in the number of sentenced prisonersduring 1994 was higher than that of 1993. Among these jurisdictions, 16 had increases of at least 10%.They were led by Texas (28.3%), Georgia (20.1%), Virginia(14.9%), New Hampshire (13.9%), and Idaho (13.7%). In five States(Delaware, Maine, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and Massachusetts)and the District of Columbia the number of sentenced prisonersincreased by less than 2%. In two States--Alaska andConnecticut--the number of sentenced prisoners declined during1994. Since 1989 net gains in the number of sentenced prisonershave averaged about 1,162 prisoners per week--a gain of about1,036 State prisoners and 125 Federal prisoners per week over theperiod. The largest net gains occurred in the South (500 inmatesper week), followed by the West (213 inmates per week), theMidwest (180 inmates per week), and the Northeast (144 inmatesper week). Texas accounted for 34% of the total growth in the 16Southern States and the District of Columbia. Californiaaccounted for two-thirds of the growth in the 13 Western States. In 1994 the 10 States with the largest prison populationsheld 55% of the total prison population nationwide, withCalifornia, Texas, and New York accounting for nearly 30%. Texashad the highest incarceration rate, with 636 sentenced prisonersper 100,000 residents, followed by Louisiana (530) and Oklahoma(508). During 1994 the prison population in Texas grew the fastest,increasing 28.5%. Over the past 5 years the State prisonpopulation of New Hampshire grew the fastest, increasing 73.3%.At yearend 1994 North Dakota had the lowest rate of incarceration(78 sentenced prisoners per 100,000 residents), followed byMinnesota (100), West Virginia (106), and Maine (118). Seventeen States, each holding fewer than 5,000 inmates,together held 4% of all prisoners in 1994. The number of sentenced inmates has increased in every Statesince 1989. Alaska (up 1.4% since 1989) and Maine (up 2.2%) hadthe smallest percentage increases. Four other States hadincreases of less than 20% in the last 5 years. Kansas had a5-year rate of growth of 13.5%, followed by Nebraska (13.7%), NewMexico (17.9%), and Wyoming (18.6%). Female prisoner population grew at a faster pace The numberof female inmates (64,403) increased at a faster rate during 1994(10.6%) than the number of male inmates (989,335 at 8.5%). At the end of 1994 women accounted for 6.1% of all prisonersnationwide. Relative to the number of women in the residentpopulation in the States in 1994, Oklahoma (with 96 femaleinmates per 100,000 female residents) and Texas (with 94) led theNation. North Dakota (5 per 100,000) and Maine (9) had the lowestfemale incarceration rates. In 1994, 28 States, the District ofColumbia, and the Federal system had more than 500 femaleinmates. Among these jurisdictions, 14 had increases of at least10%, led by the Texas increase of 27.2% (from 6,949 in 1993 to8,839 in 1994). Six States held fewer than 100 female inmates at yearend1994. Women represented less than 4% of all prisoners in NorthDakota, Montana, and Vermont. In 1994, 7.5% of inmates in theFederal system were female--higher than all State systems exceptfor Oklahoma (9.7%), Hawaii (7.7%), and Texas (7.5%). Local jails held almost 49,000 prisoners because of Stateprison crowding At the end of 1994, 23 jurisdictions reported atotal of 48,949 State prisoners held in local jails orotherfacilities because of crowding in State facilities. Texasaccounted for 42% of the prisoners sentenced to prison butincarcerated locally. Eight States--Louisiana, Texas, Virginia,West Virginia, Mississippi, New Jersey, Tennessee, andIdaho--held more than 10% of their prison population in localjails. Overall, because of prison crowding, 4.6% of the Stateprisoners were confined in local jails, down from 5.2% in 1993. Prison capacity estimates are difficult to compare The extentof crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficult to determinebecause of the absence of uniform measures for defining capacity.The 52 reporting jurisdictions apply a wide variety of capacitymeasures to reflect both available space to house inmates and theability to staff and operate an institution. To estimate thecapacity of the Nation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked tosupply three measures for yearend 1994: rated, operational, anddesign capacities. These measures were defined as follows: Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by arating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can beaccommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, andservices. Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners orarchitects intended for the facility. Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 38 supplied ratedcapacities, 43 provided operational capacities, and 37 submitteddesign capacity. As a result, estimates of total capacity andmeasures of the relationship to population are based on thehighest and lowest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-fivejurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figurefor each capacity measure they reported.) Most jurisdictions are operating above capacity Prisonsgenerally require reserve capacity to operate efficiently.Dormitories and cells need to be maintained and repairedperiodically, special housing is needed for protective custodyand disciplinary cases, and space may be needed to cope withemergencies. At the end of 1994, 13 States and the District ofColumbia reported that they were operating at or below 99% oftheir highest capacity. Forty-one States, the District ofColumbia and the Federal prison system reported operating at 100%or more of their lowest capacity. By yearend, the Federal systemwas estimated to be operating at 25% over capacity. State prisons were estimated to be operating at 117% of theirhighest capacity and 129% of their lowest capacity. Changing demographic characteristics The demographic characteristics of the Nation's prisonpopulation are changing. Since 1980 the number of female inmatesin the Nation's prisons has increased at a faster rate (up anaverage 12.0% per year) than the number of male inmates (up anaverage 8.5% per year.) Despite their faster population growth,females comprised only 6% of all sentenced prisoners at yearend1994. In 1994 the male incarceration rate, 746 per 100,000 maleresidents, was more than 16 times higher than the femaleincarceration rate--45 per 100,000 female residents. Increasingpercentages of State and Federal inmates are from racial orethnic minority groups. Between 1980 and 1993, the latestavailable data, the percent of sentenced inmates who were blackrose from 46.5% to 50.8%. Relative to the number of residents inthe U.S. population, blacks at yearend 1993 were 7 times morelikely than whites to have been incarcerated in a State orFederal prison. An estimated 1,471 blacks per 100,000 blackresidents and 207 whites per 100,000 white residents wereincarcerated in the Nation's prisons on December 31, 1993. The number of prisoners with sentences of more than a yearrose 616,292 between 1980 and 1993 (up 195%). The number of whitemales grew 163%, the number of black males 217%, the number ofwhite females 327%, and the number of black females 343%. The growth in the number of black male prisoners (304,800)accounted for nearly half of the total increase during the13-year period. Hispanics, who may be of any race, are the fastest growingminority group--increasing from 7.7% of all State and Federalinmates in 1980 to 14.3% in 1993. During this period, theHispanic incarceration rate more than tripled--from 163 sentencedprisoners per 100,000 Hispanic residents in 1980 to 529 per100,000 Hispanic residents in 1993. At yearend 1993 nearly139,000 Hispanics were in State or Federal prisons. The total number of Hispanic inmates may actually be somewhatlarger. Because of variations in record keeping, some States areunable to report data on Hispanic origin; other States reportestimates only; and others report only partial counts. Data frompast surveys of State inmates, which are based on inmateself-identification during personal interviews, produce higherestimates of the number of Hispanic inmates. On December 31, 1993, nearly two-thirds of all sentencedprison inmates were black, Asian, Native American, or Hispanic.Growth linked to increasing numbers of inmates in prison forviolent and drug offenses The distribution of the four major offensecategories--violent, property, drug, and public-orderoffenses--changed dramatically in the Nation's prison populationbetween 1980 and 1993. As a percentage of all State and Federalinmates, violent offenders fell from 57% in 1980 to 45% in 1993,property offenders fell from 30% to 22%, drug offenders rose from8% to 26%, and public-order offenders rose from 5% to 7%. The rise in the number of drug offenders was the greatestamong Federal inmates. Prisoners sentenced for drug lawviolations were the single largest group of Federal inmates (60%)in 1993, up from 25% in 1980. The increase in drug offendersaccounted for nearly three-quarters of the total growth inFederal inmates. The percentage of inmates in State prison for a drug crimealso rose significantly, from 6% in 1980 to 22% in 1993. Nearly10 times as many inmates were serving time in State prisons fordrug offenses in 1993 (186,000) as in 1980 (19,000). In absolute numbers, however, the growth in State inmates wasgreatest among violent offenders. Between 1980 and 1993, thenumber of violent offenders grew by 221,200, while the number ofdrug offenders grew by 167,000. As a percentage of the totalgrowth in sentenced State inmates during the period, violentoffenders accounted for 42% of the total growth, drug offenders31%, property offenders 19%, and public-order offenders 7%. Average sentence length and time served for State inmatesrelatively unchanged Data on prison admissions and releases collected annually inthe National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) suggest thatgrowth in the State prison populations has not been the result oflonger sentences. (Each year participating States provideinformation on sentencing and time served for persons entering orleaving prison. In 1993, 38 States and the District of Columbiasubmitted data, accounting for nearly 93% of all admissions and85% of all releases nationwide during the year.) Between 1985 and1992, years in which comparable data are available, the average(mean) maximum sentences of prisoners actually declined from 78months to 67 months. The median sentence length (the 50th percentile) of prisonersadmitted from court remained constant at 48 months. Moreover,despite the increasing use of mandatory minimums and sentencingenhancements during the period, the percent of inmates whoreceived a maximum sentence of 10 years or longer actuallydeclined (from 19.7% in 1985 to 17.7% in 1992). The NCRP data also reveal no significant changes in the timeserved by offenders released from State prison during the period.In 1992 State prisoners released for the first time on theircurrent offense (that is, first releases) served an average of 22months in prison and 5 months in jail. (Time served in jail isthe amount of time an inmate spends in jail prior to enteringState prison and is credited towards time served on the totalsentence.) The amount of time served in prison was slightly lowerin 1985 (20 months), higher in 1986 (24 months), and about thesame since 1987 (22 months). These data reflect the time served by prisoners actuallyreleased. Some prisoners will never be released but will die inprison. Some prisoners with very long sentences do not show upamong released prisoners for many years. As a result, measures oftime served based on released prisoners tend to understate theactual time to be served by persons entering prison. Changing Federal sentencing linked to population growth The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 introduced "truth insentencing" to the Federal justice system. The Act created acommission that specified sentencing guidelines, which went intoeffect in late 1987. The guidelines took into account the gravityof the crime and the offender's criminal record. Under theguidelines offenders convicted of Federal offenses are expectedto serve a minimum of 85% of the actual sentence. After 1986 the average Federal sentence to prison for violentcrimes decreased, while overall time served increased. The resultis a rapidly growing Federal prison population. After 1986 theaverage time served by persons released from Federal prison rosefrom 15 months to 24 months (a 60% increase). For violentoffenses, the time served by first releases increased from 50months to 56 months and for drug offenses, time served increasedfrom 22 months to 33 months. The sentencing reforms also increased the likelihood ofincarceration for convicted Federal offenders. Between 1980 and 1992 the number of defend-ants convicted inU.S. district courts rose from 29,943 to 51,936, and thepercentage sent to prison increased from 46% to 75%. As a result,the number of offenders sent to Federal prisons rose from 13,766to 33,622--an increase of 144%. ("Federal Criminal CaseProcessing, 1980-90," September 1992, NCJ-136945;"Federal Criminal Case Processing, 1982-91, With PreliminaryData for 1992," November 1993, NCJ-144526.) Rise in State prison population the result of increasingnumber of arrests and higher probabilities of incarceration Underlying the growth in the State prison population has beenan increase in the number of arrests from nearly 8.3 millionadult arrests in 1980 to 11.6 million in 1993. Although the totalgrew by nearly 41%, for some offenses the percent increase wassubstantially greater: simple assault (139%), drug abuseviolations (116%), aggravated assault (86%). Compounding theimpact of more adult arrests for selected serious offenses, therate of sending offenders to prison rose between 1980 and 1992(the latest year for which data are available). Except for murderand nonnegligent manslaughter, the number of admissions to Stateprison per 1,000 arrests for serious crimes rose significantly.The likelihood of incarceration upon arrest increased 5-fold fordrug violations, increased 4-fold for weapons offenses, anddoubled for larceny/theft, motor vehicle theft, and sexualassault other than rape. As a result of the compounding nature of these factors, thenumber of admissions to State prisons from court rose from131,215 sentenced prisoners in 1980 to 318,069 in 1993, anincrease of 142%. Methodology National Prisoner Statistics This Bulletin is based on an advance count of prisonersconducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) programimmediately after the end of each calendar year. A detailed,final count containing any revisions to the jurisdictions'advance count will be published later. Most States provide jurisdiction counts, that is, the numberof inmates under their jurisdiction on December 31, regardless ofthe location of their inmates. These counts exclude inmateshoused for other jurisdictions, such as other State's inmates andpretrial detainees, that are housed in a jurisdiction'sfacilities. Some States provide custody counts, that is, the number ofinmates housed in State facilities regardless of jurisdiction.(See Jurisdiction notes.) These counts exclude inmates housedoutside of each State's prison facilities, such as inmates housedin local jails. Custody counts are used to calculate the totalnumber of inmates in prisons and jails. Estimation procedures The offense distributions of State prisoners at yearend wereestimated for 1980, 1985, and 1990-93. To obtain estimates of thecustody populations by offense, data from inmate surveysconducted in 1979, 1986, and 1991, were combined with counts byoffense of annual admissions and releases. The surveys providedthe basis for estimating the offense distributions of the otheryears. The offense distributions were estimating using forward andbackward stock-flow procedures as outlined in CorrectionPopulations in the United States, 1992 (January 1995,NCJ-146413). Data from the 1979 survey were used for forwardestimates for 1980; data from the 1986 survey (conducted in March1986) were used for 1985 estimates, 1990 forward estimates, and1980 backward estimates; and data from the 1991 survey for 1991estimates and 1992-93 forward estimates. To obtain flow populations for each year, the offensedistributions of admissions and releases were drawn from annualreports of the National Prisoner Statistics (1980-82) program andthe National Corrections Reporting Program (1983-92). Data fromthe 1992 NCRP were used to estimate flows for 1993. The offense distributions of Federal inmates are forprisoners of any sentence length on September 30 in 1980 and1985. Data for 1990-93 are taken from the BJS Federal justicedatabase. Jurisdiction notes Federal--The rated capacity of Federal facilities on December31, 1994, was 68,221 inmates. This does not include contract bedspaces. The number of contract bed spaces at the end of the yearwas 9,534. Alabama--The capacity of the community programs is notincluded in the capacity figures reported. Population countsinclude 1,547 inmates housed in local jails as of December 31,1994, because of overcrowding. Alaska--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include jail and prison populations. Alaska's capacity isestablished by the Cleary final settlement agreement with theState court and the Community Residential Centers program. Arizona--Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts exclude 118 inmates housed in local jailsbecauseof crowding in the State facilities. Arkansas--Population counts include 565 inmates housed inlocal jails as of December 31, 1994, because of overcrowding. California--Population counts are based on custody data. Colorado--Population counts for m sentence" include anundetermined number of "Inmates with a maximum sentence of 1year or less." Design and operational capacities do notinclude the Bent County Correctional Facility, owned and operatedby the county of Bent (Las Animas, Colorado) and MinnesotaPrairie Correctional Facility (Appleton, Minnesota) which arecontracted. The Bent County facility holds 320 prisoners and theMinnesota facility holds 405 prisoners for the State of Colorado. Population counts include 815 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding in State facilities. Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include prison and jail populations. Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. AllNPS data include jail and prison populations. Capacity countsinclude the halfway houses under the Department of Corrections. District of Columbia--Prisons and jails form one integratedsystem. All NPS data includes jail and prison populations. Florida--Population counts are based on custody data. Georgia--Population counts are based on custody data. Inmates housed in local jails are not considered part of theprison population until they are admitted. Most inmates areawaiting transfer into the prison system. An undetermined numberwere held because of crowding. Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPSdata include jail and prison populations. Population counts for"Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence" includeparole and probation violators. These inmates were previouslycounted as "Unsentenced inmates." Idaho--Population counts include 312 inmates housed in localjails because of crowding of State facilities. Illinois--Population counts are based on custody data.Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 year maximumsentence" include an undetermined number of "Inmateswith a maximum sentence of 1 year." Capacity figures include875 inmates on electronic detention. Indiana--Prison population counts include 903 inmates whowere housed in local jails as of December 31, 1994, because ofcrowding of State facilities. Another floor was opened in afacility to accommodate a larger number of inmates; as a result,capacity was increased and some crowding was reduced. Iowa--Population counts are based on custody data. Kansas--Population counts for "Inmates with over 1 yearmaximum sentence" include a small undetermined number ofinmates with a sentence of less than 1 year (among thosesentenced under the Kansas Sentencing Guidelines Act of 1993). Kentucky--Population counts include 632 inmates who werehoused in local jails as of December 31, 1994, because ofcrowding of State facilities. Louisiana--The rated and operational capacities do notinclude contractual work release facilities. The rated capacityof the contractual work release facilities is 348 inmates. Theoperational capacity of the contractual work release facilitiesis 343 inmates. Population counts include 8,064 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding of State facilities. Maine--Maine has a number of inmates serving concurrentsentences some of which are 1 year or more and some 1 year orless. These inmates are not included in the prison populationcounts. Maryland--Population totals are actual manual counts;however, the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates. Massachusetts--Population counts are based on jurisdictionaldata for the first time. For this report custody counts forDecember 31, 1993, were updated to jurisdictional counts.Population counts exclude the 963 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of crowding of State facilities. Population totals areactual counts, however, the male/female breakdown is an estimatebelieved to be within 0.05% of the actual counts. Populationcounts include 336 inmates without sentence information. Michigan--Population counts are based on custody data. Minnesota--Population counts include 85 inmates housed inlocal jails as of December 31, 1994, because of crowding of Statefacilities. Mississippi--Population counts are as of December 30, 1994.Population counts include 1,569 inmates housed in local jail asof December 30, 1994, because of crowding. New Jersey--"Design" capacity does not includepersons held in halfway houses (686) and persons held under thecounty assistance program (846). North Carolina--While population totals are actual counts,the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates. Because ofcrowding 248 male inmates were housed in local jails; another 937male inmates were housed in private prisons out of State on acontractual basis. The total of 1,185 male inmates are includedin the population counts. Oklahoma--Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" may include a small undeterminednumber of "Inmates with a sentence of 1 year."Population counts exclude 375 inmates housed in local jailsbecause of overcrowding. Oregon--An undetermined number of inmates for which sentencelength is unknown is included in the count for "Inmates witha sentence of 1 year or less." Pennsylvania--The design capacity figure increased becauseseveral sections in different facilities opened. This State nowtreats the rated, operational, and design capacity the same. Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system.All NPS data include prison and jail populations. South Carolina--Population counts include 359 inmates whowere housed in local jails as of December 31, 1994, because ofcrowding of State facilities. Tennessee--Population counts for "Inmates with over 1year maximum sentence" include an undetermined number ofinmates with a sentence of 1 year. These counts are based on theDepartment of Corrections' population report from December 29,1994. Population counts include 1,829 inmates housed in localjails because of overcrowding and exclude an undetermined numberoffelons sentenced to serve their time in local jails. (The Statepays to house these felons, but the local court maintainsjurisdiction.) These counts are based on a jail report fromDecember 16, 1994. Texas--Population counts for December 31, 1994, include20,720 inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. InTexas the minimum sentence for any offender sentenced to a Stateprison is 2 years. Utah--Population counts include 169 inmates housed in localjails because of crowding of State facilities. Vermont--Prisons and jails form an integrated system. All NPSdata include prison and jail populations. Some county andmunicipal authorities operate local "lockups." NPS datainclude the inmates in local "lockups". Populationcounts for sentenced inmates include 305 who were on long-termfurlough. The rated capacity figures decreased due to the closingof one facility for renovations. Virginia--Virginia uses a base capacity method to determinethe rated, operational, and design capacity figures. Under thismethod of determining capacity, only the bunks that touch thefloor are counted; top bunks are not counted. Population countsinclude 4,508 inmates who were housed in local jails because ofcrowding of State facilities. West Virginia--Population counts are based oncustody data.Population counts exclude 383 male and 15 female inmates housedin county or regional jails because of crowding of Statefacilities. Washington--Offenders sentenced to 1 year or less andunsentenced offenders reside in county jails. Capacities reportedexclude state work release and pre-release facilities whichhoused 918 inmates on December 31, 1994. These facilities'capacity of 1,102 inmates are not specifically reserved for Stateprison inmates. These facilities are for prison inmates,parolees, probationers, and offenders serving partial confinementsentences. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-18IA031-000655-B044-212http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/jails1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114542 text/html 42060HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:45:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:32 GMTContent-length: 41842 Jails and Jail Inmates 1993-94: Census of Jails and Surveyof Ja Jails and Jail Inmates 1993-94: Census of Jails and Survey ofJails By Craig A. Perkins, James J. Stephan, and Allen J. Beck BJS Statisticians U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin April 1995, NCJ-151651 (This report text does not contain the 23 data tables. A copyof the complete report with tables may be obtained from theBureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277, P.O.Box 179, Annapolis Junction, MD 20701-0179--or fax your name,address, the title, and the NCJ number to 410-792-4358.) The number of inmates held in the Nation's local jails onJune 30, 1994, reached a record high of 490,442. Local jails,which are operated by counties and municipalities andadministered by local government agencies, housed about a thirdof all persons incarcerated in the U.S. at midyear 1994; theother two-thirds were in State or Federal prisons. The jail population grew by 30,638 inmates between July 1,1993, and June 30, 1994, the third largest annual increaserecorded since 1983. The 12-month increase was the equivalent ofa 6.7% rate of growth. Between 1983 and 1993, when comparable statistics werecollected, the number of local jail employees grew at a fasterrate than the number of inmates. During this period, the numberof jail inmates increased at an annual rate of 7.5%, while thenumber of full-time and part-time jail employees grew at anannual rate of 10%. By midyear 1993, local jails employed anestimated 165,500 persons. Highlights After a decade of record growth, the number of inmates inlocal jails reached a high of 490,442 on June 30, 1994 Annual Survey Census of Jails of Jails ------------------------------------------- 1983 1988 1993 1994 -------------------------------------------------------------- Number of inmates 223,551 343,569 459,804 490,442 Rated capacity of jails 261,556 339,949 475,224 504,324 Percent of capacity occupied 85% 101% 97% 97% Number of jails 3,338 3,316 3,304 -- Number of staff 64,560 99,631 165,500 -- Number of inmates per employee 3.5 3.4 2.8 -- Annual operating expenditures per inmate $9,360 $10,639 $14,667 -- --Not collected. * The number of jail inmates per 100,000 U.S. residentsincreased from 96 in 1983 to 188 in 1994. * In 1993, 8 States had over 200 local jail inmates per100,000 residents: Louisiana (377), Georgia (328), Texas (307),Tennessee (282), Florida (250), Virginia (225), California (222),and Nevada (215). * Between 1983 and 1993 the number of jail inmates increased106%; the total jail staff increased 156%; and the number ofcorrectional officers grew 165%. * At midyear 1994 the capacity of the Nation's local jailswas 504,324 inmates, as measured by the number of beds allottedby State or local rating officials. * The jail population was 97% of rated capacity. Jail spaceincreased 93% between 1983 and 1994. * White non-Hispanics made up 39% of the jail population;black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and non-Hispanics ofother races, 2%. Factors underlying the growth in the Nation's jail populationincluded: * an increase in adult arrests * a growth in jail admissions * an increased number of felons sentenced to local jails * an increased number of inmates charged with or convicted ofdrug offenses * more inmates held in jails because of crowded State orFederal facilities. Data sources The data in this report are based on results from the 1993Census of Jails and the 1994 Annual Survey of Jails. Every 5years the jail census collections provide detailed information onlocal jail inmates, staff, facilities, and programs. Previouscensuses were conducted in 1970, 1972, 1978, 1983, and 1988.Beginning in 1982 and in years between each jail census, a sampleof jails has been surveyed to obtain basic information on inmatesand jail capacity. These annual surveys provide national-levelestimates on fewer characteristics than the census. (SeeMethodology at end.) As defined in this report, jails are locally operatedcorrectional facilities that confine persons before or afteradjudication. Inmates sentenced to jail usually have a sentenceof a year or less, but jails also incarcerate persons in a widevariety of other categories. Jails-- * receive individuals pending arraignment and hold themawaiting trial, conviction, or sentencing readmit probation, parole, and bail-bond violators and absconders * temporarily detain juveniles pending transfer to juvenile authorities * hold mentally ill persons pending their movement toappropriate health facilities * hold individuals for the military, for protective custody,for contempt, and for the courts as witnesses release convicted inmates to the community upon completion of sentence * transfer inmates to Federal, State, or other authorities * relinquish custody of temporary detainees to juvenile andmedical authorities * sometimes operate community-based programs with electronicmonitoring or other types of supervision. Not included in the survey or census are inmates in sixStates with combined jail and prison systems. At midyear 1994these States-Alaska (except for 5 local jails), Connecticut,Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont--held nearly 6,000inmates who were unsentenced or had sentences of less than ayear. These inmates and the facilities that house them areincluded in BJS prison statistics. The 1993 Census of Jails also included, for the first time,seven Federal facilities that perform the pretrial functions oflocal jails. Data on these Federal facilities and inmates arereported separately. (See the section on Federal jails.) Local jail inmates On June 30, 1994, the Nation's jails held 490,442 inmates, anincrease of 6.7% over the number held on June 30, 1993. The jailpopulation grew by more than 30,000 inmates during the 12-monthperiod, the third largest increase ever recorded. Since 1983 the jail inmate population has nearly doubled on aper capita basis. During this period, the number of jail inmatesper 100,000 residents rose from 96 to 188. At midyear 1994 about1 in every 398 adult residents of the United States was in alocal jail. An estimated 6,725 persons under age 18 were housed in adultjails on June 30, 1994. Over three-quarters of them had beenconvicted or were being held for trial as adults in criminalcourt. Most juveniles in correctional custody are housed injuvenile facilities. Who is a juvenile? Most, but not all, States define a juvenile as a person underage 18 who is subject to juvenile court jurisdiction. Exceptionsusually depend on offense severity or an offender's adjudicationhistory. In the 1993 census and 1994 survey, to achieve reportinguniformity, jail authorities were asked to report the number ofinmates under age 18. Of the 6,725 total in 1994, 76% wereidentified as juveniles tried or scheduled to be tried as adults.Statutes and judicial practice some- times allow youths to beheld in adult jails. Often juveniles accused of acts that arecrimes for adults may be held in local jails or police lockups,given certain conditions: * separated by sight and sound from the general population * held for a limited time, typically less than 6 hours. Most confined juveniles are housed in institutions specifiedfor them. In 1993 about 96,000 were in public and privatejuvenile detention and correctional facilities. The average daily population for the year ending June 30,1994, was 479,757, an increase of 2.9% from 1993. Between 1983and 1993, when separate counts by sex were collected, the averagedaily population of female inmates grew at a faster rate (up11.1% per year) than the average daily population of adult maleinmates (up 7.1% per year). States with the largest jail populations In 1993, 5 States incarcerated slightly less than half of alllocal jail inmates: California (69,298 inmates), Texas (55,395),Florida (34,183), New York (29,809), and Georgia (22,663).Twenty-one States reported a jailpopulation that more thandoubled between 1983 and 1993, with growth ranging from 103% inMaryland to 264% in Texas. States that had the largest number of jail inmates per100,000 residents in 1993 were Louisiana (377), Georgia (328),Texas (307), Tennessee (282), Florida (250), Virginia (225),California (222), and Nevada (215). States with a jailincarceration rate less than half that of the Nation (178 per100,000) were Iowa, Maine, and North Dakota (57), Minnesota andMontana (81), and South Dakota (87). The number of local jail inmates rose the most in the Southand the least in the Midwest. From 1983 to 1993 the inmatepopulation grew 135% in the South, 102% in the Northeast, 81% inthe West, and 79% in the Midwest. For the Nation a declining number of jails held theseincreasing numbers of inmates. In 1993 the total of 3,304facilities was 12 fewer than 5 years before and 34 fewer than in1983. Facility size and the percentage of the inmate populationheld A small number of jails held a disproportionate share of theNation's jail inmates. About 6% of the jail facilities housedmore than half of all jail inmates on June 30, 1993. Facilitieswith an average daily population of 500 or more during the annualperiod ending June 30, 1993, held 53% of local jail inmates.Facilities with an average daily population of fewer than 50persons comprised 57% of all jails but housed about 8% of allinmates. Demographic characteristics of local jail inmates Male inmates made up 90% of the local jail inmate populationat midyear 1994, down from 93% in 1983. An estimated 1 in every212 adult men and 1 in every 2,048 adult women were held in alocal jail on June 30, 1994. On June 30, 1994, a majority of local jail inmates were blackor Hispanic. White non-Hispanics made up 39% of the jailpopulation; black non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and otherraces (Asians, Pacific Islanders, American Indians and AlaskaNatives), 2%. Relative to the number of residents in the U.S. population,black non-Hispanics were more than twice as likely as Hispanics,nearly 7 times more likely than white non-Hispanics, and over 9times more likely than persons of other races to have been heldin a local jail on June 30, 1994. Federal jails June 30, 1994 ----------------------------------------- Estimated number Number of inmates of inmates per 100,000 population ------------------------------------------------------------ Total 490,442 188 White non-Hispanic 191,900 100 Black non-Hispanic 215,400 691 Hispanic 75,500 290 Other race 7,700 74 Note: U.S. resident populations were estimated. Inmate countswere adjusted for nonresponse and rounded to the nearest 100.Rates were based on relevant population subgroups. Adult conviction status, mid-1993 On June 30, 1993, the most recent date for available data, atleast half the Nation's adult jail inmates had been convicted ontheir current charge. Convicted inmates include those awaitingsentencing, serving a sentence, or returned to jail for aviolation of probation or parole. Between 1983 and 1993 thereported number of convicted inmates more than doubled (from107,660 to 226,600). The number of jail inmates awaiting courtdisposition also doubled (from 113,984 to 228,900). In 1993 female inmates were somewhat more likely than maleinmates to have been convicted. Among adult female inmates, 52%had been convicted on their current charge, compared to 50% ofthe male inmates. Rated capacity and percent occupied At midyear 1994, therated capacity of the Nation's local jails totaled 504,324. Ratedcapacity is the maximum number of beds or inmates allocated byState or local rating officials to each jail facility. During the12 months ending June 30, 1994, an estimated 29,100 beds wereadded. Nearly a quarter of a million beds have been added since1983. As of June 30, 1994, 97% of the local jail capacity wasoccupied. As measured by a ratio of the number of inmates housedin jail facilities to the rated capacity, the percent of capacityactually occupied may have been somewhat lower than 97%. Includedamong the total jail inmates were an unknown number of inmateshoused outside of jail facilities--under electronic monitoring,on house arrest, under other kinds of community supervision, ortemporarily in hospitals or treatment centers. As a ratio of all inmates to capacity, the percent ofcapacity occupied increased considerably after 1983, reaching arecord 108% in 1989 and then falling to 97% in 1993. Since 1989rated capacity has risen by nearly 137,000 beds, while the numberof inmates has increased by 95,000. In 1993 the total jail population exceeded jail capacity ineight States and the District of Columbia. Percent of jail State capacity occupied --------------------------------------- Virginia 160% South Carolina 124 District of Columbia 121 New Jersey 120 Texas 115 California 113 Massachusetts 106 Washington 102 Pennsylvania 101 In eight other States, excluding Alaska, the total jailpopulation was below 75% of the combined capacity of all localjails. The lowest occupancy rates were in North Dakota (43%),followed by Wyoming (52%), South Dakota (54%), and Montana (60%).Between 1988 and 1993 the capacity of the Nation's local jailsincreased by 40%, from 339,949 beds to 475,224. In eight Statesthe capacity of local jails increased by more than 60% during the5-year period. Jails in New Hampshire and Massachusettsexperienced the largest percentage increase in capacity. Duringthis period the combined capacities of jails declined in thefollowing jurisdictions: West Virginia, Montana, and the Districtof Columbia. In every census year, facilities with the largest averagedaily populations have reported the highest occupancy rates. In1993 occupancy was 111% of rated capacity in jails with anaverage population of 1,000 or more inmates, compared to 67% inthose with fewer than 50 inmates. The 25 largest jail jurisdictions In 1994 the Nation's 25 largest jail jurisdictions accountedfor 30% of all jail inmates. The jurisdictions were in 12 States:7 in California; 5 in Texas; 4 in Florida; and 1 each in NewYork, Illinois, Louisiana, Tennessee, Arizona, Pennsylvania,Maryland, Georgia, and Michigan. New York City's system, with 15 institutions, had the largestnumber of facilities. The two jurisdictions with the most inmates, Los AngelesCounty and New York City, together held more than 38,284, or 8%of the national total. Overall, the 25 largest jurisdictions on June 30, 1994, had atotal population of 149,082 inmates, 10% more than the 135,060 ayear earlier. In 1994, 15 jurisdictions reported having a larger averagedaily population than in 1993. Dallas County, Texas, reported the largest single yeargrowth--2,123 inmates--and the largest growth from 1988 to1994--5,494. Shelby County (Memphis), Tennessee, reported thelargest decrease from 1993 to 1994--1,327 inmates. Local jail employees Local jails employed an estimated 165,500 persons on June 30,1993. Including all full-time and part-time, payroll andnonpayroll staff, the total staff grew by more than 100,000between 1983 and 1993, an increase of 156%. The staff total included 117,900 correctional officers, theemployees most responsible for providing a secure environment andfor directly supervising inmates. Correctional officers comprisedabout 7 in every 10 jail employees in the 3 censuses, 1983-93. Characteristics of local jail staff At midyear 1993 men comprised 70% of all paid jail staff and76% of correctional officers. Excluded were nonpayroll jailemployees, such as teachers or counselors, who were paid byagencies other than jails. Between 1988 and 1993 the female staff in local jails nearlydoubled, from 25,642 to an estimated 48,000. In 1993 nearly athird of all paid staff and a quarter of correctional officerswere women. The race and ethnic composition of jail staffremained unchanged between 1988 and 1993. White employees made upan estimated 71% of the payroll jail staff in 1993, including 69%of the correctional officers. Blacks comprised 22% of all employees, including 23% of thecorrectional officers. Hispanics accounted for 6% of the totalpaid staff and 7% of correctional officers. Inmate-to-staff ratios, 1993 From 1983 to 1993 the number of U.S. jail employees increased156%, as the number of correctional officers went up 165%. Jailstaffs in the Northeast had the largest percentageincreases--more than tripling in 10 years--while those in theMidwest had the smallest, more than doubling. The South, theregion with the largest number of jail employees, registered thegreatest regional growth (75%) from 1988 to 1993. The West, withless than half the number of employees in the South, also had theleast growth in staff (50%). Throughout the period, 1983-93, thejail staff in the Nation and in every region grew more rapidlythan the inmate population. In 1993 jails held 2.8 inmates peremployee. The ratio in 1993 was almost a fifth lower than the 3.4inmates per employee in 1988. As a measure of workload, the number of inmates percorrectional officer also declined, from 4.7 in 1988 to 3.9 in1993. All four regions had decreases in inmate-to-correctionalofficer ratios. The West reported the sharpest decline, from 7.1inmates per officer in 1983 to 5.3 in 1993. The smallerfacilities had fewer inmates per correctional officer (2.4) thandid larger jails (4.6 inmates per officer in the jails with a1,000 or more inmates). The jails that were operating with aninmate population at least 10% over their rated capacity had aninmate-to-correctional officer ratio almost twice that of jailswith less than 75% of capacity occupied. Jails with 91% to 110%of capacity filled employed a correctional officer for more thanevery 4 inmates. Annual jail expenditures Local jails throughout the United States spent a total ofslightly over $9.6 billion during the year ending June 30, 1993.This estimated total (not adjusted for inflation) was more thandouble the $2.7 billion spent in 1983. Approximately 71% of all reporting facilities were able toprovide data on expenditures in 1993. These jails reported totalannual expenditures were nearly $7.8 billion; operating costs,about $5.5 billion; and capital expenditures, $2.2 billion. Gross salaries and wages, employer contributions to employeebenefits, purchases of food, supplies, contractual services, andother current operating costs accounted for 71% of expenditures.Construction costs, major repairs, equipment, improvements, landpurchases, and other capital outlays accounted for the remaining29%. In 1988, operating costs made up 78% of all expenditures andcapital outlays, 22%. Average operating cost per inmate Excluding capital outlays in 1993, the average cost to keepone jail inmate incarcerated for a year was $14,667. Over 10years the cost per inmate had risen 57% from $9,360. (Adjustedfor inflation to 1983 dollars the annual cost per inmate haddecreased by 11%.) The Northeast had the highest averageoperating expenditure per inmate ($22,678) and the South, thelowest ($11,697). Excluding Alaska and the District of Columbia,average annual operating costs per inmate by State were highestin New York ( $29,297) and lowest in Mississippi ($7,014). Inmate deaths During the year ending June 30, 1993, 647 inmate deathsoccurred in the jurisdiction of the jail authorities who provideddata on such deaths. Although asked to report the death ofinmates under the jurisdiction of jail authorities, regardless ofwhere the death took place, some facilities could report onlydeaths that occurred on the jail premises. In addition, about 10%of all jails were unable to report whether any inmate deaths hadoccurred in 1993. In 1993 illness was the leading cause of death in local jails(45%), followed by suicide (36%). Acquired immune deficiencysyndrome (AIDS) accounted for about 10% of reported inmatedeaths; homicide, 3%; and other causes, 6%. The death rate among jail inmates fell by more than a thirdbetween 1983 and 1993, from 232 to 149 per 100,000 inmates. Whilethe rate of death from illness, including AIDS, remainedrelatively constant over the period, the rate of suicide declinedsharply, from 129 per 100,000 in 1983, to 85 in 1988, to 54 in1993. Federal jails In 1993 the Federal Bureau of Prisons maintained a smallnumber of detention facilities that functioned as jails. Thesewere not counted among the city, county, or regional adultdetention facilities called local jails in this report. Localfacilities, however, did hold about 12,000 persons for Federalauthorities, according to data reported by 90% of all facilities.At midyear 1993 the Bureau of Prisons operated 7 jails, holding5,899 persons who were awaiting adjudication or serving asentence, usually of a year or less. Inmate demographics Ninety-three percent of Federal jail inmates were men, aslightly higher proportion than in local jails (90%). Seventy-twopercent were white, 25% were black, and 3% were Asians, PacificIslanders, American Indians, or Alaska Natives. Conviction status Slightly more than half of the Federal inmates wereunconvicted and were awaiting arraignment, trial, or thecompletion of their trial. Facility capacity The 7 Federal jails had a combined rated capacity of3,810-the population being 155% of that capacity. The percentoccupied was about 50% higher than that of local jails ofcomparable size. Inmate deaths Eight inmates died while under the jurisdiction of Federaljail authorities during the annual period ending June 30, 1993.Four deaths resulted from illness or natural causes, two weresuicides, and two were drug overdoses. Staff Seventy-five percent of Federal jail employees were male, ahigher percentage than the 70% of employees for local facilities.A majority of the Federal jail employees were correctionalofficers. Overall, there were 2.9 inmates per staff member in Federaljails, about the same as in local facilities where the ratio was2.8 inmates per employee. However, the number of inmates percorrectional officer (5.5) was higher than in local jails with500 to 999 inmates (4.4). Expenditures Federal jail expenditures totaled slightly more than $166million during the annual period ending June 30, 1993, excludingthose at the Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, facility, in operation only afew months at the time of the census. Gross salaries and wages,contributions to employee benefits, purchases of food, supplies,contractual services, and other current operating costs accountedfor 76% of expenditures. Construction costs, major repairs,equipment, improvements, land purchases, and other capitaloutlays made up the remaining 24%. The average cost to house one Federal jail inmate during theyear ending June 30, 1993, exclusive of capital expenditures was$22,773, as compared to $14,667 among local jails. Characteristic Number of facilities 7 Number of inmates 5,899 Male 5,490 Female 409 White 4,271 Black 1,462 Other 166 Status of inmates Convicted 47% Unconvicted 53% Rated capacity 3,810 Percent of capacity occupied 155% Inmate deaths during annual period ending June 30, 1993 - 8 Cause Illness/natural cause 4 AIDS 0 Suicide 2 Homicide 0 Other* 2 Number of employees 2,009 Male 1,499 Female 510 Administrators 89 Correctional officers 1,080 Clerical and maintenance 263 Educational 26 Other** 551 Number of inmates per employee All employees 2.9 Correctional officers 5.5 Annual expenditures*** Total $166,297,143 Capital 39,360,670 Operating 126,936,473 Operating cost per inmate**** $22,773 Note: Facilities are in Los Angeles, CA; San Diego, CA;Miami, FL; Chicago, IL; New York, NY; Otisville, NY; andGuaynabo, PR. *Drug overdose. **Professional and technical workers, such as public healthservice employees, case managers, facility managers, andtransportation specialists. ***Excludes Guaynabo, PR, which had operated for only 4months and was not fully occupied or staffed at the time of thecensus. ****Calculated by dividing operating costs for all facilitiesby average daily population (5,574). Factors behind the growing jail population An increasing number of arrests Underlying the dramatic growth of the Nation's local jailpopulation after 1983 was a rise in the number of arrests from11.7 million in 1983 to 14.0 million in 1993. Over the 10-yearperiod, the total number of arrests grew at an annual rate of1.8%. For some offenses the annual rate of growth wassubstantially greater: simple assault (7.6%), aggravated assault(5.8%), drug abuse violations (5.4%), and weapons violations(3.9%). The increase in arrests resulted in a growing number ofadmissions to local jails. On June 30, 1993, an estimated 26,800persons were officially booked and admitted to local jails, andan additional 9,500 inmates were transferred in from otherfacilities or readmitted after having been temporarily released.The estimated number of new admissions totaled nearly 9.8 millionfor 1993, up from an estimated 6.0 million in the annual periodending June 30, 1983. Among inmates facing felony charges, the likelihood of beingheld in a local jail prior to the disposition of their caseremained nearly the same between 1988 and 1992. Based on thebiennial National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) thatdescribes State felony defendants in the Nation's 75 mostpopulous counties, an estimated 37% were held awaitingdisposition in 1992. Roughly the same percentage was detained in1988 (34%) and 1990 (35%). (Pretrial Release of FelonyDefendants, BJS Bulletins, 1988 [February 1991, NCJ-127202], 1990[November 1992, NCJ-139560], and 1992 [November 1994,NCJ-148818]). More felons sentenced to local jail The impact of more arrests and jail admissions was compoundedby a growing number of felons receiving a sentence to local jail.Between 1986 and 1992 the number of convicted felons sentenced toconfinement in local jails almost doubled: Felons sentenced to local jails ------------------------------- Percent of all Year Number convicted felons ---------------------------------------- 1986 122,400 21% 1988 176,000 26 1990 207,300 25 1992 232,300 26 Percent change, 1986-92 90% Source: Felony Sentences in State Courts (1986, 1988, 1990,and 1992). Jail inmates received about the same average sentences Growthin the local jail population between 1983 and 1993 was not theresult of longer sentences. Results from the National JudicialReporting Program (NJRP) indicate that between 1988 and 1992,years in which comparable data on felons sentenced to local jailsare available, the average (mean) maximum jail sentence amongthose entering jail remained constant. In 1988 and 1992 felonssentenced to local jail received a mean sentence of 7 months.(Felony Sentences in State Courts, BJS Bulletins, 1988 [December1990, NCJ-126923], 1990 [March 1993, NCJ-149077], and 1992[January 1995, NCJ-151167]). Data from the 1983 and 1989 surveys of inmates in local jailsalso reveal no significant changes in the sentence lengthsreceived by sentenced inmates overall, including felons andmisdemeanants. About 50% of the jail inmates had been convictedand sentenced at the time of both surveys. (Profile of JailInmates, 1989, BJS Special Report [April 1991, NCJ-129097]).Between 1983 and 1989, there was an increase in the mean sentence(from 14 months to 17 months) but no change in the median. Inboth years half of the sentenced inmates had received a sentenceof 6 months or less. More drug offenders incarcerated in local jails The largest source of growth among inmates in local jails wasdrug law violators. Based on data from inmate surveys in 1983 and1989, the number of jail inmates charged or convicted of drugoffenses rose from 20,800 to 91,000. In 1983 about 1 of every 10inmates were in jail for a drug offense; in 1989 nearly 1 ofevery 4 were in jail for drugs. From 1983 to 1989 the increase inthe number of persons in jail for drug offenses accounted formore than 40 percent of the total increase in the jailpopulation. Between 1983 and 1989 the percentage of jail inmatesdecreased for violent offenses (from 30.7% to 22.5%) and propertyoffenses (from 38.6% to 30.0%), but increased for public-orderoffenses (from 20.6% to 22.8%). During this period, the totalnumber of inmates increased in every category: violent offendersincreased from 68,600 to 89,000; property offenders from 86,300to 118,700; and public-order offenders from 46,100 to 90,200. Although offense information for more recent years is notavailable, estimates may be made using 1989 percentages. Assumingno change in the percentage distributions, the estimated numberof drug offenders in local jails in 1993 was more than 105,800,representing a 5-fold increase since 1983. More jail inmates held for State/Federal authorities The Nation's jail population also grew between 1983 and 1993as a result of crowding in State and Federal prisons. On June 30,1993, nearly 12% of all jail inmates were prisoners being heldfor State or Federal authorities. An estimated 53,900 inmateswere held for State or Federal authorities in 1993, up from17,281 in 1983. Between 1983 and 1993 the number of inmates held for Stateand Federal authorities grew at twice the rate of the inmatepopulation overall (212% compared with 106%). Approximately 34,200 jail inmates in 1993 were in localfacilities as a direct result of crowding of State or Federalfacilities (representing 7.4% of all jail inmates). The other19,700 inmates held for State or Federal authorities were in jailfor other reasons, such as waiting transfer or early release(pending completion of paperwork or transportation),participation in special programs, and special security needs. Methodology Census of Jails The 1993 Census of Jails was the sixth in a series of datacollection efforts aimed at studying the Nation's locallyadministered jails. Previous censuses were conducted in 1970,1972, 1978, 1983, and 1988. As in previous censuses, the U.S.Bureau of the Census collected the data for the Bureau of JusticeStatistics. The 1993 census included all locally administered confinementfacilities (3,287) that hold inmates beyond arraignment and arestaffed by municipal or county employees. The census alsoincluded 17 jails that were privately operated under contract forlocal governments and 7 facilities maintained by BOP andfunctioning as jails. Excluded from the census were temporary holding facilities,such as drunk tanks and police lockups, that do not hold personsafter being formally charged in court (usually within 72 hours ofarrest). Also excluded were State-operated facilities in Alaska,Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont, whichhave combined jail-prison systems. Five locally operated jails inAlaska were included. The mailing list used for the census was derived from theNational Justice Agency List, which is maintained by the Bureauof the Census for BJS. The census forms were mailed to 3,506facilities on June 22, 1993. Twenty-eight jails were added to the initial mail out, and230 were deleted, resulting in a total of 3,304 facilities. After extensive follow-up, including additional mail requestsand repeated telephone contacts, all jails (except those in onejurisdiction) provided data for four critical data items--numberof inmates, average daily population, rated capacity, and sex ofinmates housed. Data on the these four items for thenonresponding jails were imputed based on data reported in the1994 Annual Survey of Jails. Completed forms with data for all or most items were receivedfor 2,981 jails, resulting in a 90% response rate. Thesereporting jails housed 93% of all local jail inmates on June 30,1993. Estimation procedures Because there was nonresponse and incomplete data on allcensus items except the four critical items, national totals hadto be estimated. The following procedures were used to estimatetotals when data were incomplete: 1. Each item was first assessed for coverage and internalconsistency. For purposes of estimating the totals, extremevalues were examined and then verified by checking other censusinformation or calling the respondents. Detailed categories werealso checked to determine if they summed to the reported totals. 2. To provide a national total, item values were summed andthen multiplied by a nonresponse adjustment factor (NAF). Formost estimates, the NAF was a ratio of the total number ofinmates in all jails to the number of inmates in jails thatreported valid data. Ratios based on inmate counts were used toestimate the number of adults, the number of inmates by sex andage, conviction status by sex, the number of staff byoccupational category and region (tables 11 and 13), and payrollstaff by sex and race. Ratios based on the total average dailypopulation were used to estimate total expenditures. Estimates of detailed categories were further adjusted so that for each item the sum of the detail equaled the estimated total. For example, the estimated numbers of male and female adult inmates were ratio adjusted so that the final estimates summed to the total number of adult inmates. All estimates of inmates and staff were rounded to the nearest 100. Expenditures were rounded to the nearest million dollars. 5. All rates, ratios, and percentage distributions in thisreport are based on reported data only. Annual Survey of Jails In each of the 4 years between the full censuses, a survey ofjails is conducted to estimate baseline characteristics of theNation's jails and inmates housed in these jails. The 1994 AnnualSurvey of Jails is the 10th such survey in a series begun in1982. The reference date for the 1994 survey was June 30, 1994. Using information from the 1993 Census of Jails, a new sampleof jail jurisdictions was selected for the 1994 survey. Ajurisdiction is a county (parish in Louisiana) or municipalgovernment that administers one or more local jails. The sampleincluded all jails in 796 selected jail jurisdictions and 23multijurisdiction jails. A multi-jurisdiction jail is one inwhich two or more jurisdictions have a formal agreement tooperate the facility. In drawing the sample for 1994, jail jurisdictions were firststratified into two groups: single jurisdiction jails andmultijurisdiction jails. All of the multi-jurisdiction jails wereincluded in the survey. The remaining jurisdictions were thenfurther stratified into two groups: jurisdictions with jailsauthorized to hold juveniles and jurisdictions with jails holdingonly adults. Jurisdictions were then selected based on theaverage daily population in the 1993 census. All jails in 203jurisdictions were automatically included if the jurisdictionheld juveniles and had an average daily population of 250 or moreinmates in 1993 or if they held only adults and had an averagepopulation of 500 or more. The other jurisdictions (593) werethen selected based on stratified probability sampling. Data were obtained by mailed questionnaires. After follow-upphone calls to nonrespondents, the response rate for the surveywas 100%. National estimates for the inmate population on June 30,1994, were produced by sex, race/Hispanic origin, and age groupand for the average daily population during the year ending June30, 1994. National estimates were also produced for ratedcapacity. Sampling error Survey estimates have an associated sampling error becausejurisdictions with smaller average daily populations were sampledfor the survey. Estimates based on the sample survey may differsomewhat from the results of conducting a complete census.Different samples could yield somewhat different results.Standard error is a measure of the variation among the estimatesfrom all possible samples, stating the precision with which anestimate from a particular sample approximates the average of allpossible samples. The estimated relative sampling error for thetotal inmate population of 490,442 on June 30, 1994, was 0.50%.(See appendix tables 1 and 2.) Results presented in this Bulletin were tested to determinewhether differences between 1993 census counts and 1994 surveyestimates were statistically significant. All differencesmentioned in the report meet or exceed the 95-percent confidencelevel. Measures of population Two measures of inmate population are used: the average dailypopulation for the year ending June 30 and the inmate count onJune 30 of each year. The average daily population balances outany extraordinary events that may render atypical the inmatecount on June 30. The June 30 count provides data oncharacteristics of inmates, such as race, Hispanic origin, andage, that may not be available on an annual basis. Juveniles State statutes and judicial practices allow juveniles to beincarcerated in adult jails under a variety of circumstances.Because of the differing statutes and practices, however,accurate and comparable data on juveniles are difficult tocollect. The 1994 Annual Survey of Jails provides new and moreaccurate estimates of the juvenile population. For the firsttime, the survey provides estimates of the total number of jailinmates under age 18, the number held as adults, and the numberheld as juveniles. New sampling procedures were also introducedin 1994 to minimize the standard errors of these estimates. Bystratifying jurisdictions based on the authority to housejuveniles, the precision of the juvenile counts were improved. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B40-19IA031-000655-B044-246http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/denfcpr.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114602 text/html 44055HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:45:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:48 GMTContent-length: 43837 Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 July 1992 NCJ-134724 Full text with tables available from: BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 1-800-732-3277 Box 6000 Rockville, MD 10850 This study examines how State and Federal correctionalfacilities seek to stop the entry and use of illegal drugs. Based on the 1990Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, the report indicatesthat nearly 9 in 10 institutions conduct urine surveillance among the inmatepopulation, usually on a random basis or on suspicion of use. Marijuanaand cocaine were the drugs most commonly detected--in Federal facilitiesabout 1 in 100 of the tests for marijuana and 1 in 250 tests for cocainewere positive while in State facilities about 1 in 16 tests were positivefor marijuana and 1 in 28 were positive for cocaine. I want to express my deep appreciation to the employees inthe 957 State prisons, 80 Federal prisons, and the 250 community-basedfacilities who participated in the census. The 100-percent response rate is,I believe, important testimony to the utility and significance ofnational data on the operations of our Nation's correctional facilities. Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 By Caroline Wolf Harlow, Ph.D. BJS Statistician About 7 of every 8 prisons in the Nation tested an estimatedtotal of 565,500 inmates for one or more illegal drugs between July 1,1989, and June 30, 1990. In State facilities, 3.6% of the tests forcocaine, 1.3% for heroin, 2.0% for methamphetamines, and 6.3% for marijuanafound evidence of drug use. In Federal prisons, 0.4% of the testsfor cocaine, 0.4% for heroin, 0.1% for methamphetamines, and 1.1% formarijuana were positive. This report uses information provided to the Census of Stateand Federal Adult Correctional Facilities. Data were collected from 957State prison facilities, 250 State community-based facilities, and 80Federal prisons operating on June 29, 1990. Censuses were also conducted in1984, 1979, and 1974, but the 1990 census was the first to gatherinformation on drug interdiction practices, drug testing of inmates and staff,and inmate drug treatment programs. Other findings from the 1990 census include the following: *Ninety-eight percent of State community-basedfacilities--those in which at least half of the residents may leave the facilitydaily--tested residents. All Federal prisons and 83% of State prisonsreported that they tested inmates for drug use. *Seventy-six percent of institutions reported testing inmatesfor drugs when drug use was suspected. Twenty percent tested allinmates at least once during confinement. *At State confinement facilities 1.4% of tests for cocaine,1.0% for heroin, 2.3% for methamphetamines, and 5.8% for marijuanaindicated drug use. *At State community-based facilities 8.9% of tests forcocaine confirmed the presence of the drug, as did 2.2% for heroin, 1.1% for methamphetamines, and 8.1% for marijuana. *State confinement facilities that only tested inmatessuspected of drug use had higher positive rates than facilities that tested allor random groups of inmates (6% for cocaine and 14% for marijuanaversus 1.5% for cocaine and 5% for marijuana). *State and Federal facilities used a variety of methods toprevent drugs from being brought into the institution, includingques-tioning, patdowns, clothing exchanges, and body cavity searches. *At admission inmates were required to exchange clothing in88% of the Federal prisons and 59% of State prisons; inmates were patteddown in 88% of Federal prisons and 78% of the State prisons. *In the facilities using the most intrusive interdictiontechnique, body cavity searches, positive drug test results among inmatestested were lower than in facilities using other methods of interdiction. *Questioning and search of belongings were widely used forvisitors to both Federal and State facilities. *Federal confinement facilities reported that they couldprovide drug treatment for an estimated 7,800 inmates; State confinementfacilities, for 114,000; and State community-based facilities, for 9,400. *Federal facilities were using an estimated 62% of total drugtreatment capacity on June 29, 1990; State confinement facilities, 78%;and community-based facilities, 66%. Introduction The Census of State and Federal Adult CorrectionalFacilities, conducted periodically by the Bureau of the Census on behalf of theBureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), included a new series of questions in 1990.(See Methodology on page 12 for further information about thecensus and the questionnaire.) This addendum--designed with the assistanceof the National Institute on Drug Abuse and the Office of NationalDrug Control Policy--asked how facilities interdict drugs andparaphernalia among inmates, visitors, and staff and who was chosen for eachmethod of interdiction. In addition, the addendum gathered information on drugtesting policies, practices, and outcomes. The questionnaire asked facilitiesto estimate the number of inmates in need of drug treatment programs andthe capacity of currently available programs. Methods of drug interdiction Different facilities have a variety of policies and practicesrelated to interdiction of drugs from inmates, visitors, and staff. Facilities may physically check persons entering thefacility. Inmates may be checked for drugs or other contraband when they enter afacility for the first time or reenter after an absence. The checks may berelatively nonintrusive, such as verbal questioning or pat-downs, ormore intrusive, such as body cavity searches and clothing exchanges orsearches of belongings. These checks may be conducted among all enteringpersons, random groups, or only those suspected of carrying drugs.Many prisons may use all of the approaches at different times. The figure below shows a general typology for the range ofmethods for each type of drug interdiction. A plus sign (+) indicates the useof a method and a minus sign (-) means no reported use. Type 1facilities, for example, reported using all three methods to choose personsfor an interdiction activity. Type 4 facilities reported performingan interdiction activity on all persons but not choosing randomor suspected subjects. Interdiction All Random Suspected Type 1 + + + Type 2 + + - Type 3 + - + Type 4 + - - Type 5 - + + Type 6 - + - Type 7 - - + Type 8 - - - Interdiction activities: Most prison facilities patted down inmates and required themto exchange clothes upon admission or any reentry Prison facilities perform many activities to prevent drugsand other contraband from entering. Correctional authorities commonlyquestion inmates, pat them down, require changing intoprison-furnished clothes, and search body cavities. Eighty-eight percent of Federalfacilities reported that they patted down new admissions and required them toreplace their clothes (table 1). Seventy-eight percent of State confinementfacilities and 71% of community-based facilities patted down newlyadmitted inmates. (Community-based facilities are those in which half or moreof the residents are permitted to leave unaccompanied by staff forwork or study. Because inmates regularly leave community-based facilities,drug-related problems in these facilities are different from those insecured facilities.) Fifty-nine percent of State confinement facilities and 26% ofcommunity- based facilities required them to substitute prison clothes.At least three-quarters of both State and Federal facilitiesquestioned new admissions about drugs. When looking for the presence of hidden drugs, facilitieswere less likely to perform body cavity searches than take other interdictionmeasures. Sixty-one percent of Federal facilities, 45% of Stateconfinement facilities, and 14% of State community-based facilitiesreported that they conducted body cavity searches among inmates at admission. Institutions could apply an interdiction activity to allinmates, to groups of inmates selected at random, or to suspected drug users orcouriers. Patting down new and returning inmates and requiring them toexchange clothes generally applied to all inmates (table 2). Over 80%of Federal facilities patted down all inmates and required an exchangeof clothing. Almost 78% of State confinement facilities frisked allinmates, and 57% substituted prison clothes. In 46% of Federal facilities and in 20% of State facilities,body cavity searches were conducted among all entering inmates. About 39%of State confinement facilities reported that a body cavity searchwould be conducted when the staff suspected inmates of carrying drugs. Most facilities searched the belongings of visitors Staff checked visitors' belongings for drugs in 93% ofFederal institutions, 87% of State confinement facilities, and 76% ofthe community-based (table 3). Visitors were patted down fordrugs in 51% of Federal prisons, 69% of State confinement institutions, and40% of community-based facilities. All visitors were generally subjected to searches of theirbelongings (table 4). About 83% of Federal facilities and 57% of Statefacilities looked through the personal possessions of all visitors.Frisking visitors for drugs and checking body cavities occurred primarily ifvisitors were suspected of carrying drugs or paraphernalia. Five in ten ofFederal prisons and 4 in 10 of State facilities patted down visitorson suspicion. About 28% of Federal Facilities and 18% of State facilitiessearched body cavities of visitors if the visitors were suspected ofsmuggling drugs. Staff were also subject to drug interdiction activities: When reporting to work, staff were patted down in about halfof State confinement facilities and in more than a fifth of Federalconfinement and State community-based facilities (table 5). In over 50% ofFederal facilities and 40% of State facilities staff were questioned.Most interdiction activities involving staff were conducted onsuspicion of smuggling drugs. About 45% of Federal facilities and 23% ofState facilities interrogated staff if they were suspected of druginvolvement (table 6). About 19% of Federal facilities also patted downstaff on suspicion, compared to 14% of State facilities. About 23% ofState facilities frisked staff members at random. Maximum security facilities took more stringent druginterdiction measures than other facilities Staff in Federal maximum security prisons were more likelythan those in medium or minimum security facilities to search body cavitiesand to require all inmates to exchange clothing (table 7). AllFederal maximum security institutions required all inmates to put on newprison-issued clothes upon entry or reentry. Nearly 55% of Federal maximumsecurity facilities, compared to 38% of minimum security prisons,conducted body cavity searches of all newly admitted or returning inmates. In maximum security prisons staff were less likely than inother Federal facilities to question all of the inmates or to pat themdown. All inmates were interrogated in 64% of maximum security prisons andfrisked in 73%, while all inmates were questioned in 94% of minimum securityfacilities and patted down in 81%. The staff in State maximum and medium security prisons weremore likely than those in minimum security facilities to make allentering or returning inmates exchange clothes (over 60% of maximum or mediumsecurity prisons, compared to 47% of minimum security prisons). In nearly 1 in5 maximum security State prisons, staff searched the body cavities ofall new or returning prisoners. Staff performed body cavity searches onsuspected inmates in over half of State maximum security facilities. State community-based facilities were less likely than Stateconfinement facilities to search residents to interdict drugs. Staff inabout 59% of State community-based facilities patted down all inmates. In22% of community-based facilities, the staff required all inmates tochange to facility clothing, and in 15%, searched body cavities ofresidents suspected of having drugs. Interpreting measures of drug testing Prevalence of drug use in prisons is difficult to estimate.Part of the difficulty occurs with record keeping and reporting. A drugtest determines the presence of a specific drug at a specificlevel. A single urine sample can be used for a single drug test or formultiple tests for different drugs. Correctional authorities were asked toreport the number of tests for each drug and the number of positive tests.However, some authorities may have reported the number of urine samplestaken if their records included only those figures. Other difficulties in estimating the amount of drug use inprison include the following: *Prisons differ in the selection of whom to test. Mostfacilities do not choose inmates for testing using a sample with a knownprobability of selection: One cannot say that the selected inmates representall inmates in the institution. * Prisons differ in what drugs they test for. Prisonauthorities may not suspect the use of a drug and not test for it, even thoughthe drug is used in their facility. Other prisons may conduct repeated testsfor a drug seldom used. * A single urine specimen can have more than one positivedrug test from an individual using multiple drugs. Describing positive rates bytype of drug will overstate the number of inmates with at least onepositive test. *Prisons differ in how often they test inmates. Drug testingmay be rare in some prisons and frequent in others. *Urine tests only detect the presence of most drugs 48 to 72hours after use, except for PCP and marijuana, which may be detected upto 30 days after use. This varying span, when combined with lack of randomsampling, distorts any estimation of overall drug use. * Depending on various factors, the presence ofmethamphetamines may not be distinguished from amphetamines; therefore, the test resultsfor these two drugs should be considered together. *Prisons may differ in the types of tests used. Some typesare more accurate than others, producing lower numbers of falsepositives and false negatives. Facilities may or may not perform confirmatorytests, and they were not asked to estimate the number of false positives andfalse negatives. For the above reasons, drug test results in this report arenot a measure of the extent of the problem in the various kinds offacilities. Positive results should be interpreted only as indicating thepercentage positive for the specific tests given. Testing urine for drug use Most correctional facilities tested some inmates for illegaldrug use About 87% of all correctional facilities tested inmates forillegal drug use (table 8). All Federal prisons, 83% of State confinementfacilities, and 98% of State community-based facilities reported testinginmates between July 1, 1989, and June 30, 1990. Authorities in facilities which reported data (85% of allfacilities) indicated that they collected 598,000 urine specimens from468,500 inmates. When these figures are projected to all facilities, includingthose which did not respond to these questions, an estimated 565,500inmates provided 721,800 specimens from July 1, 1989, through June 30, 1990.(See "Estimation procedure" in Methodology.) State minimum and medium security and community-basedfacilities were more likely than maximum security institutions to test inmates.About 85% of the lower security facilities and 98% of community-basedfacilities tested inmates, compared to 76% of the maximum security prisons. Most State facilities testing inmates for drugs performed thetests when the staff suspected particular inmates of drug use; 76% ofthe institutions reported checking inmates based on suspicion of use.Forty-two percent tested both suspected inmates and random groups, and anadditional 14% tested all inmates (type 1). Relatively few facilities (20%)tested all inmates at least once during confinement (types 1-4). Most large State confinement facilities tested for drugs About 92% of State prisons with a population of 2,500 or moretested inmates, compared to around 83% of facilities with fewer than1,000 inmates and 77% of facilities with a population between 1,000 and2,499 (table 9). Over half of the largest facilities tested inmates onsuspicion only. Over half of facilities with a population between 250 and 2,499tested all inmates or random groups of inmates in addition to inmatessuspected of drug use. About 70% of community-based facilities testedeither all inmates or random groups and inmates suspected of usingdrugs. Almost all work release facilities tested for drugs About 92% of facilities that provided special work release orprerelease programs tested inmates for drugs (table 10). Ninety-threepercent of facilities that separately handled offenders reincarceratedfor violating some condition of their supervised release also checkedinmates for drugs. Over 90% of facilities that performed "other"functions, such as presentence, psychiatric, or geriatric services also testedtheir residents. Nearly 60% of facilities for youthful offenderstested inmates. For all inmates tested, State prisons reported higherpositive rates than Federal prisons Nationwide, 3.1% of the tests for cocaine in the 12 monthsbefore June 30, 1990, were positive, as were 1.2% of the tests for heroin,1.5% for methamphetamines, and 5.6% for marijuana. State facilitiesreported higher positive rates for drug tests than Federal facilities (table11). In State institutions, 3.6% of tests for cocaine were positive,compared to 0.4% in Federal prisons. State facilities found 2.0% of the testsshowing recent methamphetamine use and 6.3% showing marijuana use; Federalprisons found 0.1% and 1.1%, respectively. I Same percentage of State and Federal facilities reportedpositive drug tests When facilities rather than individual drug tests areconsidered, Federal and State facilities were about equally likely to have founddrug use in their institutions. Around 6 in 10 of both Federal and Statefacilities which tested for cocaine had at least one positive test. Inover 2 in 10 facilities testing for methamphetamines, the use of the drugwas discovered. Marijuana was detected in about 8 in 10facilities testing. Community-based facilities found higher rates of drug usethan confinement facilities Tests had positive outcomes for 8.9% of the cocaine tests and8.1% of the marijuana tests administered by community-based facilities,compared to 1.4% of the cocaine tests and 5.8% of marijuana tests inconfinement facilities (table 12). Methamphetamines, however, were foundmore often in confinement facilities (2.3% tested positive) than incommunity-based facilities (1.1% positive). Among State confinement facilities, positive test resultswere highest in those testing on suspicion only. How inmates were selected for testing affected the rate ofpositive results. Those State confinement facilities testing only whendrug use was suspected recorded higher rates of positive results thanother facilities that tested randomly or comprehensively. When facilitiestested only on suspicion of drug use, 6% of cocaine tests and 14% ofmarijuana tests were positive, compared to 1.5% or less for cocaine and 5% or lessfor marijuana when facilities tested everyone or at random. The results for State community-based facilities wereopposite those of confinement facilities. Testing on suspicion only produced alower percentage of positive results than testing everyone or arandom selection. In community-based facilities which tested on suspicion only,4.8% were positive for cocaine and 6.4% for marijuana; incommunity-based facilities using other selection methods, around 9% of tests for cocaineand 8% for marijuana were positive. The percentages of positive tests were higher in largefacilities Large prisons, whether Federal or State, had higher rates ofpositive drug tests. In Federal facilities with 1,000 or more inmates, 1.4%of the marijuana tests, 0.6% of the cocaine, and 0.6% of the herointests were positive (table 13). In Federal facilities holding fewer than500 inmates, the percentages were 0.5% for marijuana, 0.2% for cocaine,and none for heroin. Among State prisons, the largest facilities with2,500 or more inmates had the highest percentages of positive tests foramphetamines, cocaine, and heroin. The facilities holding 1,000 to 2,499 inmates had the highestrates for marijuana and methamphetamines. Among Federal prisons, themaximum security facilities had higher rates for positive drug teststhan minimum security facilities. In maximum security prisons, 2.5% of thetests for marijuana, .7% of the tests for cocaine, and 1.4% of thetests for heroin were positive. In minimum security, 0.3% for marijuana, 0.3%for cocaine, and none for heroin were positive. State medium security facilities generally had higherpositive rates than maximum or minimum security prisons. For each drug in mediumsecurity facilities, the percentage positive was as follows: 6.8% formarijuana, 4.2% for methamphetamines, 1.7% for cocaine, and 1.4% forheroin. In maximum and minimum facilities, the equivalent findings were5.0% or less for marijuana, 0.6% or less for methamphetamines, 1.4% orless for cocaine, and 0.8% or less for heroin. Positive results from drug tests varied among facilitiesperforming different functions Facilities which confined inmates returned to custody forparole violations had relatively high percentages of positive drug tests (table14). More than 9% of tests for marijuana were positive, as were 6.2% oftests for methamphetamines, 3.5% for cocaine, and 2.9% for heroin.Facilities holding inmates who participated in work release programs orwho were preparing for discharge also had relatively high positivetest rates: 7% for cocaine, 6.9% for marijuana, and 1.8% for heroin. Drug/alcohol treatment in facilities was associated with relatively highpositive results on tests for cocaine and marijuana use--3% forcocaine and 7.6% for marijuana. Facilities handling youthful offenders generally hadrelatively low positive test results: 2.1% for marijuana and 1.5% forcocaine. Positive drug tests were linked to interdiction activities The State confinement facilities that questioned and friskedinmates but did not exchange clothes or search body cavities had higherrates of positive drug tests than facilities doing all these measures(table 15). The tests in the facilities using less stringent measureswere 5.2% positive for cocaine, 13.5% for marijuana, and 16.2% formethamphetamines. Tests in facilities performing all types of specific druginterdiction activities were 1.2% positive for cocaine, 4.6% formarijuana, and 0.6% for methamphetamines. Facilities which performed all types ofinterdiction activities had higher positive drug test rates thanfacilities which did body cavity searches and/or clothing exchanges. Thefacilities doing all types of interdiction may have adopted more measures as areaction to relatively high test rates. The reported rates were fromresults over the 12 months before the census, while the interdiction measureswere those in place on June 29, 1990. Facilities that did not question, frisk, or search visitorshad the following positive test results: 8.3% for marijuana and 7.4%for cocaine. Facilities that inspected visitors' belongings and searchedbody cavities when indicated, but did not both question and pat downvisitors, had the following positive test percentages: 2.9% for heroin, 2.6%for cocaine, and 12% for methamphetamines. Facilities that reported not making special efforts tointerdict the supply of drugs from the staff had 2.6% positive tests for cocaine,2.2% for heroin, and 6.6% for methamphetamines. Facilities thatquestioned staff, patted them down, and took other actions such as drugtesting, when needed had 1.0% positive tests for cocaine and 0.9% for heroin and methamphetamines. Drug testing of staff was highest in Federal facilities While 83% of Federal facilities reported they tested theirstaff for drugs, 42% of State confinement facilities and 32% ofcommunity-based facilities checked their employees (table 16). About 55% of Federalconfinement facilities tested all staff, as did 30% of State confinementfacilities and 19% of community-based facilities. Seventy-six percent of Federal facilities and about 23% ofState facilities tested employees, the primary staff category tested. A higher percentage of Federal than State facility staff weretested for drugs. Fifteen percent of Federal facility staff were testedcompared to 4% of those working in State confinement facilities and 10%in community- based facilities. A positive test was grounds for dismissal in over a third of facilities that tested staff for drugs In over a third of facilities, policies required that stafftesting positive for drugs be dismissed. In over a seventh, affectedstaff were suspended (table 17). Sixty percent of State confinementfacilities and 44% of community-based facilities referred positive drugdetection cases to internal affairs. Fifty-nine percent of Federal facilitiesreferred the case to a departmentally operated program -- generally anemployee assistance counselor who could refer the employee for outsidetreatment. Federal facilities were more likely than State facilities tokeep their staff and continue to check them for drugs or to reassignthem. Twenty- four percent of Federal facilities continued monitoring staffwith drug tests, compared to 10% of State confinement facilities and12%of community- based facilities. Inmate/resident drug treatment programs and capacities Facilities provided estimates of the number ofinmates/residents who could be treated in each of their drug treatment and interventionprograms and estimates of the enrollment in each program. Facilities alsoestimated their total capacity for drug treatment and their totalenrollment. These totals were generally lower than the sum of all theseparately listed programs and interventions, possibly for the followingreasons: *some programs listed were not considered true drug"treatment" programs; *an individual program might have several of the componentslisted on the addendum--for example, counseling, education, and urinesurveillance--and hence be counted several times in the specific listings; *inmates could be participating in more than one program; *facilities could have some treatment slots which could beallocated to more than one program and therefore were counted more thanonce. Drug treatment/intervention on June 29, 1990 Among the 1,287 State and Federal facilities, 1,024 reportedtheir own estimates of total capacity and enrollment in programs theyconsidered to be for drug treatment. Facility capacities and enrollmentsfor drug treatment were-- Among those Federal facilities that reported, administratorsindicated that on a single day the facilities could treat about 6,100inmates and had an enrollment of about 3,800. For reporting State facilities,both confinement and community-based, the estimated capacity was90,900 and enrollment was 69,900. Prisons could treat an estimated 131,900 inmates for drug addiction If the reported capacity is projected to all prisons, Federalconfinement facilities could treat an estimated 7,800 inmates; Stateconfinement facilities, 114,000; and State community-based facilities,9,400. (See "Estimation procedure" in Methodology.) (Treatment capacity and enrollment were estimated from the77.7% of Federal inmates in reporting facilities, 72.9% of State inmates inreporting confinement facilities, and 83.3% of State inmates inreporting community- based facilities.) Federal confinement facilities had the capacity to treat fordrug abuse 14% of the inmate population; State confinement facilities, 18%;and community- based facilities, 55%. Prisons were treating approximately 100,200 inmates If the reported enrollment figures are projected to cover allfacilities, the Federal prison system was treating an estimated 4,800inmates; the State prisons, an estimated 88,700; and community-basedfacilities, an estimated 6,200. (See "Estimation procedure" inMethodology.) (Treatment capacity and enrollment were estimated from the77.7% of Federal inmates in reporting facilities, 72.9% of State inmates inreporting confinement facilities, and 83.3% of State inmates inreporting community- based facilities.) Enrollment in drug treatment was below capacity) Federal inmates were using 62% of the drug treatment capacityon June 29, 1990. State prisoners were using 66% of the capacity incommunity-based facilities and 78% in confinement facilities. Many factors play a role in these utilization figures.Inmates may refuse to participate or may have already completed the program.Inmates may not qualify--too new to the institution, not near enough to theend of their sentence, rule breakers, under administrative segregation, orin the wrong custody level. Facilities also may keep some slots open togain flexibility to deal with unexpected situations. Prisons offered a variety of programs Prisons may offer many types of drug intervention ortreatment: detoxification, counseling, education and/or awarenessprograms, urine surveillance, and treatment in special residential unitswithin the facility. Federal facilities reported they could test 33% ofinmates for drugs; State confinement facilities, 10%; and community-basedfacilities, 57% (table 18). Counseling was available for 14% of inmatesin Federal facilities, 12% in State confinement facilities, and 48% incommunity-based facilities. Residential treatment program capacity was from1% to 2% of inmate population for all types of institutions. Of all Federal inmates, 9% were enrolled in some form of drugtreatment on June 29, 1990. Among State prisoners, 14% in confinementfacilities and 37% in community-based facilities were enrolled. The two mostcommon types of programs for both Federal and State correctionalfacilities were education and counseling. Drug education programs enrolled 13% of Federal prisoners, 7%of State confinement inmates, and 25% of residents in community-basedfacilities. Six percent of those in Federal facilities were beingcounseled, as were 9% of State confinement facility inmates and 32% of those incommunity-based facilities. Methodology The 1990 Census of State and Federal Adult CorrectionalFacilities was the fourth enumeration of State institutions and the first ofFederal institutions sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statisticsand conducted by the Bureau of the Census. Earlier censuses were completed in1974, 1979, and 1984. Census universe The facility universe was developed from the Census of StateAdult Correctional Facilities conducted in 1984. This list wasrevised using the 1990 American Correctional Association Directory andinformation obtained from State correctional administrators and the Federal Bureauof Prisons. The census included: prisons; prison farms; reception,diagnostic and classification centers; road camps; forestry and conservationcamps; youthful offender facilities (except in California);vocational training facilities; correctional drug and alcohol treatmentfacilities; and State- operated local detention facilities in Alaska, Connecticut,Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. Facilities were included in the census if they: *were staffed with State or Federal employees *housed primarily State or Federal prisoners *were physically, functionally, and administratively separatefrom other facilities *were operational on the reference date, June 29, 1990. The census also included, for the first time, 67 privatefacilities that were under exclusive contract by State governments to houseprisoners. Specifically excluded were-- *privately operated facilities that were not exclusively forState or Federal inmates *military facilities *Immigration and Naturalization Service facilities *facilities operated and administered by local governments,including those housing State prisoners *facilities operated by the U.S. Marshals Service *hospital wings and wards reserved for State prisoners. Questionnaire administration Questionnaires were mailed to facility respondents at the endof June 1990. Second and third request forms and telephone followups wentout in the fall, resulting in a final response rate of 100%. Definitions of community-based and confinement facilities Correctional facilities were classified as community-based if50% or more of the residents were regularly permitted to leave thefacility unaccompanied for work or study. These facilities includedhalfway houses, restitution centers, and pre-release, work release, and studyrelease centers. Correctional facilities in which less than 50% ofthe inmates regularly left the facility unaccompanied were classified asconfinement institutions. Drug addendum An addendum on drug control activities in State and Federalfacilities was included for the first time in the 1990 census. Facilitieswere asked to provide information on the following: *activities they used with inmates, visitors, and staff tokeep out illegal drugs and drug paraphernalia *inmate drug testing practices, including the criteria fortesting inmates, the number of inmates tested in total and by specific drug,and the number positive *staff drug testing, including groups and basis for testing,number tested, and procedures when tests were positive *capacity and enrollment in various types of drug treatmentand intervention programs. Estimation procedures When all prisons in the census did not provide data onparticular variables, estimated figures were used where indicated. Totalfigures were estimated by multiplying the known or reported numbers by theratio of the total relevant population to the reported population. Allfigures were estimated independently and total estimates were thereforelarger than the sum of all subgroup estimates. The total population figureused in the projections varied, depending upon which figure was mostappropriate. The two available population figures are the average dailypopulation and the prison count on the reference day for the census, June 29,1990. For drug testing, table 8, the basis for estimation was the averagedaily population, and for drug treatment capacity and enrollment,the basis was the 1-day count. Because the census was a complete enumeration, the resultswere not subject to sampling error. Public use data tapes for each Census of Adult CorrectionalFacilities in the series, conducted in 1974, 1979, 1984, and 1990, areavailable from the National Criminal Justice Archive, P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor,MI 48106. 1- 800-999-0960. Caroline Wolf Harlow wrote this report under the supervisionof Allen J. Beck. Corrections statistics are prepared under the generaldirection of Lawrence A. Greenfeld. Tom Hester edited this report, andJames Stephan, Danielle Morton, and Dorothea Proctor provided statisticalreview. Marilyn Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Shermanand Jayne Pugh. July 1992, NCJ-134724 The Bureau of Justice Statistics is a component of the Officeof Justice Programs, which also includes the National Institute ofJustice, the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Office of Juvenile Justice andDelinquency Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime. ************************************************ . CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-20IA031-000655-B044-273http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/corr93.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114621 text/html 9004HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:46:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:45 GMTContent-length: 8787 Correctional Populations in the United States 1980 - 1993 Correctional Populations in the United States 1980 - 1993 Bureau of Justice Statistics Executive Summary U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs The Nation's correctional population jumped more than 2 1/2times from 1980 through 1993. During 1993 approximately 2.6% ofthe U.S. population--4.9 million adults--were on parole, onprobation, or in jails or prisons, an increase of 3 millionpeople since 1980. More than 909,000 men and women were in thecustody of State and Federal prisons, 455,500 were in localjails, 671,000 on parole, and 2.8 million on probation: --More than two-thirds of the 4.9 million persons undercorrectional supervision were on probation or parole. --The Nation's parole population had the fastest rate ofgrowth, 205% from 1980 to 1993. --During the 13 years between 1980 and 1993, the probationpopulation grew by more than 1.7 million, larger than theincrease in any other correctional population. --In 1993 nearly 1.4 million offenders were in local jail andState or Federal prison. During the 1980-92 period, the percent of black State andFederal prisoners increased from 46.5% to 50% at a time when thepercentage of blacks in the general population increased from11.8% to 12.4%. The Hispanic prison population doubled from 7.7%to 14.1%, while Hispanics in the general population increasedfrom 6.5% to 9.5%. At yearend 1992, there were 4,094 black male inmates per100,000 black adults in the U.S. population, compared to 502white male inmates per 100,000 adult white residents. Among U.S.adults who neither graduated from high school nor earned ageneral equivalence degree (GED), almost 6% of blacks and 1% ofwhites were in a Federal or State prison serving a sentence of ayear or more. The number of convicted drug offenders increased ninefold(from 19,000 to 172,300) from 1980 through 1992. The number ofviolent offenders accounted for a larger share of the growth inthe total prison population (41%, compared to 32% for drugoffenders). The total number of violent offenders in State prisonincreased by nearly 200,000 during the 12-year period. The number of returned parole violators and newly admittedprobation violators soared between 1980 and 1992. Almost 1 inevery 3 offenders admitted to State prisons (142,000) in 1992were probation or parole violators, compared to 1 in every 6(27,000) in 1980. Violent offenders were more likely to be sent to prison in1992 than they were in 1980. Relative to the number of victims ofmurder, rape, robbery, or aggravated assault, the number ofviolent offenders admitted to State prison increased during the12-year period, from 18 admissions per 1,000 violentvictimizations to 27 per 1,000. Between 1980 and 1992 the rate of incarceration in State andFederal prisons more than doubled, from 139 sentenced inmates(inmates serving 1 year or more) per 100,000 U.S. residents to332 per 100,000. In 1992 incarceration rates were nearly 19 timeshigher among adult men than among adult women (883 per 100,000compared to 47) and 8 times higher among adult black men thanamong adult white men. The data are from a 188-page book published by the Bureau ofJustice Statistics (BJS) and listing the correctional populationsof each State and the Federal system. The book lists jail andprison suicide statistics, correctional crowding, electronicmonitoring, sentence commutations, jail AIDS deaths and muchmore. Single copie"s of the publication, "CorrectionalPopulations in the United States, 1992, (NCJ-146413), written byBJS statistician Tracy L. Snell, may be obtained from the BJSClearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179,telephone 1-800-732-3277. Fax orders with name, address, title,and NCJ number to 410-792-4358. Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can beobtained in spreadsheet files on 5. and 3. inch diskettes bycalling 202-307-0784. Note: BJS expects to release population counts for prisonersin State and Federal prisons at yearend 1994, Prisoners in 1994,in early June. Number of adults on probation, in jail or prison, or onparole, 1980-93 Total estimated correctional Year population Probation Jail* Prison Parole -------------------------------------------------------------1980** 1,840,400 1,118,097 182,288 319,598 220,438 1981** 2,006,600 1,225,934 195,085 360,029 225,539 1982 2,192,600 1,357,264 207,853 402,914 224,604 1983 2,475,100 1,582,947 221,815 423,898 246,440 1984 2,689,200 1,740,948 233,018 448,264 266,992 1985 3,011,500 1,968,712 254,986 487,583 300,203 1986 3,239,400 2,114,621 272,735 526,436 325,638 1987 3,459,600 2,247,158 294,092 562,814 355,505 1988 3,714,100 2,356,483 341,893 607,766 407,977 1989 4,055,600 2,522,125 393,303 683,367 456,803 1990 4,348,000 2,670,234 403,019 743,382 531,407 1991 4,536,200 2,729,322 424,129 792,535 590,198 1992 4,763,200 2,811,611 441,781 851,205 658,601 1993b 4,879,600 2,843,445 455,500 909,185 671,470 1980-93 165% 154% 150% 184% 205% Note: Counts for probation, prison, and parole population arefor December 31 each year. Jail population counts are for June 30each year. Prisoner counts are for those in custody only. Because some persons may have multiple statuses, the sum ofthe number of persons incarcerated or under community supervisionoverestimates the total correctional population. *Includes convicted and unconvicted adult inmates. **Jail counts are estimated. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners under State orFederal jurisdiction, per 100,000 adult U.S. residents, by sex,race, and education, 1992 Number of sentenced prisoners per 100,000 adult residents -----------------------------------------Level Male Female of ------------------- -------------------education* Total All** White Black All** White Black----------------------------------------------------------------All inmates 448 883 502 4,094 47 27 202 Less than high school 886 1,734 948 5,896 95 49 326 High school graduate 597 1,248 754 4,834 56 34 223 Some college or more 136 254 154 1,503 18 11 83 *Highest grade of school completed before the currentadmission to prison. General equivalency degree (GED) wascategorized as "High school graduate." **Includes Asians, Pacific Islanders, American Indians, andAlaska Natives. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners under State orFederal jurisdiction per 100,000 adult U.S. residents, by sex,race/Hispanic origin, and age, 1992 Number of sentenced prisoners* per 100,000 adult residents -------------------------------------Male -------------------------------------Age Total** White*** Black*** Hispanic ------------------------------------------------Total 883 407 3,785 1,773 18-19 681 220 2,750 872 20-24 1,458 661 5,309 2,102 25-29 1,867 837 7,210 2,839 30-34 1,538 729 6,299 2,367 35-39 1,099 511 4,415 2,150 40-44 793 417 3,179 1,586 45+ 222 142 768 610 Number of sentenced prisoners* per 100,000 adult residents -------------------------------------Female -------------------------------------Age Total** White*** Black*** Hispanic ------------------------------------------------Total 47 22 188 95 18-19 34 18 103 47 20-24 78 36 261 119 25-29 119 57 426 154 30-34 1,100 47 352 175 35-39 71 33 280 114 40-44 41 21 138 86 45+ 8 4 27 25 *Sentenced prisoners are those with a sentence of more than 1year. **Includes Asians, Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, andAlaska Natives. ***Excludes persons of Hispanic origin. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-21IA086-000615-B003-278http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/deacht1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025600 text/html 2273HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:55:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:05 GMTContent-length: 2056 DEA Charts on Drugs, Cocaine, Heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications DEA Charts The following charts were produced by the DEA themselves. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B40-22IA031-000655-B045-35http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/cocccp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114719 text/html 32618HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:47:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:02 GMTContent-length: 32400 Coca Cultivation and Cocaine Processing Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications COCA CULTIVATION AND COCAINE PROCESSING: AN OVERVIEW DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION INTELLIGENCE DIVISION STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE SECTION SEPTEMBER 1993 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Two of the lesser understood aspects of the illicit cocainetraffic are the cultivation of the coca plant and the conversion of the cocaleaf into cocaine hydrochloride (HCl). While the coca plant can be foundthroughout most of Latin America, varieties containing the cocainealkaloid (the basis for cocaine HCl) are cultivated and converted primarily inPeru, Bolivia and Colombia. There are two different species and several differentvarieties of coca plants which contain the cocaine alkaloid and these varietiesprosper under quite different climatic conditions. At the same time, themethods used to cultivate and harvest coca leaf differ depending onclimate,tradition,and other factors. The conversion of coca leaf into coca paste,cocaine base, and cocaine hydrochloride is also a varied process with many stepsinvolved and many chemicals necessary. THE COCA PLANT It has been estimated that there are over 200 Erythroxylumspecies growing in the Western Hemisphere. Only 17 species can be utilized toproduce cocaine. Fifteen of the 17 species contain relatively low levels ofcocaine alkaloid and subsequently are not cultivated. In South America twospecies and two varieties within each of these species are cultivated. Theyare: --E. coca Species var. coca var. ipadu --E. novogranatense Species var. novogranatense var. truxillense These varieties are traditionally cultivated in the followingareas: --Bolivia E. coca var. coca --Peru E. coca var. coca E. novogranatense var. truxillense E. coca var. ipadu --Colombia E. novogranatense var. novogranatense E. coca var. ipadu E. novogranatense var. truxillense The most widely grown variety of coca is E. coca var. cocawhich is cultivated on the eastern slope of the Andes from Bolivia inthe south to as far north as central Ecuador. This area of the Andes has atropical climate and experiences high amounts of rainfall. Coca in this regionis usually grown between 1,650 and 4,950 feet in elevation. E. novogranatense var. novogranatense thrives in the drierregions of Colombia and, to a lesser extent, Venezuela. It is also grownat lower elevations where the climate is generally hotter. The mainvariety of E.novogranatense, var. truxillense, is grown up to anelevation of 4,950 feet. The last variety, E. coca var. ipadu, is found insouthern Colombia, northeastern Peru, and western Brazil in the Amazon basin. E.coca var. ipadu is primarily cultivated by Indians for their own consumptionand is not as high in cocaine alkaloids as the other three. It is not an easy task, even for an expert, to readilydistinguish between the different varieties of coca plants. One of the ways toidentify the variety is to look at the leaves. Both varieties of E. coca(E. coca var. coca and E. coca var. ipadu) have broadly elliptic leaves. Theleaf of var. ipadu has a rounded apex, whereas the apex of var. coca ismore pointed. The leaf of var. coca is large, thick and dark green in color. The leaf of E. novogranatense var. novogranatense is palegreen with a rounded apex and is somewhat narrower and thinner than theleaf of var. ipadu and var.coca. E. novogranatense var. truxillense is verysimilar to var. novogranatense except that it does not possess the linesparallel to the central vein of the leaf that are characteristic to so manyvarieties of coca plant. The cocaine alkaloid content of the E. coca and the E.novogranatense species also serves to distinguish between these species and the manyother species of wild coca that grow in Latin America. These other speciescontain much lower levels of cocaine alkaloid. The usual cocaine alkaloidcontent of a sample of coca leaf material is between 0.1 and 0.8 percent.The cocaine alkaloid content can go much higher, however, as was shown inone sample of coca leaf from the Chapare region in Bolivia that measured 1.2percent. Coca grown on the upper slopes of the Andes also contain morecocaine alkaloids than coca grown in low-lying areas. It is therefore believedthat the best quality coca is grown at higher altitudes. CULTIVATION While methods of cultivating the coca plant are similar inmany ways throughout Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia, there are differencesin techniques because of terrain, tradition, and other factors. Some coca plantations have been in existence for years. Inother areas, however, such as Peru's Upper Huauaga Valley, new plantationsare being established daily. A typical farmer who is preparing a fieldfor coca will usually pick an area that slopes slightly so that water willnot drown his plants. He will then begin clearing his field, normally bycutting trees and stumps and setting fire to the debris, a clearing method knownas slash and bum. The felled trees are left in the field and the coca issimply planted around them. The farmer has no motivation to move the logssince there is no market for the timber. Logs are absent from the older fieldsbecause of rot or because the farmer gradually cleared his field. Once the field is cleared for cultivation, the farmer canready his crop for planting. The first step in cultivation generally begins withthe seed. Seeds are usually gathered from December through March from plantsranging from two to three years in age. They are often poured into water at theonset to identify bad seeds, which will usually float to the top andare discarded. The good seeds are planted in small plots that are kept shadedfrom the sun. Seeds are sown about two inches apart at a depth ofapproximately one half inch in humus enriched soil. These seedbeds are kept wellwatered and weeded frequently and the seeds will usually germinate within 20 to30 days. Sometimes the seeds are presoaked in water to hastengermination which will then occur in about ten days. Seedlings usually reach transplanting size in about twomonths. At this age they are about 12 inches tall. While the measurements vary,seedlings generally are planted in holes about a foot deep and about oneand-one-half feet from each other within rows about three feet apart. Another popular method of establishing new fields of E. ipaduinvolves taking a cutting from an established coca bush and planting it in theground. This method (cloning) is getting more popular as it gives thefarmer a head start. There are two methods of planting a cutting. One involvessticking several branches a couple of feet long into the ground. The othermethod is to cut three or four inch cuttings from a branch, each one withprotruding smaller branches. The cutting is soaked in water a day or so and thenplanted in loose, fertile soil. It is reported that coca leaf can beharvested from these plants within six months and seeds develop on theseplants after one year but the seeds lack embryos and are not viable. A coca plant cultivated from seed will generally reach fullmaturity and its leaves harvested between 12 and 24 months after beingtransplanted. Even though coca growing in the wild has been known to reachheights of up to 30 feet, that which is cultivated is almost always pruned back tofacilitate harvesting the coca leaf. Cultivated fields are usually keptat a height of three to six feet. All picking of coca leaf is done by hand.Harvesters have to be very quick in their work yet careful not to damage theleaf buds on the bush while stripping off the leaves. Leaves are said to beready for harvest when they take on a yellowish tint and have a tendency tocrack when bent. Coca leaf can be harvested between two and six times per yeardepending on climatic conditions. Coca growing at lower altitudes willusually be harvested more often than coca growing at higher altitudes.The most abundant harvest, sometimes accounting for about half of the totalyearly harvest, takes place after the rains in March. Subsequent harvests takeplace in June/July and November, the normal dry season in SouthAmerica. Some harvesting, however, takes place all year round. When the leaves are harvested, they are put in sacks and takento a closed room and spread out on the floor. The next day, the leaves aretaken to a flat area, where they are spread in thin layers on a tarpaulinin direct sunlight and left to dry. If there is a lot of sunshine andminimal cloud cover, the drying phase can be completed in six hours. Duringinclement weather, it takes much longer because at the first sign ofrain the leaves are gathered up and taken into shelter. If a load of cocaleaves is caught by a rainstorm during drying, it could ruin the whole load. Thisis because the leaves will ferment if the moisture goes over 14 percent. Thistends to cause a breakdown of the cocaine alkaloids. After the drying phase is completed, the coca leaves are sweptinto large piles and left for about three days before being taken tomarket and/or processing facilities. The weight of packaged leaves variesfrom the 100 pound "carga" in the Bolivian Chapare, to the 25pound "arroba" in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley. In Colombia, coca leaves are notusually sold; however, when dried coca leaves are sold, it is usually inpackages of 25 pounds. Peru Peru, the world's largest source of coca, has both licit andillicit cultivation. Licit coca is cultivation by farmers registeredwith the National Coca Monopoly (ENACO). ENACO buys and sells it toretailers either for resale domestically, for chewing or for herbal tea, or forexport to produce soft drink flavoring or pharmaceuticals. The 18,000hectares that have been registered for licit coca cultivation are centeredin the department of Cuzco. Illicit coca cultivation occurs primarily in the UpperHuallaga Valley region of northern Peru including the departments of San Martin,Huanuco, and Ucayali. Other areas under cultivation include the valleys ofLa Convencion and Lares in the department of Cuzco, and the provinces ofHuanta and La Mar along the Rio Apurimac in the department of Ayachucho. Thereare also smaller growing areas located in the departments of Puno and Pasco. The Upper Huallaga Valley is a tropical area with a mildclimate that receives an average of 12.44 feet of rain during the year.June through September is the dry season when the region gets very littlerainfall. The mean annual temperature is 55 degrees Fahrenheit. Coca isusually grown here between 1,980 to 2,640 feet above sea level but is sometimesplanted up to 6,270 feet in altitude. The soil in the Upper Huallaga Valleyis well drained and rich in iron, an important element for all plant life. The area surrounding Cuzco has an average rainfall of between1.32 and 5.94 feet annually which usually falls between the months ofOctober and April. The average temperatures in this region are greater than 53degrees Fahrenheit. Coca is generally grown between 2,409 and 4,257feet above sea level. The soil is especially poor in iron content. A semi-tropical climate with warm days and abundant rain fall,between 6.6 and 7.26 feet per annum, characterizes the Ayacucho area. Cocais usually grown on steep slopes which require terracing at an elevationof between 1,650 and 4,290 feet. Soils in this area are red and high iniron. Bolivia Bolivia is the world's second largest source of coca leaf.There is both licit and illicit coca cultivation occurring in this countryas well. In mid-1988, a law became effective that made coca cultivationillegal in most of the country. The law also established legal, transitional,and illegal zones of cultivation and declared that 12,000 hectares of cocawould be the amount grown to meet the traditional demand for coca. There are roughly three main growing areas in Bolivia. Thethree areas are the Yungas de La Paz, the Chapare, and the Apolo. Cocacultivation in the Yungas de La Paz is located between the cities of Guanay andInquisivi, northeast of La Paz on the eastern slope of the Andes.Cultivation in the Chapare occurs in the provinces of Carrasco, Chapare, andArani in the department of Cochabamba, east of La Paz. The small area ofApolo is in the La Paz department north of the city of La Paz. Nearly all the licit coca is grown in the traditional growingareas of the Yungas. The overwhelming amount of illicit coca is grown inthe Chapare where it is estimated that about 75 percent of the country's cocacrop is cultivated. The amount of coca grown in the Apolo is much lessthan in either of the two other areas. Parts of the Yungas have been cultivated for hundreds ofyears. Coca is planted at between 4,800 and 6,000 feet in altitude onterraced fields, generally on steep slopes. Some of these fields have a slopeof more than 45 degrees. The Yungas is characterized by a five-month rainyseason that runs from December to April receiving about 4 feet of rainfall peryear, followed by seven dry months. The soil content is poor, and this areahas suffered severe erosion problems. In the Chapare, the weather is continually wet and warm, withan annual rainfall averaging around 13 feet. The growing areas in thisregion are broad, low plains containing some hills. Coca is cultivated atbetween 660 and 1,650 feet above sea level where the temperature averagesaround 57 degrees Fahrenheit. The soil is clay based, rich alluvial(sediment deposited by flowing water). The Apolo, located in La Paz department, is also a noteworthycoca-growing region of Bolivia. Coca in the Apolo region is ofteninterplanted with coffee, a major crop in the area. Soil in the Apolo is notsuited very well to coca; the longevity of a coca bush there is only from fiveto eight years. Coca plants in the Apolo are therefore constantly replaced. Colombia Colombia ranks third in worldwide coca leaf production withall cultivation being illicit. There is widespread cultivation in the easternplains region of the Llanos which encompasses about one-half of Colombia.The heaviest areas of cultivation are located in the departments ofPutumayo, Caqueta, Guaviare, and Vaupes. There is substantial expansion of thecoca crop in the Bolivar department in the north-central area of Colombia aswell as areas of cultivation in the south and southwest part of the country. In the southern coca-growing region, the temperature averagesbetween 49.5 and 52 degrees Fahrenheit and there is light rainfall. Coca isnormally grown between 3,300 arid 6,600 feet above sea level. The soil inthis region is iron rich; however, there is some erosion. COCAINE PROCESSING The conversion of coca leaves to coca paste, cocaine base, andcocaine hydrochloride occurs primarily in Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru.Peru and Bolivia are the primary locations for the conversion of leafto coca paste and cocaine base, while Colombia is the primary location forthe final conversion to cocaine hydrochloride. It is believed that bothPeruvian and Bolivian traffickers have begun increasing their production ofHCI in the last few years. There are a number of chemicals and solvents which play vitalroles in the processing of coca leaves to paste, base and HCI. Many ofthese chemicals are quite common; all are theoretically substitutable and all havelegitimate uses making them difficult to control. Coca processing can be broken down into three stages. Thefirst is the conversion of the coca leaf into coca paste; this is almostalways done very close to the coca fields to cut down on the transport of thecoca leaves. The second phase is the conversion of coca paste into cocainebase. This step is usually omitted in Colombia and the process is taken straightthrough from paste to cocaine HCI. The final stage is conversion of base toHCI. Coca Leaves to Coca Paste The conversion of coca leaf into coca paste is accomplished ina coca paste pit, or "pozo. " A typical coca paste pit is a verycrude structure located near the harvesting site and consists of only a very fewitems. Some paste pits have even been reported in peasants' houses. The pastepit is usually a hole in the ground, lined with thick, heavy plastic, or mayeven be a 55-gallon drum with the top cut out. Paste pits are oftenlocated near streams so that the processors will have a constant supply offresh water, which is used in the first stage of processing. The process ofconverting leaves to paste usually takes a few days. Often, however, theleaves will be "worked" or "stomped" for only a few hoursrendering less paste than if "worked" for several days. It is apparentlysometimes more desirable to move the paste out than to get more paste per kilogram of cocaleaf. Depending on the size of the pit and the amount of leaf, the whole processwill require the energy of two to five workers. The following recipe for coca paste is but one of many.Recipes will differ depending on where the laboratory is located. Some will optnot to use water in the first step and amounts and mixing times vary widely.However, this remains a good benchmark formula. --Step 1 The coca leaves are put in an above-ground container or in aplastic lined pit. An alkaline material (sodium carbonate) and water areadded to the leaves. Here the alkaline material enables the cocainealkaloid present in the leaf to be extracted into kerosene. --Step 2 A water immiscible solvent (kerosene) is added to water,solution, and leaves. The mixture is then agitated. Usually this isaccomplished by having several people stomp on the leaves. The solvent acts toextract water insoluble cocaine alkaloids from the alkaline solution. --Step 3 Cocaine alkaloids and kerosene separate from water and leaves.The water and leaves are then drained off. --Step 4 Cocaine alkaloids are extracted from the kerosene into adilute acid solution. Alkaline material (sodium carbonate) is added to theremaining solution which causes a precipitate to form . The acid and thewater are drained off and the precipitate is filtered and dried toproduce coca paste, a chunky, off-white to light brown, putty-like substance. Coca Paste to Cocaine Base The processing of coca paste into cocaine base is morecomplicated than paste production, requiring more sophisticated equipment and addedskills. Cocaine base can be processed at the paste facility, but baselaboratories may be located away from the cultivation zones. Usually the baselaboratories are located near rivers or have a clandestine airstrip located inthe vicinity to facilitate both the movement of coca paste into the baselaboratory, but also the movement of cocaine base to cocaine HCl laboratories. As with the paste recipes, the base recipes have manyversions. This one is one of the more common and a continuation of the paste recipe. --Step 1 The coca paste is added to sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acidand water. The paste is dissolved into the acid solution. --Step 2 Potassium permanganate is combined with water. This mixture isadded to the coca paste and acid solution. Potassium permanganate is usedin this step to extract other alkaloids and material that is undesired in thefinal product. In particular, potassium permanganate is used to break downthe alkaloid ciscinnamoylcocaine found in large concentrations in E.novogranatense varieties. If the coca paste has a high concentration of thisalkaloid and potassium permanganate is not used, then crystallization ofcocaine HCl will be very difficult. --Step 3 This mixture is allowed to stand for about six hours. --Step 4 The solution is filtered and the precipitate is discarded.Ammonia water is added to the filtered solution and another precipitate isformed. --Step 5 The liquid is drained from the solution and the remainingprecipitate is usually dried with heating lamps. The resulting powder iscocaine base. It is common in Colombia to skip the base stage of cocaineprocessing and go right from coca paste to cocaine HCl. This can be accomplishedby eliminating the last part of step number four in coca paste processing andskipping to step number two of the cocaine base phase where the coca pasteis added to the potassium permanganate solution. Cocaine Base to Cocaine Hydrochloride (HCl) The final stage of cocaine processing requires even more skilland equipment, and is much more dangerous than the previously mentionedsteps. Unlike paste and base processing, cocaine HCl processing calls forexpensive chemicals that are harder to find and often not manufactured in theprocessing country. The HCl laboratory usually consists of several buildingsincluding dormitories, eating facilities, an office, storage facilities,and the laboratory itself. Also usually found at HCl laboratories arecommunications operations, generators, filtering and drying equipment, and,more recently, chemical recycling facilities. The HCl laboratory willsometimes have direct access to an airstrip. The following recipe is a continuation of the above two. Atthis point the methods of processing vary only slightly. --Step 1 Acetone or ether is added to dissolve the cocaine base and thesolution is filtered to remove undesired material. --Step 2 Hydrochloric acid diluted in acetone or ether is added to thecocaine solution. The addition of the hydrochloric acid causes thecocaine to precipitate (crystallize) out of the solution as cocainehydrochloride. --Step 3 The remaining acetone/ether solvent can be discarded orreused. --Step 4 Cocaine HCl is dried under heat lamps, laid out to dry withthe aid of fans, or dried in microwave ovens. NATURAL ENEMIES AND ERADICATION EFFORTS Although the coca bush is a very strong plant and will livefor many years and produce many harvests of leaf, it will do better if takencare of, fertilized, and treated with herbicides and insecticides. Occasionally, a coca field will become infested with one ofthe plant's natural enemies. The main pests and the effect that they areknown to have on the plant are discussed below. The larvae of the moth Eloria Noyesi presents the most seriousthreat to the coca plant. This moth lives through out the coca-growingregion of South America and seems to feed almost exclusively on E. coca. Ithas also been recorded feeding on E. novogranatense in Colombia and northernPeru. The larva will develop in about a month and will eat up to 50leaves in its lifetime. The larva will also eat the shoots of the bush thatgrow out after harvest. If Eloria attacks a plant repeatedly, even a strongplant will die. The moth is usually only abundant from December to April. Cocagrowers are using insecticides to eradicate Eloria. The larvae of Eucleodora Coca, a fly, seems to cause harm onlyto Trujillo coca. (There have been major infestations of this insect inthe past usually occuring from April to August.) The larvae spend their entirelives on the plant, feeding on the leaves and shoots . As with the Eloria,Eucleodora is being controlled with insecticides. Very little is known about the effect of the leaf-cutting ant,Acromyrmex, on coca. Growers in the Upper Huallaga Valley report that seriousdamage in the past has been done to their coca cultivation. The damage isoften controlled with the use of insecticides and flooding. The beetle,Aegoidus Pacificus, also poses a threat to Trujillo coca. The adult beetle laysher eggs in the bark of the coca plant, and the larva later burrows into thestem of the plant. This usually results in an infestation of pathogenicfungi which is ultimately responsible for the death of the coca plant. Aswith the other pests, the beetle can also be controlled with insecticides. Most of the other insects which attack coca only do so whenthere are shortages of their normal food supply. Some scientists believethat cocaine and other alkaloids may present some natural defense againstmost pests. Nevertheless, sometimes insects such as spider mites,grasshoppers, leafhoppers, and beetles find it necessary to eat coca. The coca plant is also susceptible to numerous species ofpathogenic fungi. Fungi seem to present the greatest threat to a plant duringthe wet season. The most serious threat seems to come from a fungus called"witches broom ." The exact effect of this fungus on the coca plant is not clearbecause of the limited amount of study which has been done on this fungusinfesting coca plantations. Natural enemies hold hope for control of the coca plant in thefuture. At present, however, the most successful methods in controllingthe growth of coca are herbicides and manual eradication. As of early 1990, all eradication of the coca plant in Boliviaand Colombia was being done manually. The usual method has been for a teamof eradication workers to go into a field and pull up the bushes plant byplant. In Peru, manual eradication of coca is often suspended because ofsecurity reasons. Prior to that time, a number of gasoline-powered cutters hadbeen supplied to the workers making it easier and much quicker to cut the coca.The problem with this method is that sometimes the coca bush will sproutfrom the stump within 12 to 18 months. As such, the cutting must be made veryclose to the ground to insure that the plant does not sprout again. A number of herbicides have been tested for use in eradicatingthe coca plant including hexazinone and tebuthiuron (spike) . Application ofboth has been deemed successful in killing the plant as long as they areapplied in the correct manner and amount. Within ten to twenty days afterapplication of hexazinone or tebuthiuron the coca bush sheds all its leavesand usually within 60 to 90 days the coca plant will be completely dead. The United States is working with some South Americangovernments to develop an herbicidal eradication program; Bolivia, however, hasprohibited the use of herbicides for this purpose. [NOTE: the report from which this text was input containedaccompanying illustrations.] Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B40-23IA031-000655-B045-61http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/deaseal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114742 text/html 1175HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:47:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:01 GMTContent-length: 959 The Drug Enforcement Administration Seal DEA Seal Below is the official seal of the Drug EnforcementAdministration. As a product of the Federal Government, this sealis in the public domain so it may be freely reprinted anywhere,such as on rolls of toilet paper, as long as you are notpretending that you are an official representative of the DEA. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-24IA031-000655-B045-87http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/const1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114757 text/html 26869HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:47:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:15:52 GMTContent-length: 26651 Drug Enforcement Administration - Congressional Testimony DEA Congressional Testimony Statement by: Thomas A. Constantine Administrator Drug Enforcement Administration United States Department of Justice Before the: Senate Foreign Relations Committee Regarding: International Drug Trafficking Organizations inMexico Location: Dirksen Senate Office Building Room 419 Washington, D.C. Date: August 8, 1995 Note: This document may not reflect changes made inactual delivery. Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee: I'm pleased to appearbefore you today to discuss the growing role of internationaldrug trafficking organizations operating in Mexico and to tellyou what the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is doing toattack these organizations that are responsible for smugglingtons of illegal drugs across the U.S./Mexico border. Mexico is pivotal to the success of any U.S. drug strategy. Notonly do we share a common border, through which three-fourths ofthe cocaine enters our country, but Mexico has long been a majorsource country for heroin and marijuana. Within the last fewyears, it has also become a major source country formethamphetamine, as well as a transit country for chemicals,especially ephedrine, used in the manufacture of methamphetamine. My purpose at this hearing today is to talk about the drugtrafficking situation and to highlight our concerns about theincreased role of these international drug gangs operating inMexico. My comments will be limited to observations ontrafficking organizations and their methods of smuggling, the lawenforcement communities' efforts to work with Mexico, and anassessment of our chances for success in decreasing the flood ofillegal drugs that enter this country each day and have adevastating impact on the citizens on both sides of the border. A Glimpse of the Problem Mr. Chairman, an important 1989 drug seizure gave us a glimpse ofthe magnitude of the problem law enforcement faces and alsoillustrates just how important Mexico is to our efforts tocontrol illegal drugs coming into our country. In late 1989, DEAmade America's largest cocaine seizure on record (over 21.5 tons)in Sylmar, California. This cocaine came across the border at El Paso and was trucked tothe West Coast. Drug law enforcement was encouraged by such ahuge seizure, and we were convinced that we had seriously woundedthe Colombian drug organizations by preventing such a largeamount of illegal drugs from reaching our streets. But, we realized our encouragement was premature when we analyzedseized records. What we found was even more astounding. Welearned that during only a 3-month period, the organization hadsucceeded in smuggling 55 tons of cocaine into the U.S. Thiscocaine had been trucked to Los Angeles and had already beendistributed on our streets. One of the most disturbing aspects of this case is that ten yearsago, we measured drug seizures in grams and pounds. Today, weroutinely measure seizures in tons-even multitons. In January,for example, in Pasadena, Texas, a suburb of Houston, we seized6.5 tons of cocaine. In July, we seized over 5 tons of cocaine inthe border town of El Paso. And one of the primary reasons forthese multiton shipments of cocaine is the efficient andmutually-rewarding relationship that has emerged between thecocaine mafia in Colombia and the drug trafficking groupsoperating in Mexico. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we estimate that the Colombian drug mafiais using Mexico as a cocaine safe haven to store, at any onetime, as much as 70 to 100 tons of cocaine that will eventuallybe smuggled across the U.S. border for distribution on Americanstreets. This is enough to provide a line of cocaine to everyman, woman, and child on this planet--and then some. At aconservative estimate, this cocaine would be worth over $700million to $1 billion on America's streets. Role of the International Drug Traffickers The fact that these traffickers have been able to accommodate thetransportation needs of the Cali cocaine mafia is not somethingthat happened overnight. Criminal organizations from Mexico havehad decades of practice. Traditionally, the Mexican bordereconomies have been significantly affected by the smugglingactivities into and out of the United States. It was theseorganized smuggling organizations that rose to prominence in thelate 1960s and 1970s when marijuana trafficking presented thepotential for huge profits. During the early 1980's, most of the Colombian cocaine enteredthe United States through South Florida by way of the Caribbean.But, traffickers were forced to find new routes when U.S. drugagencies increased enforcement action in the Caribbean and SouthFlorida. The Colombian drug lords naturally turned to thetrafficking groups in Mexico which had what they were lookingfor: proximity to the United States, a 2,000 mile expanse ofborder offering unlimited smuggling possibilities, and an alreadyestablished drug trafficking infrastructure that stood ready toserve their needs. The drug trafficking organizations easily adapted theiroperations to include cocaine trafficking, and by the mid-80's,were well-established and reliable transporters of Colombiancocaine. Delegating cocaine transportation to the traffickers inMexico was a tactical decision on the part of the Cali mafia.With the transportation assistance of these traffickers, thecocaine barons could now move larger bulk quantities throughMexico which would have been logistically impossible to move byany other means. By turning the riskiest part of the cocainedistribution cycle (the transportation) over to thesetraffickers, the Cali mafia could turn its attention to otheraspects of their cocaine enterprise. This drug traffickingpartnership has become one of both convenience and profit. One of the first traffickers to move cocaine through Mexico andto the U.S. was Juan Ramon Matta-Ballesteros, a Honduran, who,from the mid-'70s to the mid-'80s, was actively involved with theMexican Guadalajara Cartel. This was the group responsible forthe kidnapping torture and murder of DEA Special Agent Enrique(Kiki) Camarena in 1985. The death of Agent Camarena outraged theAmerican public. Matta-Ballesteros has been convicted in threeseparate U.S. cases and is serving a term of life imprisonment. Emerging Traffickers Coming into their Own Today, there is no question that drug traffickers operating inMexico have become major players in the international drug trade.These veteran traffickers have been good students and havelearned valuable lessons from the drug experts--the Cali mafia.They have seen the benefit (and profits) of working together in apartnership to provide a needed transportation service to thecocaine organizations in Colombia. Receiving payment in both cashand cocaine, they have begun to establish their own cocainedistribution networks and territories, stretching from theSouthwest border areas as far as New York. In effect, the Calimafia has been a willing partner in helping these organizationscreate distribution and sales networks in the U.S. Like the Cali mafia, these trafficking organizations havedemonstrated their flexibility to change trafficking routes whenlaw enforcement action along any one route becomes too risky totheir business. These drug groups have also followed the lead oftheir predecessors by expanding and diversifying their productline. Sophisticated trafficking organizations based in Mexico nowmanufacture methamphetamine and smuggle the precursor chemicalsnecessary for its manufacture. And, perhaps most important, asthey have expanded their role in the drug trade, they have madevaluable worldwide contacts, which will be necessary as theycontinue to establish themselves as important players in theworld of illegal drugs. There are a number of trafficking groups in Mexico that havegained a firm foothold in the trafficking of drugs, but I'd liketo take a moment to describe the four major drug traffickingorganizations that work closely with the Cali mafia: Tijuana Cartel The organization sometimes referred to the "TijuanaCartel," is headed by Benjamin Arellano-Felix and hisbrother Francisco. They control most of the drugs crossing theborder on the West Coast between Tijuana and Mexicali. Feuding between this group and other organizations has becomeincreasingly violent. In fact, it was the feuding between theArrellano-Felix organization and rival drug dealers that led tothe killing of Catholic Cardinal Juan Jesus Posadas-Ocampo at theGuadalajara airport in 1993 The Arellano-Felix brothers are currently the subjects of anationwide manhunt by law enforcement authorities for theirinvolvement in the Cardinal's killing. On June 23, Mexicanauthorities arrested Hector Luis Palma-Salazar, the leader of arival drug organization that is believed to be behind theattempted assassinations of the Arellano-Felix brothers, as wellas the murder of Cardinal Posadas-Ocampo. Benjamin and FranciscoArellano-Felix have both been indicted in San Diego, California,and are DEA fugitives. The Caro-Ouintero Organization The Caro-Quintero organization is involved in the cultivation,processing, smuggling and distribution of heroin and marijuanaand the transportation of Colombian cocaine into the U.S. Thisorganization was previously led by Rafael Caro-Quintero, known asthe "Mexican Rhinestone Cowboy," who began his criminalcareer at the young age of 12 or 13 as an apprentice to PedroAviles, a notorious Mexican drug trafficker. Caro-Quintero is currently in a Mexican maximum security prisonfor his involvement in the kidnaping, torture and murder of DEASpecial Agent Enrique Camarena, as well as for marijuana andcocaine trafficking. His brother, Miguel Caro-Quintero, now runsthe organization, and is under indictment in Tucson and Denver. Juarez: Cartel One of the most notorious and powerful of these traffickingorganizations is the Amado Carrillo-Fuentes organization,sometimes referred to as the "Juarez Cartel."Carrillo-Fuentes has been the chief transporter for the recentlyarrested Cali mafia leader Miguel Rodriguez-Orejuela. Carrillo-Fuentes owns several airline companies, which enableshim to fly 727s from Colombia into Juarez, where he runs hisorganization from his ranch headquarters. Increasingly, murdersin Juarez have been associated with Carrillo-Fuentes. In July,the leader of the juvenile gangs he recruits to smuggle drugsacross the border was found shot 23 times in the head. Here inthe United States, Carrillo-Fuentes has been indicted in Miami onheroin and marijuana charges, and in Dallas on cocaine charges. Juan Garcia-Abrego Another influential Mexican trafficker acting in concert with theCali mafia is Juan Garcia-Abrego, who is involved in smugglingdrugs from the Yucatan area in Mexico to South Texas and up toNew York. Juan Garcia-Abrego was recently added to the FBI's topten most wanted fugitives, with a $2 million reward for hiscapture. This is the first time an international drug traffickerhas been included on the FBI list. This organization transports large quantities of cocaine for theCali mafia, as well as marijuana and heroin for othertraffickers. Garcia-Abrego pioneered deals in which Mexicantraffickers take payment in cocaine, which substantially raisedtheir profits, and at the same time diversified their involvementfrom beyond smuggling to the role of suppliers to their own drugdistribution networks. He and his organization are notorious forthe violence they employ to further and protect their illicittrade. He also ships bulk amounts of cash for the Cali mafia. During afour-year period, from 1989 to 1993, $53 million was seized inconnection with the Garcia-Abrego organization. Two AmericanExpress bankers in Brownsville, Texas, were indicted forlaundering $30 million for Garcia-Abrego, and to date, 70 membersof his organization have been prosecuted and convicted in theU.S. Juan Garcia-Abrego has been indicted in Houston and remainsa fugitive. Expanding Influence: Cocaine and Methamphetamine DEA is very concerned about the expanding role of drugorganizations based in Mexico which are playing an increasinglylarger role in the shipment and distribution of cocaine andmethamphetamine to the United States. Cocaine In the last few years, we've seen international traffickingorganizations make major changes in their efficiency intransporting bulk shipments of cocaine to transportingorganizations in Mexico. Traditionally trafficking organizationsused twin-engine general aviation aircraft to transport cocainefrom Colombia to transhipment locations in Mexico and theCaribbean. Today, however, the Cali mafia has bought passengerjets (like 727's) gutted them, and are using them to transportmultiton loads of cocaine to the trafficking organizations inMexico. In March of this year, for example, a Caravelle jetaircraft was seized in the Mexican State of Sonora, after beingabandoned by traffickers when its tires became stuck in the dirtrunway. Mexican Government forces later seized 2.8 tons ofcocaine that are believed to have been off-loaded from thatCaravelle. Law enforcement has also uncovered two tunnels built to movecocaine from Mexico into the United States. The first wasdiscovered in Arizona in 1990. The second nearly-completed tunnelwas discovered in 1993 near the Tijuana Airport and led to anunfinished warehouse in the United States. Methamphetamine U.S. law enforcement is also concerned about the growing role oftrafficking gangs operating in Mexico involved in themethamphetamine trade. We directly attribute the increasedamounts of methamphetamine available in the U.S. to thesetrafficking organizations which have replaced domestic outlawmotorcycle gangs as the predominant methamphetamine producers,traffickers, and distributors. Unfortunately, DEA is very much aware of the problem of thesemethamphetamine gangs operating in the U.S. Last summer, DEASpecial Agent Richard Fass was shot and killed in Tucson by amethamphetamine trafficker during an undercover operation. Thering leader of the gang responsible for Agent Fass' death hasstill not been apprehended and is believed to be in Mexico. TheDEA is currently working with both the FBI and Mexicanauthorities to apprehend him. In the last three years, these trafficking organizations havevirtually saturated the western United States market withhigh-purity methamphetamine, known also as "speed"or"crank." In some areas of California, it has nowreportedly replaced cocaine as the drug of choice. With asaturated West Coast market, these traffickers have begun toexpand their markets to the East Coast and in the South. DEA'ssouthern offices report a growing presence of these traffickinggroups providing methamphetamine to domestic traffickingorganizations in rural and suburban areas of Georgia, Tennessee,Kentucky, and the Carolinas. As supplies have increased, prices have fallen, making it a cheapalternative to cocaine. Some have called it the "poor man'scocaine." In 1991, for example, the lowest pound pricenationwide was $6,000. Today, in California, methamphetaminesells for between $2,500 and $3,600 per pound. With increased availability, methamphamine use has increased.According to the Drug Abuse Warning Network, the number ofemergency room episodes involving methamphetamine has increasedsteadily since 1991, particularly in the West. From 1991 to 1993,episodes more than doubled in both Los Angeles and Phoenix. The dominance of Mexico-based, poly-drug organizations inmethamphetamine trafficking is further evidence of their growingsophistication. The smuggling skills developed while transportingcocaine for the Cali mafia has enabled these organizations tobranch out into moving other contraband, such as precursorchemicals, especially ephedrine and pseudoephedrine, used in themanufacture of methamphetamine . They have established international connections in Europe, Asiaand the Far East to obtain the shipment of tons of precursorchemicals, particularly ephedrine, to addresses in both UnitedStates and Mexico. During 1993 and 1994, the majority ofephedrine shipments destined for Mexico were supplied by suchdiverse countries as China, India, the Czech Republic, andSwitzerland. From mid-1993 to early 1995, DEA documented thediversion of almost 170 tons of ephedrine used in illicitmethamphetamine production. It's important to note, however, thatDEA has obtained cooperation from many of these countries to stemthe flow of chemicals going to Mexico. It's difficult to predict where this newest surge ofmethamphetamine use and trafficking will lead, but we must notassume that it has peaked. Unlike other drugs, methamphetamine isone that these criminal organizations can control entirely frombeginning to end. They have the international contacts to obtainthe necessary precursor chemicals to make the drug. They have theclandestine labs to process the chemicals into methamphetamine onboth sides of the border. They have expanded their distributionnetworks across the nation by the use and intimidation of illegalaliens. And, unlike their previous role as middle-men movingcocaine and heroin, they can keep 100 percent of the profits fromtheir methamphetamine sales. U. S. law enforcement may be in for a difficult and violent fewyears as we work to get the methamphetamine problem undercontrol. We've already seen "meth" smuggling gangs faceoff against each other. Recently, in San Diego, a confrontationbetween meth smuggling groups with ties to Mexico resulted in 26homicides. There may be more bloodshed on our streets, as thesedrug gangs fight to protect (and expand) their drug turf. DEA's Response In response to the threats of the Mexico-based traffickingorganizations and their surrogate drug gangs operating here inthe United States, DEA has taken a number of steps to work withour law enforcement partners in Mexico, as well as with ourFederal, state, and local colleagues here at home. DEA has joined forces with the FBI in a Southwest BorderInitiative that targets the major Mexican traffickingorganizations for enforcement actions. Combined teams of state,local and federal law enforcement led by DEA and FBI SpecialAgents are working together with a common goal of disruptingthese gangs and bringing their leaders to justice. For the first time, the DEA, the FBI, the Department of JusticeCriminal Division, and respective U.S. Attorneys in every statealong the Southwest Border are coordinating both intelligence andmanpower resources against a common enemy--the poly-drugtrafficking organizations that are transporting increased amountsof cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and methamphetamine across ourborders. Both the DEA and the FBI hold high expectations for thesuccess for this operation. Three new binational Border Task Forces have been established andwill focus on the four principal trafficking organizations.Senior personnel of the DEA, FBI, and DOJ Criminal Division serveon a U.S./Mexican Plenary Group, working to enhance ourcooperation against narcotics, money laundering, arms smuggling,and other crimes. Mr. Chairman, in this open forum I cannot explain the specificsof how this new initiative will work, but I would be happy todiscuss this in more detail in a closed session or a privatebriefing. Our support for Mexico's drug fighting efforts is critical totheir success--and ultimately to our own. Attorney General Renoand Mexican Attorney General Antonio Lozano-Gracia have pledgedto work cooperatively to address the problems. Hopefully, a closeand coordinated law enforcement response by our two countrieswill have an impact on this growing problem. Future Threats: An Assessment There is no question that the international drug traffickingorganizations operating in Colombia and Mexico have had a directimpact on the multiton quantities of cocaine law enforcement isforced to deal with today. These organizations have proven to bea serious threat to both the United States and Mexico. In recent years, as the political and economic ties between theUnited States and Mexico have strengthened, a new generation ofinternational traffickers have been able to carve out an everlarger share of the world's drug trade and pose a growing threaton both sides of the border. We've seen these traffickingorganizations grow from low-level smuggling groups tosophisticated organizations that smuggle more and more drugs ofevery kind--cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and nowmethamphetamine--into the U.S. They are increasingly being paidfor their transportation expertise with cocaine, a move thatcould prove to be the undoing of the Cali mafia and could shiftthe balance of power within the worldwide cocaine trade. Mr. Chairman, in a few years down the road, I believe it'sentirely possible that these newly emerging groups could rise toan equal (or superior) footing with the Cali mafia. If thishappens, life as we know it in both the United States and Mexicowill change dramatically. They care little for the devastingimpact they have on the people of Mexico and the United States.They are international criminal elements that must be dealt with. The President of Mexico, Ernesto Zedillo, has publically statedto the American media that drug trafficking is a threat toMexican national security, not only because of the crime that isinherent in such activity, but also because of the growing wealththat enables traffickers to corrupt police and governmentinstitutions. As these organizations grow in wealth and sophistication, theythreaten to overwhelm the capabilities of any law enforcementsystem, including Mexico. By comparison, we have a professionallaw enforcement system in the United States, at the Federal,state and local level, that promotes and encourages highstandards in recruitment, training, internal inspections,standards of operations and accountability to electecl officials. We have a criminal justice system that is quick to respond tocharges of unethical or corrupt actions on the part of lawenforcement. It has helped to professionalize our law enforcementagencies and insure a continuing quest for ethics and integrity.Despite our best efforts, unethical or illegal activities dooccasionally occur within the ranks of our law enforcementagencies, requiring swift and decisive government action topreserve the public's faith and trust. As a society, we provide modern and sophisticated resources toour law enforcement agencies to combat the criminal elementsconfronting them. The law enforcement institutions in Mexico donot presently have an infrastructure similar to those in the U.S.The development of such institutions will require a substantialcommitment of time and resources to achieve the necessary levelof professionalism. The potential exists that if this is notdone, they may be overwhelmed by the wealth and influence of thedrug organizations. We are not alone in recognizing this problem. Attorney GeneralLozano has moved to have special police units report directly tohim. He has announced a plan to include reviews of all Federalpolice officers and prosecutors, with mandatory drug testing, tocombat internal corruption. I cite this only to illustrate thatthe Mexican government itself recognizes this is a problem. It is imperative that we work with our partners in Mexico toblunt the influence these drug traffickers are having in both ourcountries. It is also imperative that our own Federal, state, andlocal law enforcement continue to work cooperatively together tomake the best use of our resources, as well as to increase ourimpact on these trafficking organizations. Surely, when we speakof tons of drugs coming across our borders and causing tremendousdamage to the health and well-being of our citizens, we aretalking of a national security threat that demands our immediateand continuous attention. DEA is hopeful that future counterdrug efforts with Mexico willbe successful. In the past year, Mexico has instituted newprograms that include attempts to professionalize its lawenforcement institutions and increase cross-border cooperation toaddress the threat of the international traffickers. The directand cooperative communication between Attorney General Reno andAttorney General Lozano should be of great help in securing acoordination of our resources to address a common problem. Thethreat is serious--and it is real. Returnto Cliff Schaffer's Main Page WT01-B40-25IA031-000655-B045-192http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/gao/gaomen1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114845 text/html 15304HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:48:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:24:27 GMTContent-length: 15086 General Accounting Office Publications on Drugs and DrugPolicy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | GAO Publications General Accounting Office Document Menu GAO Documents relating to drug policy General Accounting Office WebPage Money Laundering: U.S.Efforts To Fight It Are Threatened By Currency Smuggling(Chapter Report, 03/09/94). Drug Control: U.S. AntidrugEfforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley (12/07/94). In short,not working. High Risk Series: AssetForfeiture Programs (Letter Report, 02/95). The GAO reportsthat asset forfeiture is a government policy with a high risk ofabuse. Expanded MilitarySurveillance Not Justified by Measurable Goals or Results -10/5/93 U.S. CounterdrugActivities in Central America - August 2, 1994 The DRUG WAR- Colombia IsImplementing Antidrug Efforts, but Impact Is Uncertain October5. 1993 Interdiction Efforts inCentral America Have Had Little Impact on the Flow of DrugsAugust 1994 - Like all the other reports on this topic -interdiction seems to be a general waste of time and money withno real effect on the overall flow of drugs. Drug Use Measurement -Strengths, Limitations, and Recommendations for Improvement October5, 1993 - Summarized: They don't really have a clue about theextent of illegal drug use and many of the high-risk groups fordrug use are excluded by the major surveys. Drug Courts: Informationon a New Approach to Address Drug-Related Crime (BriefingReport, 05/22/95, GAO/GGD-95-159BR) Drug Control:Reauthorization of the Office of National Drug Control Policy (Testimony,10/05/93, GAO/T-GGD-94-7). Drug War: Observations onthe U.S. International Drug Control Strategy (Testimony,06/27/95, GAO/T-NSIAD-95-182). Drug War: Observations onU.S. International Drug Control Efforts (Testimony, 08/01/95,GAO/T-NSIAD-95-194). U.S. Attorneys: MoreAccountability for Implementing Priority Programs Is Desirable(Letter Report, 06/23/95, GAO/GGD-95-150). DOD Budget: SelectedCategories of Planned Funding for Fiscal Years 1995-99 (LetterReport, 02/17/95, GAO/NSIAD-95-92). Foster Care: HealthNeeds of Many Young Children Are Unknown and Unmet (LetterReport, 05/26/95, GAO/HEHS-95-114). Border Control: RevisedStrategy Is Showing Some Positive Results (Letter Report,12/29/94, GAO/GGD-95-30). Management Reform: GAO'sComments on the National Performance Review's Recommendations(Letter Report, 12/03/93, GAO/OCG-94-1). (Abbreviated version -drug-related sections only) School Safety: PromisingInitiatives for Addressing School Violence (Letter Report,04/25/95, GAO/HEHS-95-106). Federal CriminalJustice: Cost of Providing Court-Appointed Attorneys Is Rising,but Causes Are Unclear (Letter Report, 07/19/95, GAO/GGD-95-182). U.S. Postal Service:Drug Investigation Data (Fact Sheet, 12/06/94,GAO/GGD-95-29FS). Honduras: ContinuingU.S. Military Presence at Soto Cano Base Is Not Critical(Letter Report, 02/08/95, GAO/NSIAD-95-39). Continental Air Defense:A Dedicated Force Is No Longer Needed (Letter Report,05/03/94, GAO/NSIAD-94-76). Social Security:Disability Benefits for Drug Addicts and Alcoholics Are Out ofControl (Testimony, 02/10/94, GAO/T-HEHS-94-101). Child Welfare: ComplexNeeds Strain Capacity to Provide Services (Letter Report,09/26/95, GAO/HEHS-95-208). Prescription Drugs andthe Elderly: Many Still Receive Potentially Harmful DrugsDespite Recent Improvements (Letter Report, 07/24/95,GAO/HEHS-95-152). Drug Control: The Officeof National Drug Control Policy--Strategies Need PerformanceMeasures (Testimony, 11/15/93, GAO/T-GGD-94-49). Foster Care: ParentalDrug Abuse Has Alarming Impact on Young Children (LetterReport, 04/04/94, GAO/HEHS-94-89). Juvenile Justice:Juveniles Processed In Criminal Court and Case Dispositions (LetterReport, 08/15/95, GAO/GGD-95-170). Juvenile Justice:Representation Rates Varied As Did Counsel's Impact on CourtOutcomes (Letter Report, 06/19/95, GAO/GGD-95-139). Residential Care: SomeHigh-Risk Youth Benefit, But More Study Needed (LetterReport, 01/28/94, GAO/HEHS-94-56). Welfare Dependency:Coordinated Community Efforts Can Better Serve Young At-Risk TeenGirls (Letter Report, 05/10/95, GAO/HEHS/RCED-95-108). Managing for Results:The Department of Justice's Initial Efforts to Implement GPRA (FactSheet, 06/13/95, GAO/GGD-95-167FS). DRUG-EXPOSED INFANTS-- A Generation at Risk - June 1990 The Drug War: U.S.Programs in Peru Face Serious Obstacles. (464138)GAO/NSIAD-92-36, October 21, 1991. GAO Reports Coming Soon The following GAO reports will soon be added to these webpages. Anyone who has a computer text copy of any of thesereports is requested to e-mail it to: schaffer@smartlink.net. Anyone who needs a copy of these reports before they hit the webpage can write to the GAO at the address below. The first copy ofany report is free. Call (202) 512-6000, or fax your * request to (301) 258-4066,or by writing to GAO P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. Drug Treatment: Targeting Aid to States Using Urban Populationas Indicator of Drug Use (GAO/HRD-91-17, November 27, 1990). War on Drugs: Information Management Poses FormidableChallenges (GAO/IMTEC-91-40, May 31, 1991) Justice Department: Coordination Between DEA and the FBI(GAO/GGD-90-59, Mar. 21, 1990) Customs Service and INS: Dual Management Structure for BorderInspections Should Be Ended (GAO/GGD-93-111, June 30, 1993) Drug Control: Heavy Investment in Military Surveillance Is NotPaying Off (GAO/NSIAD-93-220, Sept. 1, 1993) Drug Interdiction: Funding Continues to Increase but ProgramEffectiveness Is Unknown (GAO/GGD-91-10, Dec. 11, 1990) Drug Control: Anti-Drug Efforts in the Bahamas (GAO/GGD-90-42,Mar. 8, 1990) relates to DOJ03. Drug Smuggling: Capabilities for Interdicting Private AircraftAre Limited and Costly (GAO/GGD-89-93, June 9, 1989) U.S. Department of Justice: Overview of Civil and CriminalDebt Collection Efforts (GAO/T-GGD-90-62, July 31, 1990) Federal Prisons: Inmate and Staff Views on Education and WorkTraining Programs (GAO/GGD-93-33, Jan. 19, 1993) Asset Forfeiture Programs (GAO/HR-93-17, Dec. 1992) Drug Control: Coordination of Intelligence Activities(GAO/GGD-93-83BR, Apr. 2, 1993) Drug Control: Inadequate Guidance Results in DuplicateIntelligence Production Efforts (GAO/NSIAD-92-153, Apr. 14, 1992) Intensive Probation Supervision: Crime-Control and Cost-SavingEffectiveness (GAO/PEMD-93-23, June 4, 1993) Prison Boot Camps: Short-Term Prison Costs Reduced, butLong-Term Impact Uncertain (GAO/GGD-93-69, Apr. 29, 1993) Prison Costs: Opportunities Exist to Lower the Cost ofBuilding Federal Prisons (GAO/GGD-92-3, Oct. 25, 1991) Federal Prisons: Revised Design Standards Could Save ExpansionFunds (GAO/GGD-91-54, Mar. 14, 1991) Intermediate Sanctions: Their Impacts on Prison Crowding,Costs, and Recidivism Are Still Unclear (GAO/PEMD-90-21, Sept. 7,1990) "Drug Control: Impact of the Department of Defense'sDetection and Monitoring on Cocaine Flows," GeneralAccounting Office, September 19, 1991 Drug Abuse Research: Federal Funding and Future Needs. GAO/T-PEMD-91-11, September 25, 1991. Asset Forfeiture: Customs Reports Improved Controls Over Salesof Forfeited Property. (246010) GAO/GGD-91-127, September 25,1991. ADMS Block Grant: Drug Treatment Services Could Be Improved byNew Accountability Program. GAO/T-HRD-92-4, October 17, 1991. Drug War: Observations on Counternarcotics Aid to Colombia.(464133) GAO/NSIAD-91-296, September 30, 1991. The Drug War: Observations on Counternarcotics Programs inColombia and Peru. GAO/T-NSIAD-92-2, October, 23, 1991. Drug Policy and Agriculture: U.S. Trade Impacts of AlternativeCrops to Andean Coca. (483555) GAO/NSIAD-92-12, October 28, 1991. Prison Alternatives: Crowded Federal Prisons Can Transfer MoreInmates to Halfway Houses. (182811) GAO/GGD-92-5, November 14,1991. Drug Education: Rural Programs Have Many Components and MostRely Heavily on Federal Funds. (104672) GAO/HRD-92-34, January31, 1992. Drug Control: Communications Network Funding and RequirementsUncertain. (395157) GAO/NSIAD-92-29, December 31, 1991. Drug Enforcement: Assistance to State and Local LawEnforcement Agencies in High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas.GAO/T-GGD-92-37, May 6, 1992. Prison Expansion: Staffing New Facilities Will Be a Challengefor BOP. (182208) GAO/GGD-92-75, May 12, 1992. Drug Control: Inadequate Guidance Results in DuplicateIntelligence Production Efforts. (395152) GAO/NSIAD-92-153, April14, 1992. Drug Control: Difficulties in Denying Federal Benefits toConvicted Drug Offenders. (186744) GAO/GGD-92-56, April 21, 1992. Asset Forfeiture: U.S. Marshals Service Internal ControlWeaknesses Over Asset Sharing Cash Distributions. (186740)GAO/GGD-92-59, May 8, 1992. Employee Drug Testing: Estimated Cost to Test All ExecutiveBranch Employees and New Hires. (966499) GAO/GGD-92-99, June 10,1992. War on Drugs: Heroin Price, Purity, and Quantities Seized Overthe Past 10 Years. (186754) GAO/GGD-92-95FS, May 27, 1992. The Drug War: Extent of Problems in Brazil, Ecuador, andVenezuela. (464137) GAO/NSIAD-92-226, June 5, 1992. Prescription Drug Monitoring: States Can Readily IdentifyIllegal Sales and Use of Controlled Substances. (101195)GAO/HRD-92-115, July 21, 1992. Asset Forfeiture: Improved Guidance Needed for Use of SharedAssets. (181960) GAO/GGD-92-115, July 16, 1992. Drug Control: Oversight Needed to Prevent Acquisition ofUnnecessary Equipment. (395182) GAO/NSIAD-92-260, July 30, 1992. Computer Security: DEA Is Not Adequately Protecting SensitiveDrug Enforcement Data. (510882) GAO/IMTEC-92-83, September 22,1992. Employee Drug Testing: Opportunities Exist to LowerDrug-Testing Program Costs. (966469) GAO/GGD-93-13, November 23,1992. Drug Control: Status Report on Counterdrug TechnologyDevelopment. (395194) GAO/NSIAD-93-104, January 28, 1993. Drug Control: Treatment Alternatives Program for DrugOffenders Needs Stronger Emphasis. (186747) GAO/GGD-93-61,February 11, 1993. Federal Prisons: Inmate and Staff Views on Education and WorkTraining Programs. (182813) GAO/GGD-93-33, January 19, 1993. Drug Education: Limited Progress in Program Evaluation, byEleanor Chelimsky, Assistant Comptroller General for ProgramEvaluation and Methodology, before the Subcommittee on SelectEducation and Civil Rights, House Committee on Education andLabor. GAO/T-PEMD-93-2, Mar. 31. Drug Treatment: Despite New Strategy, Few Federal InmatesReceive Treatment. (108743) GAO/HRD-91-116, September 16, 1991. Drug Treatment: State Prisons Move to Enhance Treatment.(108797) GAO/HRD-91-128, September 20, 1991. Drug Control: U.S. Drug Interdiction Issues in Latin America(Testimony, 10/07/94, GAO/T-NSIAD-95-32). Drug Control: Communications Network Funding and RequirementsUncertain (GAO/NSIAD-92-29) Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | GAO PublicationsWT01-B40-26IA031-000655-B045-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/Needle1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114914 text/html 107937HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:48:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 107718 The Clinton Administration's Internal Reviews of Researchon Needle Exchange Programs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications The Needle Exchange Report Does needle exchange work to reduce AIDS? Does it encouragedrug use? Here are the answers from the Federal Governmentitself. The Clinton Administration's Internal Reviews of Researchon Needle Exchange Programs Previously Unreleased Documents Plus Background Material Made public March 7,1995 by: The Drug Policy Foundation,Washington, D.C. New York Contents "Talking Points" on needle exchange 4 pages. (Provided along with internal reviews; originuncertain) Agency reviews submitted Dec. 10, 1993 48 pages. Reviews by Clinton administration health agencies ofUniversity of California report on needle exchange programs(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Nat'l Institutes ofHealth, Substance Abuse Mental Health Administration, HealthServices and Resources Administration, Food and DrugAdministration). "Update" submitted Nov. 22,1994 8 pages. Update of research and events in the field since 1993review. Legal barriers to federal funding of needle exchanges 2 pages. Appendix of March 1993 report by General AccountingOffice (GAO). These "talking points" were provided along with theClinton administration's reviews, but their origin is uncertain. Needle exchange talking points Origins of the University of California study Former drug czar Bob Martinez and former Centers for DiseaseControl (CDC) director Bill Roper decide in Summer '91 thatobjective review of data on needle exchange programs (NEPs) isneeded University of California (UC), Berkeley and UC San Franciscoagree to do the work Study is funded by CDC through a Cooperative Agreement withthe Association of Schools of Public Health Pls are Arthur Reingold (UC Berkeley) and Philip R. Lee (UCSan Francisco) Lee leaves 7/1/94 to be Assistant Secretary for Health;replaced as Pl by Peter Lurie, formerly Project Director Approximate total cost of study $400,000 Work begins 4/1/92 The University of California study 3 volumes, >700 pages Entailed review of 2000 documents, visits to 23 programs in 15cities in 4 countries, interviews with almost 250 individuals,mail survey of programs not visited, mathematical modeling ofcost-effectiveness Conclusions: available [data] provide no evidence that needle exchangeprograms increase the amount of drug use by needle exchangeprogram clients or change overall community levels ofnon-injection and injection drug use." (page 18 of reportSummary) Multiple lines of evidence suggest that it is likely that NEPsdecrease the rate of new HIV infection: (page 26) 1. Biologic plausibility; removing potentially infectedsyringes from circulation and replacing them with clean ones mustdecrease new infections 2. Behavioral data: 10/14 studies showed a decrease in HIVrisk behavior (the sharing of syringes) and none showed anincrease 3. Three- to four-fold decrease in new hepatitis B infections[with later data this increased to seven- to eight-fold forhepatitis B and C infection] 4. Mathematical models from New Haven (33% decrease in new HIVinfections) and by the UC study model (15-17% Recommendations (page 27): The federal government should repeal the ban on the use offederal funds for needle exchange services." Substantial federal funds should be committed to bothproviding needle exchange services and to expanding research intothese programs. State governments in the ten states and the District ofColumbia that have prescription laws should repeal these laws. States should repeal the paraphernalia laws as they apply tosyringes. Report released 9/30/93 About 12,000 copies of various volumes of the reportdistributed The first review On October 15, 1993, Joe Boufford, Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Health (Lee's office), writes to CDC Director DavidSatcher requesting a review of the UC report and providingopinions and recommendations for federal action in response toneedle exchange. CDC consults with NIH (NIDA), FDA, HRSA and SAMSHA (SubstanceAbuse Mental Health Services Administration). Their comments areattached as tabs to the review. Conclusions: The UC research team has done a careful and scientificallysound compilation and review of all the available data on needleexchange and the availability of needles and syringes toinjection drug users." (page 1) The UC team used stringentscientific standards in its analysis and interpretation of thecollected published and unpublished studies ... The UC report isthe most extensive and comprehensive study of needle exchangeever published." (page 6) After reviewing several lines of evidence similar to the fourpoints listed above, the review concludes: Taken together, theseobservations indicate that NEPs are likely to reduce HIVtransmission, even though the epidemiologic studies of NEPs donot definitively demonstrate decreases or increases in HIVtransmission." (page 2) Several findings strongly supportthe conclusion that NEPs reduce HIV transmission." (page 10) No data exists indicating increases related to NEPs in eitherdrug use or in the number of discarded syringes." (page 2)We agree with the UC team conclusion that available data arequite limited but provide no evidence of any NEP-relatedincreases in community levels of drug use." (page 10) "... we believe that the benefits of NEPs as a componentof a comprehensive HIV prevention program for drug users exceedthe theoretical risks of such programs." (page 2) "We conclude that the ban on Federal funding of NEPsshould be lifted to allow communities and States to use Federalfunds to support NEPs as components of comprehensive HIVprevention programs." (page 2) "We also recommend that States consider the repeal oflaws requiring a physician's prescription to buy needles andsyringes and the removal of criminal penalties for the possessionof needles and syringes" (page 2) Fate of the first review Review signed by Satcher and sent to Boufford on December 10,1993. Review has never been made public. Rep. Henry Waxman obtained a copy, but only under conditionthat it not be released to the public. Review not disclosable under the Freedom of Information Act; arequest by San Francisco Chronicle for the review was deniedrecently. Only real press coverage is reference to the coverup on CNN inAugust 1994 and in San Francisco Chronicle in December 1994. The second review In fall 1994, Brian Biles of the Office of the AssistantSecretary for Health, wrote to CDC asking for an update oninformation since the University of California Report. This second review, much shorter and less expansive than thefirst review, is sent to the Associate Director for HIV/AIDS(James Curran) by the Assistant Director for Substance Abuse andHIV Prevention (T. Stephen Jones) on November 22, 1994, andpresumably forwarded on to the Office of the Assistant Secretaryfor Health. The review contains the following: Summary of new evidence from New York City showing a decreasein HIV transmission among NEP clients that concludes thatalthough the numbers are small, the evidence is plausible."(page 1 ). Three additional studies with evidence of decreases in HIVrisk behavior (page 3). No evidence of increased drug use in a San Francisco study(page 3). New data showing that the decrease in hepatitis B and Cinfections associated with needle exchange is now seven- toeight-fold. 'this study demonstrates more clearly than anyprevious research that use of NEPs is associated with decreasesin blood borne infections." (Page 4) Data from Montreal showing higher HIV infection rates, higherrates of HIV risk behaviors and higher rates of new HIV infectionamong NEP clients that "require further study." (page5) This finding is most reasonably interpreted as showing thatNEPs are reaching the drug users at highest risk for HIV (a goodthing). No formal recommendations with respect to federal policy. The existence of this review has never been made public. Public health significance Approximately 1/3 of all AIDS cases occur among injectionsdrug users, their sex partners and their children. Only about 15% of injectors are in drug treatment on any givenday. Over 10,000 drug users, their sex partners and their childrencontract HIV each year. This is 1-2 preventable HIV infectionsper hour. Needle exchange may decrease new HIV infections by 33%,according to the New Haven mathematical model. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES Public HealthService Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Atlanta, GA30333 December 10, 1993 SUBJECT: Review of University of California Report on needleExchange and recommendations on Needle Exchange On October 15 you requested that the Center for DiseaseControl and Prevention (CDC) review the University of Californiaresearch report on needle exchange and provide opinions andrecommendations for Federal action in response to needleexchange. The UC report and recommendations were reviewed by CDC staff.CDC also requested and received comments on the UC report andrecommendations for needle exchanges from the National Institutesof Health, the Substance Abuse Mental Health ServicesAdministration, the Health Services and Resources Administration,and the Food and Drug Administration. The comments attached tothe review were provided by the Principal[sic] AIDS Coordinatorsof the four agencies. Directors of these agencies have not beenasked for final concurrence on the review. I am pleased to submit the attached review (Tab A). David Satcher Attachment Tab A - Review of University of California Report on Needle Exchange and Recommendations on Needle Exchange REVIEW OF UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA REPORT ON NEEDLE EXCHANGESAND RECOMMENDATIONS ON NEEDLE EXCHANGE. 1. ISSUE On October 15, 1993, the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Health requested that the Centers for Disease Control andPrevention (CDC) review the University of California (UC)research report on needle exchange (executive summary at Tab A)and provide recommendations and opinions on Federal action inresponse to needle exchange to the Principal Deputy AssistantSecretary for Health and the Surgeon General. The UC report and recommendations were reviewed by CDC staff.The CDC also requested and received comments on the UC report andrecommendations and opinions on Federal action in response toneedle exchange from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) (TabB), the Substance Abuse Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA) (Tab C), the Health Services and ResourcesAdministration (HSRA) (Tab D), and the Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) (Tab E). Comments on this report to you werealso requested from these agencies. The agencies were not askedfor final concurrence on the CDC response. The attached comments(Tabs B-E) were provided by the Principal AIDS Coordinators ofthe four agencies. 2. SUMMARY The UC research team has done a careful and scientificallysound compilation and review of all the available data on needleexchange and the availability of needles and syringes toinjection drug users (IDUs). The UC team also gathered new datathrough surveys of needle exchange programs (NEPs), key informantinterviews, and focus groups of IDUs. NEPs are intended to decrease human immunodeficiency virus(HIV) transmission associated with injection drug use byreplacing used, potentially HIV-infected syringes with sterileones. They also can help IDUs obtain drug treatment and otherpublic health services. The emergence of more than three dozenNEPs in the United States suggests an increasing acceptance ofthese programs as part of a community response to the dualepidemics of injection drug use and HIV infection. However, insome communities, NEPs have been very controversial. Some lawenforcement, drug treatment, and community leaders are concernedthat these programs give "the wrong message" about druguse and may reduce law enforcement agencies' ability to combatdrug use and associated violence. Other concerns are that NEPshave not been shown to be effective in eliminating HIVtransmission and may draw scarce resources away from other,possibly more effective, programs such as drug treatment. The CDC concurs with the UC findings that (1) NEPs areeffective in removing used, sometimes HIV-contaminated needlesand syringes from circulation and replacing them with sterileones, (2) IDUs using NEPs decrease HIV drug-risk behaviors (e.g.,decreased sharing of injection equipment, decreased frequency ofinjection), (3) NEPs are effective in recruiting IDUs to enterdrug treatment, (4) HIV prevalence in syringes returned to NEPsdecreases, and (5) mathematical models of NEPs estimatesubstantial decreases in HIV transmission among NEP clients.Taken together, these observations indicate that NEPs are likelyto reduce HIV transmission, even though the epidemiologic studiesof NEPs do not definitively demonstrate decreases or increases inHIV transmission. The existing epidemiologic studies are limitedin their ability to detect such changes. No data existsindicating increases related to NEPs in either drug use or in thenumber of discarded syringes. W8 endorse the UC reportrecommendation that additional research and evaluation on NEPs isa high priority to further assess the impact of these programs-sand the relative effectiveness of various models of delivery ofNEP services. Two other issues have prompted reconsideration of Federalpolicy on needle exchange: (1) the magnitude of the HIV epidemicamong IDUs and the related epidemics among their sex partners andnewborns in many areas of this country and (2) the limitations ofalternative intervention options to prevent drug-related HIVtransmission (e.g., limited capacity of drug treatment availableto IDUs and limitations of bleach disinfection of injectionequipment). Based on these observations and the weight of datapresented in the UC report, we believe that the benefits of NEPsas a component of a comprehensive HIV prevention program for drugusers exceed the theoretical risks of such programs. We concludethat the ban on Federal funding of NEPs should be lifted to allowcommunities and States to use Federal funds to support NEPs ascomponents of comprehensive HIV prevention programs. We recommendthat NEPs receiving Federal funds be linked to substance abusetreatment programs and other HIV prevention services. We alsorecommend that such programs be required to include evaluationcomponents to validate their effectiveness. Increasing the ability of IDUs to obtain and possess sterileneedles and syringes should decrease HIV transmission for thosewho will not or cannot stop injecting drugs. Therefore, we alsorecommend that States consider the repeal of laws requiring aphysician's prescription to buy needles and syringes and theremoval of criminal penalities[sic] for the possession of needlesand syringes, while maintaining the criminal penalties on otherdrug use equipment. Additional evaluation of these interventionsis crucial. 3. BACKGROUND The substantial role of injection drug use in the HIV/AIDSepidemic One-third of reported U.S. AIDS cases are related directly orindirectly to injection drug use[1]. A disproportionate number ofAIDS cases among people of color in the United States is relatedto infection drug use. In 1992, almost half of all AIDS casesreported among African Americans (49 percent) and Hispanics (48percent) were directly or indirectly related to injection druguse. The majority of reported AIDS cases among women and childrenin the United States are related to injection drug use. Amongadult and adolescent women reported with AIDS in this country,nearly three-quarters (71 percent) were directly or indirectlyrelated to injection drug use; 50 percent of women with AIDSreported injecting drugs and an additional 21 percent reportedsexual contact with a male who injected drugs. Two-thirds (66percent) of children with perinatally acquired AIDS had motherswho reported injecting drugs themselves and/or having sex with anIDU. Preventing HIV/AIDS associated with injection drug use Use of drug injection equipment (especially needles andsyringes) by more than one person (often called"sharing" or "multiperson use") is theprimary mechanism for the spread of HIV related to injection druguse. Sexual transmission among IDUs also occurs. Several culturaland social factors are associated with the multiperson use ofneedles and syringes and other injection equipment. However,legal restrictions on the purchasing and possession of needlesand syringes by IDUs are central factors in the multiperson useof needles and syringes. IDUs' access to and legal ability topossess sterile needles and syringes are limited by a variety ofState and Federal laws, including (1) prescription laws[2], (2)drug paraphernalia laws[3], and (3) the [1]AIDS cases associated with injection drug use include AIDScases among a) heterosexual men and all women who reportinjecting drugs, b) men who have sex with men who also injectdrugs, c) men and women who do not inject drugs but haveheterosexual relations with drug injectors, and d) newbornchildren whose mothers inject drugs or have sex with male druginjectors. [2]A State law that requires a physician's prescription as acondition for sale of needles and syringes in pharmacies (in 10States and the District of Columbia}. Federal Mail Order Drug Paraphernalia Control Act[4]. InStates without prescription laws, the selective refusal of somepharmacists to sell needles and syringes to persons who might beIDUs is an additional barrier. In its July 1991 report on "The Twin Epidemics ofSubstance Use and HIV, n the National Commission on AIDSrecommended: "Remove legal barriers to the purchase andpossession of injection equipment. Such legal barriers... limitthe availability of new/clean injection equipment and thereforeencourage the sharing of injection equipment, and the increase inHIV transmission. Prevention and treatment for drug dependency and addiction areimportant HIV prevention strategies. However, only 10 to 20percent of all drug users are in drug treatment programs at anygiven time. Drug treatment capacity is not expected to increasesubstantially in the near future, and the capacity will remainsmaller than that required to provide drug treatment for all whoneed it and are willing to start. In addition, a substantialproportion of IDUs are unable or unwilling to stop injectingdrugs and start drug treatment. Outreach programs are another component of HIV prevention forIDUs. In addition to providing condoms and advising drug users tostart drug treatment and to decrease drug use, since themid-1980s, outreach workers have advocated the use of householdbleach to disinfect drug-injection equipment (particularlyneedles and syringes). In April 1993, the CDC, the Center forSubstance Abuse Treatment (CSAT) of SAMHSA, and the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) of NIH issued an HIV PreventionBulletin describing the limitations of bleach disinfection ofneedles and syringes and indicating that (1) sterile, never-usedneedles-and syringes are-safer than bleach-disinfected,previously used needles and syringes and (2) bleach disinfectionis useful only when there is no other safer option. In thisstatement, Public Health Service (PHS) agencies clearly pointedout the limitations of one of the few HIV risk-reductioninterventions for IDUs who share needles and syringes. [3]A State (or local) law that places criminal penalties onthe possession and distribution of needles and syringes and otherequipment used in the consumption or manufacture of drugs (in 46States and the District of Columbia. [4]The Act includes needles and syringes in the list of drugparaphernalia that cannot be transported by the U.S. PostalService or any other means of interstate conveyance. 4. LEGAL RESTRICTIONS OF FEDERAL FUNDING OF NEEDLE EXCHANGEPROGRAMS IS THE UNITED STATES Congress has included provisions in at least six lawsrestricting the use of Federal funds for NEPs. For example, theFY 1994 Appropriations Act for the Department states that"no funds appropriated under this Act shall be used to carryout any program of distribution of sterile needles for hypodermicinjection of any illegal drug, unless the Surgeon General of theUnited States determines that such programs are effective inpreventing the spread of HIV and do not encourage the use ofillegal drugs, except that such funds may be used for suchpurposes in furtherance of demonstrations or studies authorizedin the ADAMHA Reorganization Act (Public Law 102-321)." 5. THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA REPORT ("THE PUBLICHEALTH IMPACT OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATESAND ABROAD") This project was carried out by a team of researchers at theSchool of Public Health of the University of California,Berkeley, and the Institute for Health Policy Studies at theUniversity of-California, San Francisco. The study began in April1992 and was supported by funds from the CDC through acooperative agreement with the Association of Schools of PublicHealth. The project staff gathered nearly 2,000 "datasources," including journal articles (475), conferenceabstracts (381), reports (236), and unpublished materials (159).Between May and September 1992, the team carried out site visitsto 15 cities (10 in the United States, -3-in Canada, and 2 inEurope). During these site visits, structured observations of 33needle exchange sessions were made. In addition, 110 keyinformants (including NEP staff, public health officials, andcommunity leaders supporting and opposing the NEP) wereinterviewed, and 18 focus groups of clients and non-clients ofthe-NEPs (12-9 IDUs ~ participated in the focus groups orindividual interviews) were held by the UC project staff. UCproject staff obtained extensive information on the budgets ofthe NEPs visited. To obtain a more complete picture of the NEPsin the United States, the project staff conducted a postal surveyof 20 NEPs not visited. The major findings of the UC study are presented in a Summary,Conclusion, and Recommendations document (43 pages). The detailedanalysis and findings of the UC study are presented in Volume One(519 pages). Volume Two, a city-by-city description of NEPactivities and related information from the site visits to nineU.S. and three Canadian cities, will be available in lateDecember 1993. Drafts of all chapters of the UC report were reviewed by adistinguished panel of expert reviewers representing a range ofopinions on needle exchange (Dr. Mindy Fullilove, Dr. Don DesJarlais, Dr. Ed Kaplan, Dr. Herbert Kleber, Dr. Douglas Owens,Dr. Beny Primm, and Ms. Beth Weinstein). The UC teas used stringent scientific standards in itsanalysis and interpretation of the collected published andunpublished studies on NEPs and needle and syringe availability.The UC report is the most extensive and comprehensive study ofneedle exchange ever published. 6. NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA The information in this section on NEPs in the United Statesand Canada is derived from the UC report. The first NEP to provide comprehensive services in the UnitedStates opened in 1988 in Tacoma, Washington. As of September 1,1993, there were at least 37 NEPs operating in 30 cities in 12States. By June 1993, more than 5.4 million syringes had beendistributed (almost always in exchange for used syringes) by NEPsin the United States. In calendar year 1992, U.S. NEPsdistributed more than 2.4 million syringes. Needle exchange has provoked intense political debate at thenational level and in some States (e.g., California, New York)and cities (e.g., Baltimore, New York City, Boston, Berkeley).Nonetheless, in many cities (e.g., Seattle, Tacoma, SanFrancisco, Honolulu,- New Haven), large-scale NEPs have beenestablished with substantial community support. In New York City,after years of intense political debate, five NEPs were legallyopened in 1992 and now distribute about one million syringes ayear. The UC team collected U.S. public opinion polls that-at-included questions regarding needle availability needle cleaning.These public opinion polls indicate that approximately half ofthe general public has supported harm reduction efforts,including needle cleaning, legalization of needles sales, needleexchange, and needle distribution. While this public support hastended to increase over time and has been somewhat higher forneedle exchange than for needle distribution, needle exchangeremains a controversial issue. Substantial variations exist among U.S. NEPs in legal status,administrative structure, and sources of funding. Nineteen U.S.NEPs are "legal,"[5] eight are"illegal-tolerated,"[6] and six are"illegal-underground."[7] Six U.S. NEPs areadministered by State or local governments, six bycommunity-based organizations (CBOs with government sponsorship,eight by CBOs without government sponsorship, and thirteen bywhat the UC report called "activist" organizations.Private donations are a major source of funding at 19 U.S. NEPs,more than any other source of funding. Fourteen NEPs arefinancially supported by foundation grants, 12 by funds from aCBO and/or activist organization administering the NEP, 12 bycity or county government, and 4 by State governments. FifteenU.S. NEPs depend entirely on volunteer staff, and all but sevenNEPs use volunteers. Twenty-seven of 33 U.S. NEPs surveyed orvisited have "one-for-one rules" (one sterile syringeis given out for each syringe turned in). Seventeen NEPs provide'starter needles" (one or more [usually three] syringesprovided to new NEP clients without requiring turn-in of usedsyringes). Ten NEPs have limits on the number of syringes thatcan be exchanged. Rules governing the exchange procedures aregenerally well enforced. U.S. NEPs serve ethnically diverse IDU populations thatgenerally reflect local ethnic and racial patterns. The mean ageof U.S. NEP clients ranges from 33-41 years with a mean durationof drug injection ranging from 7-20 years. NEPs successfullyreach IDUs who are not enrolled in drug treatment, with studiesin the United States reporting one-third to one-half of NEPclients having no prior exposure to drug treatment. NEP clientsare at significant risk for drug-related HIV transmission with 10to 60 percent reporting some needle sharing and about one-thirdreported sharing needles in the month preceding interview. U.S. NEPs are reaching thousands of IDUs in the 30 cities inwhich they operate. In addition to needle exchange, a variety ofpublic health services are provided on site or are available byreferral, including drug treatment, HIV counseling and testing,primary medical care, tuberculosis and sexually transmitteddisease screening and treatment, and social services. The UC teamfound that among NEPs visited with data on these activities, sixNEPs had referred more than 2,000 drug users to drug treatmentand that more than 800 drug users had started drug treatmentafter referral by four NEPs. [5]An NEP in a State that does not have a prescription law oran NEP that has a specific exemption to the prescription law. [6]In a state with a prescription law, an NEP which a locallyelected body (e.g., city council) has voted to support orapprove. [7]In a State with a prescription law, an illegal-undergroundNEP which has not been supported by a locally elected body. The median annual budget of U.S. and Canadian needle exchangeprograms visited is relatively low at 5169,000, with governmentrun programs tending to have larger budgets. Some NEPs are moreexpensive because they also provide substantial additionalservices such as drug treatment referrals. The UC team extensively reviewed the previously publishedmathematical models that estimated the impact of NEPs on HIVtransmission, and developed additional models of theeffectiveness and cost-effectiveness of NEPs in the UnitedStates. These efforts, in agreement with other independentreviews (e.g., the General Accounting Office [GAO] review),confirmed the theoretical and technical validity of the modelused to estimate the impact of the New Haven NEP. Applied toother cities, a simplified version of this model predictedreductions ranging from 17 to 70 percent in new drug-related HIVinfections among NEP clients. In one of the cities, the estimatedcost-per-HIV-infection-averted by NEPs was between S3,700 and$12,000. These estimated costs of preventing an HIV infectioncompare very favorably with the costs of other lifesavingprograms and are much less than the present value of the lifetimecosts of medical care for a person with HIV infection ($119,000). The UC report also reviews the development of NEPs in Canada,where the federal government provided leadership and initialfunding (requiring provincial matching funds) for HIV preventionprograms for drug users, including NEPs. In Canada all NEPs arelegal, and there has been very limited community or professionalopposition to the NEPs. Since the first Canadian NEPs were openedin 1989, the number of cities with active NEPs has steadilyincreased to a total of 28 cities in early 1993. More than 2.5million syringes were distributed through December 1992 by thefive Canadian NEPs visited by the UC team. 7. IMPACT OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS ON DRUG USE Accurate measurement of drug use patterns and numbers of drugusers in communities is technically very challenging, in partbecause drug use is-an illegal activity. Therefore-, it isextremely difficult to quantitatively assess the impact of NEPson community drug use. The UC report provides data on both the behavior of NEPclients and community measures of drug use. The UC report clearlydocuments that substantial numbers of IDUs (both clients andnon-clients of the NEP) have been referred to drug treatmentprograms, a substantial step in reducing drug use by thoseindividuals and in the community. The UC report presents theresults of 26 evaluations in the United States and abroad thatprovide information on changes in drug-risk behavior among IDUswho were using NEPs; 16 of the 26 were judged to be of acceptablescientific quality. Although not definitive, the majority ofthese studies found that drug-related risk behaviors for HIVtransmission were significantly reduced among NEP clients. In addition, the UC team reviewed national drug use indicatorsand the findings of IDU focus groups. The limited data for U.S.cities with NEPs from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN), DrugUse Forecasting (DUF) system, and Uniform Crime Reports do notshow clear trends in patterns of drug use in those cities withNEPs. The IDU focus groups conducted in cities with NEPsconsistently indicated that the participants believed that NEPswould have little effect on drug use in the community. We agree with the UC team conclusion that available data arequite limited but provide no evidence of any NEP-relatedincreases in community levels of drug use. However, thelimitations of both available research methods and existing dataaddressing this issue underline the need for continuingevaluation and research on the impact of NEPs on drug use.Additional evaluation and research and the development of newresearch methods in this area should be a component of Federallysupported NEPs. A key concern of NEP opponents is that these programs willdirectly or indirectly increase drug use. Opponents view NEPs asdirectly increasing drug use by providing the means (needles andsyringes) to inject drugs. They also see NEPs as indirectlypromoting drug use by appearing to condone and facilitate druguse and thereby undermining the credibility of society's messagethat using drugs is illegal, unhealthy and morally wrong.However, no study in the United States or abroad was found thatshowed that NEPs increase community drug use. 8. IMPACT OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS ON PREVENTING HIVINFECTION A major question in the policy debate over NEPs is theireffectiveness in preventing-HIV infection among IDU-s-and-theircontacts. Several findings strongly support the conclusion thatNEPs reduce HIV transmission. First, the process of needleexchange removes used, often HIV-contaminated, needles andsyringes from the hands of IDUs and replaces them with sterileneedles and syringes. Second, NEPs are often effective inreferring NEP client and non-client IDUs to drug treatmentprograms. Third, NEP clients report decreases in their HIV drugrisk behaviors. Fourth, mathematical models of the impact of NEPsin New Haven and other cities consistently estimate substantialreductions (ranging from 17 to 70 percent) in HIV transmissionfor the IDUs using NEPs and their sex partners and children.Fifth, there is some evidence that hepatitis B infection isreduced by NEPs. On the other hand, epidemiologic studies whichdirectly address HIV prevalence and incidence in relation to NEPshave been methodologically weak. One case-control study (inAmsterdam) found no protective effect of the NEP on HIVseroconversion among IDUs. However, the Amsterdam study was notprimarily designed to test NEP effectiveness and included only alimited number (31) of new HIV infections. We concur with the UCconclusion that the relationship between NEPs and HIV infectionmay be very difficult to determine conclusively. 9. REVIEW OF UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA RECOMMENDATIONS In this section, the recommendations of the UC study arereviewed. "Recommendations for the federal government The federal government should repeal the ban on the use offederal funds for needle exchange services. Substantial federal funds should be committed both toproviding needle exchange services and to expanding research intothese programs. CDC comment: Both recommendations are reasonable and appropriate with theminor modifications indicated in this section. Given the significance of injection drug use in HIVtransmission in the United States, it is important to implementNEPs as one possible component of comprehensive HIV preventionprograms for drug users. Comprehensive programs should includeincreases in drug treatment, street and community outreach todrug users, and effective school and community-based programs toprevent initiation of drug use. The ban on Federal funding ofNEP-s should be removed-to allow States-and-communities theoption of including NEPs in comprehensive programs. NEPs will bemore readily integrated into comprehensive programs when there isevidence of substantial local support for NEPs as indicated byany of the following: requests for an NEP from a State or localHIV community planning process; substantial funding for NEPs fromlocal and/or State government or nongovernmental organizations;and efforts to reform the laws limiting the sale or possession ofneedles and syringes. The PHS should fund additional evaluations of NEPs[8] togather more data on the impact of these programs and to assessthe relative effectiveness of various models of delivery of NEPservices. Additional research is needed on the initiation of druguse and drug injection and changes in community drug use,particularly in communities with high prevalence of drug use, asthey relate to NEPs and other interventions that increase theavailability of sterile needles and syringes. PHS agenciessupporting research on NEPs should develop and promote the use ofstandardized data elements, methods of data collection, andprotocols for evaluation and analysis. State governments in the ten states and the District ofColumbia that have prescription laws should repeal these laws. - States should repeal the paraphernalia laws as they apply tosyringes. CDC comment: Both recommendations are reasonable and appropriate with themodifications indicated in this section. Although the major focus of the UC report was NEPs, there isample evidence of the importance of allowing access to sterileneedles and syringes for drug users who will not or cannot stopinjecting drugs. In the United States and other countries,difficulty in obtaining and/or possessing needles and syringescontributes to multiperson use of needles and syringes andthereby to HIV transmission. NEPs can provide only a part of theincreased access to needles and syringes that is needed toprevent HIV infection in IDUs, their sex partners and children.Changing the prescription and paraphernalia laws would increaseIDU access to sterile needles and syringes with little or noexpenditure of public funds. An ongoing CDC and Connecticut evaluation of 1992 changes inthe prescription and drug paraphernalia laws in Connecticut[9]provides convincing evidence of the potential benefit of theserecommendations. The evaluation found (1) steady increases of"non-prescription" purchases of needles and syringesfrom pharmacies, (2) that IDUs reported their primary source ofneedles and syringes shifted from street/black-market purchasesto pharmacy purchases and (3) that sharing ("multipersonuse") of needles and syringes decreased from 52 percentprior to the new laws to 32 percent 8 to 12 months after the newlaws were implemented. Similar increases in pharmacy purchasesand decreases in sharing of needles and syringes were found inFrance after a prescription law was repealed in 1987. [9]In 1992, Connecticut removed all criminal penalties for (a)the sale, without a prescription, of up to 10 needles andsyringes and (b) the possession of up to 10 needles and syringes. The implementation of these recommendations is primarily theresponsibility of State governments. We recommend that theFederal government and others support strong evaluation studiesof the impact of changes in these laws on drug use patterns andHIV transmission risk behaviors. The use of standardized researchmethods yielding comparable results should be encouraged. "Recommendations for local governments and communities Local governments should enter into discussions with localcommunity groups to develop a comprehensive approach topreventing HIV in injection drug users. their sex partners. andtheir offspring. This approach should include needle exchangeprograms and the expansion of drug treatment services. Local communities should seek to further increase sterilesyringe availability by encouraging the sale, distribution. orexchange of syringes by pharmacists." CDC comment: Both recommendations are reasonable and appropriate. The experience with implementing NEPs in the United States andother countries indicates that NEPs are better accepted andoperate more efficiently when there is extensive communityinvolvement in planning how the NEP services will be provided.NEPs should be components of comprehensive, multifaceted HIVprevention programs for IDUs. Pharmacy sale of sterile needles and syringes is-an--importantcomponent in increasing the availability of sterile injectionequipment to IDUs. Retail pharmacies could provide widespreadaccess to sterile needles and syringes, especially in areas whereNEPs would be impractical (e.g., rural areas). Pharmacists areimportant "gate keepers" for the availability ofsterile needles and syringes. Many pharmacists will need trainingto realize the importance of their public health role in helpingensure the availability of sterile needles and syringes to IDUs. 10 . INCREASING THE AVAILABILITY OF STERILE NEEDLES ANDSYRINGES CDC believes that increasing the availability of sterileneedles and syringes is appropriate Federal policy for thefollowing reasons: (1) HIV transmission associated with injection drug use is amajor contributor to the growth of the current AIDS epidemic inthe United States. Injection-related HIV transmission has causedincreases in the number of AIDS cases among women and children,in heterosexually acquired HIV infections and in cases oftuberculosis. (2) Restrictions on access to and the possession of needlesand syringes increase the multiperson use ("sharing")of drug injection equipment that transmits HIV. (3) A recent bulletin from the CDC, NIDA, and CSAT indicatesthat bleach disinfection of used drug injection equipment is notas safe as using sterile needles and syringes. Such disinfectionis recommended only when sterile needles and syringes are notavailable. (4) Evaluation of NEPs in the United States and othercountries indicates that these programs can provide services tolarge numbers of IDUs, remove millions of used needles andsyringes from circulation, and increase access to drug treatmentand other high priority public health services. (5) The preponderance of evidence indicates that NEPs diminishHIV transmission without increasing drug use. (6) Evaluation of changes in the prescription and drugparaphernalia laws in Connecticut indicates that drug userschange their usual source of needles and syringes from street and"black market" purchases to purchases -from pharmaciesand substantially decrease sharing of injection equipment. We recommend that the PHS adopt a policy goal of increasingthe availability of sterile needles and syringes for IDUs. Thisspecific HIV prevention strategy would be one component ofcomprehensive, multifaceted HIV prevention programs for IDUs. Thefollowing activities should be considered to implement thispolicy: Allow Federal funding of NEPs, especially when these NEPswould also provide their clients with access to HIV counselingand other priority public health programs (e.g., drug treatmentand tuberculosis screening and treatment). Programs that receiveFederal funding should have substantial evaluation and/orresearch components, either as part of the project or as aseparately funded activity. Continue funding for research and evaluation studies of theimpact of NEPs on HIV risk behaviors and HIV infection. (1) the repeal of State laws requiring a physician'sprescription for the purchase of sterile needles and syringes,(2) the repeal of State and municipal laws and regulations makingthe possession of needles and syringes a crime, and 3) theremoval of needles and syringes from the list of materialscovered by the Federal Mail Order Drug Paraphernalia Control Act.Evaluations of the impact of these changes should be funded Work with the professional associations of pharmacists andpharmacies to develop policies that increase the pharmacy-basedavailability of sterile needles and syringes. Attachments Tab A Tab B Tab C Tab D Tab E Executive Summary University of California needle exchangereport Review of the University of California report by the NationalInstitutes of Health Review of the University of California report by the SubstanceAbuse Mental Health Services Administration Review of the University of California report by the HealthServices and Resources Administration Review of the University ofCalifornia report by the Food and Drug Administration EXECUTIVE SUMMARY THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA REPORT (THE PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACTOF NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES AND ABROAD CONCLUSIONS How and Why did Needle Exchange Programs Develop? Needle exchange programs have continued to increase in numberin the U.S. and by September 1, 1993 at least 37 active programsexist. The evolution of needle exchange programs in the U.S. hasbeen characterized by growing efforts to accommodate the concernsof local communities. increasing likelihood of being legal,growing institutionalization, and increasing federal funding ofresearch, although a ban on federal funding for program servicesremains in effect. How do Needle Exchange Programs Operate? About one-half of U.S. needle exchange programs are legal, butfunding is often unstable and most programs rely on volunteerservices to operate. All but six U.S. needle exchange programsrequire one-for-one exchanges and rules governing the) exchangeof syringes are generally well enforced. In addition to havingdistributed over 5.4 million syringes, U.S. needle exchangeprograms provide a variety of services ranging from condom andbleach distribution to drug treatment referrals. Do Needle Exchange Programs Act as Bridges to Public HealthServices? Some needle exchange programs have made significant numbers ofreferrals to drug abuse treatment and other public healthservices, but referrals are limited by the paucity of drugtreatment slots. Integrating needle exchange programs into theexisting public health system is a likely future direction forthese programs. How Much Does It Cost to Operate Needle Exchange Programs? The median annual budget of U.S. and Canadian needle exchangeprograms visited is relatively low at $169,000, withgovernment-run programs tending to be more expensive. Some needleexchange programs are more expensive because they also providesubstantial non-exchange services such as drug treatmentreferrals. The annual cost of funding an average needle exchangeprogram would support about 60 methadone maintenance slots forone year. Who Are the IDUs who Use Needle Exchange Programs? Although needle exchange program clients vary from location tolocation, the programs generally reach a group of injection drugusers with long histories of drug injection who remain atsignificant risk for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)infection. Needle exchange program clients in the U.S. have hadless exposure to drug abuse treatment than IDUs not using theprograms. What Proportion of All Injection Drug Users in a CommunityUses the Needle Exchange Program? Studies of adequately-funded needle exchange programs suggestthat the programs do have the potential to serve significantproportions of the local injecting drug user population. Whilesome needle exchange programs appear to have reached largeproportions of local drug injectors at least once, others arereaching only a small fraction of them. Consequently othermethods of increasing sterile needle availability must beexplored. What Are the Community Responses to Needle Exchange Programs? Unlike in many foreign countries, including Canada, proposalsto establish needle exchange programs in the U.S. have oftenencountered strong opposition from a variety of differentcommunities. Consultation with affected communities can addressmany of the concerns raised. Do Needle Exchange Programs Result in Changes in CommunityLevels of Drug Use? Although quantitative data are difficult to-obtain, thoseavailable provide no evidence that--needle exchange programsincrease the amount of drug use by needle exchange programclients or change overall community levels of non injection andinjection drug use. This conclusion is supported by interviewswith needle exchange program clients and by injecting drug usersnot using the programs who did not believe that increased needleavailability would increase drug use. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect the Number of DiscardedSyringes? Needle exchange programs in the U.S. have not been shown toincrease the total number of discarded syringes and can beexpected to result in fewer discarded syringes. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect Rates of HIV drug and/orSex Risk Behaviors? The majority of studies of needle exchange program clientsdemonstrate decreased ratios of HIV drug risk behavior, but notdecreased ratios of HIV sex risk behavior. What is the Role of Studies of Syringes in injection Drug UseResearch? The limitations of using the testing of syringes-as a measureof injecting drug users' behavior or behavior change can beminimized by following syringe characteristics over time,. or bycomparing characteristics of syringes returned by needle exchangeprogram clients with those obtained from non-clients of theprogram. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect Rates of Diseases Relatedto Injection Drug Use Other than HIV? Studies of the effect of needle exchange programs oninjection-related infectious diseases other than HIV providelimited evidence that needle exchange programs are associatedwith reductions in subcutaneous abscesses and hepatitis B amonginjecting drug users. Do Needle Exchange Programs Affect HIV Infection Rates? Studies of the effect of needle exchange programs on HIVinfection rates do not and, in part due to the need for largesample sizes and the multiple impediments to randomization,probably cannot provide clear evidence that needle exchangeprograms decrease HIV infection rates. However, needle exchangeprograms do not appear to be associated with increased rates ofHIV infection. Are Needle Exchange Programs Cost-effective in Preventing HIVInfection? Multiple mathematical models of needle exchange program impactsupport the findings of the New Haven Model. These models suggestthat needle exchange programs can prevent significant numbers ofinfections among clients of the programs, their drug an sexpartners, and their children. In almost ail cases, the cost perHIV infection averted is far below the $119,000 lifetime cost oftreating an HIV-infected person. RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendations for the federal government The federal government should repeal the ban on the use offederal funds for needle exchange services. Substantial federal funds should be committed both toproviding needle exchange services and to expanding research intothese programs. Recommendations for state governments State governments in the ten states and the District ofColumbia that have prescription laws should repeal these laws.[1] States should repeal the paraphernalia laws as they apply tosyringes.[2] Recommendations for local governments and communities Local governments should enter into discussions with localcommunity groups to develop a comprehensive approach topreventing HIV in injecting drug users, their sex partners, andtheir offspring. This approach should include needle exchangeprograms and the expansion of drug treatment services Local communities should seek to further increase sterilesyringe availability by encouraging the sale, distribution, orexchange of syringes by pharmacists. Recommendations for researchers Descriptions of the "kinetics" and determinants ofneedle use patterns: injection drug users sources of needles.methods of disposal of needles, frequency of needle re-use, andneedle-sharing patterns. How do these change when a needleexchange program or other changes in needle availability areimplemented? Evaluations of "natural experiments" in which needleavailability laws pharmacy based syringe sale, distribution, or exchange and toidentify the barriers to their participation. Assessments of the effects of design features of needleexchange programs (e.g., administering bodies, sitecharacteristics, opening hours, and program rules} upon processmeasures of needle exchange programs (e.g., needles distributed,drug treatment referrals discarding of needles). Ethnographic and other qualitative research to assess thefactors involved in drug use initiation and in transitionsbetween various routes of drug use. Case-control studies of the relationship between use of theneedle exchange program and acute hepatitis 8, particularly incities with active surveillance for the infection. Large, multi-center case-control studies within existingcohorts of injecting drug users to assess whether use of theneedle exchange program is associated with hepatitis B or HIVseroconversion Mathematical modeling using program data and behavior changeevaluations to determine which aspects of program designdetermine effectiveness and cost-effectiveness. [1]Prescription laws preclude the purchase of a syringewithout a prescription. limiting sterile syringe availability andcreating a risk of arrest for needle exchange program staff andclients. [2]Paraphernalia laws exist in 46 states and the District ofColumbia and preclude the possession or distribution or syringesexcept for legitimate medical purposes. Conviction under aparaphernalia law is a felony or a misdemeanor Department of Health & Human Services Public Health Service National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland 20892 To: James W. Curran, M.D. Ph.D. Assistant Surgeon General From: Deputy Director Office of AIDS Research Subject: Comments on the CDC's Draft Response on NeedleExchange We have reviewed the draft CDC response to the Office of theAssistant Secretary for Health and the Surgeon General regardingthe University of California report on needle exchange. Inaddition to the comments provided in our earlier review of thereport (included as Tab B in the CDC draft response), we providethe following comments that are specific to the draft CDCresponse letter: 1. Agency Position Issue Page 1: The second paragraph implies that the NIH, along withSAMHSA, HRSA, and the FDA, has provided "recommendation forneedle exchange." This is either inaccurate or misleading.We suggest that the wording "And recommendations for needleexchange" be dropped from the sentence. 2. Research The CDC draft response appropriately includes an emphasis onthe need for increasing research and evaluation of needleexchange programs (NEPs) and other related aspects of HIV anddrug abuse. However, in light of the reported gaps in informationconcerning the efficacy and impact of needle exchange programs,requiring evaluation to be an integral component of any federallyfunded NEP becomes critical if we are to take an iterativeapproach to this issue. The following text changes are recommended: Page 2: In the last sentence of the second paragraph the word"include" should be change (sic) to"require"; Page 11: The first sentence of the last paragraph should be"The PHS should require substantial evaluation be part ofany federally funded NEP so as to continue to gather more data onthe impact..."; and, Page 15: The last sentence of the first paragraph should bechanged to read, "Programs that receive Federal fundingshould be required to have substantial evaluation and/or researchcomponents, either as part of the project or as a separatelyfunded activity." 3. Agency Designation Page 4: The fourth paragraph lists the CDC, CSAT and NIDA asco-sponsors of a bleach use guidance. For parity , all agenciesshould be designated. This could be achieved by indicatingCSAT/SAMHSA and NIDA/NIH, or by stating, " The NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, part of the National Institutes ofHealth,..." Please feel free to contact me if you have any questions ofneed further information. Jack Whitescarver, Ph.D. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland Building 1 Room 201 (301) 496-0357 TO: Associate Director AIDS/HIV, CDC PROM: Deputy Director, - Office of AIDS Research, NIH SUBJECT: NIH comments on- the University of California Report, " Public Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in theUnited States and Abroad. " We have reviewed the report, "The Public Health Impact ofNeedle Exchange Programs in the United states and Abroad, "from a research perspective, We have provided several points foryour consideration in your response on needle exchange to theAssistant Secretary for Health: 1. This report is a good initial analysis of this issue andserves as a useful starting point for further examination; 2. Utilizing needle/syringe exchange (NSE) programs as an HIVprevention strategy is a complex issue. The current state of thescience with respect to this issue is neither complete norcomprehensive, .requiring further study on this, as well as,alternative behavioral interventions; 2. There are a number of significant issues and problems withrespect to needle exchange program that the data available to theUniversity of California have not addressed (see attachedanalysis); 3. The report appropriately suggests a substantial federalcommitment to research in this area. Such support should include,but should not be limited to, .funding for: 1) buildingsubstantiai evaluation and/or research components into existingNSEs; 2) research demonstration projects that address NSEprogram: design issues; 3. research on other forms ofneed~e/syringe distribution (e.g., pharmacy or vending machinPstrategies); and, 4) research on the relationships and impact ofNSEs on other prevention strategies (e.g., bleach use) and othernon-injecting at-risk populations (e.g., non-injecting drug userswho trade sex or money for drugs). In addition, until more isdefinitively known and has been time tested, any NSE serviceprograms funded should have appropriate research and/orevaluation components built into them as a prerequisite forFederal funding. For a more detailed analysis of the specific research issuesand questions that remain unanswered by the report, we haveattached comments on the report provided by the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse. Attachment Jack Whitescarver, Ph. D. Sent by Xerox Telecopier 7021:11-12-93 :10:48 AM : 44323174027789;# DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Public Health Service National Institutes of Health National Institute on Drug Abuse 5500 Fishers Lane Rockville, Maryland 20857 Memorandum Date: November 12, 1993 To: Jack Whitescarver, Ph.D. Deputy Director Office of AIDS Research National Institutes of Health From: Acting Chief Clinical Medicine Branch Division of Clinical Research National Institute on Drug Abuse Thru: Associate Director for AIDS National Institute on Drug Abuse Topic: Comments on University of California Report, " ThePublic Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in the UnitedStates and Abroad" In general, medical/public health interventions, likemedications, may be evaluated within a framework that examinessafety, efficacy, side effects, deleterious effects and bothpositive and negative interactions with other treatments orconditions. With respect to any of the effects, questions includewhat subpopulations are likely to experience the effect and howlong it is likely to last, including recommendations with respectto the length of treatment. In fact, to the degree to which thisReport provides the equivalent of a section of the Physician'sDesk Reference(PDR) devoted to needle/syringe exchange (NSE) itwill be helpful all who are concerned with the implications ofNSEs. Viewing this Report in the aforementioned framework it becomesclear that with respect to overall "effects" NSE isassociated in the aggregate with reductions in self reports ofneedle-related HIV risk behavior. However, a major problem with the existing data examined bythe Report is the lack of sensitivity of the data to detection ofadverse effects of NSE on individuals or subpopulations andinteraction with, for example, the various modalities of drugabuse treatment. There is no equivalent of studies that searchfor individuals who purport to have experienced "adversereactions" or negative consequences or interactions that maybe attributable to participation in NSE. It is questionablewhether in the context of medications development the FederalGovernment would approve and/or provide funds for a medicationfor which this type of data were not available. In the spirit of seeking the information that would be neededfor a complete PDR section on needle/syringe exchange, we willreview some concerns about the potential adverse impact andinteractions of NSE. One major concern of critics of NSEs as an AIDS interventioneffort is the degree to which the availability of sterileneedles/syringes would server to promote drug use. While theneedle exchange studies reported from around the world from thelast two world AIDS conferences do not, and perhaps cannot, provethat the presence and/or use of a needle exchange does notincrease drug use, there have been no reports that confirm suchan increase. However, there are a number of direct and indirectways in which drug use maybe promoted for individuals andsubpopulations that have not been addressed by existing data. Forexample, one wonders what happens to the drug use of individualswho seek drug treatment through an NSE and are told that there isno slot available for them. Analogous to that for needle/syringe exchange, the criticismof the potential for increasing injection drug use was raised forbleach distribution. This particular criticism (although not allcriticisms) with respect to bleach was, in the aggregate andwithin limits, refuted by the results of the National AIDSDemonstration Research data which is consistent with the modelthat when contact is established with drug users, trust is build,information is imparted and risky behavior is reduced, despitethe fact that safe needle use is also being assisted at the sametime(XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX). Nonetheless, the demonstration ofbeneficial effects does not preclude the simultaneous existenceof deleterious effects. NSEs may not be uniformly effective in acting as a bridge toother public health services, depending on such factors as towhat degree the services are "on-site" versus"remote" as well as "immediately available"versus "requiring waiting". Studies of the servicelinkage process suggest that higher rates of successfulengagement with other services will be attained for thoseservices that are on-site and immediately available. It would beuseful to attempt to characterize users and non-users ofadditional services and to delineate those factors that affectthese decisions. Inconsistent of infrequent users of the NSEs may remain and bestabilized at high risk behavior levels. With respect to theinconsistent or infrequent users of the NSEs, it will beimportant to determine the factors influencing periods of useversus non-user. More over, looking at NSEs as an"innovation" with respect to injection drug user, theliterature of models of [LINE LOST IN COPYING - Ed.] middle andlate adopters of NSEs may be useful in terms of delineatingpopulations with distinct patterns of motivations, risk factorsand responses to the NSEs. Change or lack of change in the micro-structure, i.e.,details, of behaviors associated with drug use may negatebeneficial effects of NSEs. In looking at drug risk behaviors, itis important to attempt to assess whether NSEs affect rate ofsharing of cookers, cotton, water, etc. as well as such practicesas frontloading, backloading and booting. With respect to drugrisk behaviors it is thus important to examine NSE effects onbehavioral norms of (1) non-NSE-users and (2) drug usingnon-injectors as well as (3) NSE users. NSE users may sell paraphernalia or exchange it for drugs orsex. In fact, the possibility should be examined thatnon-injectors may use the NSEs as a source for paraphernalia thatmay used in transactions with injectors. The rate at which NSE users (versus NSE non-users) initiatenew injectors and influence other IDUs to utilize or not utilizethe NSE should be examined. Moreover, questions of the influenceof the NSE on injections frequency should be examined closely.For individuals, the availability of clean paraphernalia mayremove one brake on increasing the frequency of injection. Certainly, NSE effects on the number of IDUs entering drugtreatment need to be examined. However, the fate of IDUs who haveused the NSE prior to entry into drug treatment should also beexamined. NSE participants or injections drug users whose networkincludes NSE participants may relapse to needle use and/or dropout of drug treatment at a higher rate than NSE non-users. NSE effects on social network may lead to problems. Since NSEsimply a high rate of flow of IDUs through the neighborhoodsurrounding the site, there may be a tendency for dealers,operators of shooting galleries and/or crack houses andprostitutes to relocate to the same area. If possible, theseeffects and their implications should be assessed. The potentialeffects of NSEs on setting up bridges between networks of IDUs inhigh and low HIV seroprevalence neighborhoods should be examined.If NSEs serve to create such bridges they would, especiallythrough inconsistent seropositive users, serve as conduits tofacilitate viral spread. If data are generated on local changesin seroprevcalence and/or seroincidence over time in areassurrounding NSEs, (including baseline levels prior to theestablishment of the NSE and changes during the growth of theNSE), then some of these questions may be able to be addressed.Data pertinent to the perceived effects of participation in theNSE on the sexual, social and drug-using networks of theindividuals would also be helpful in beginning to address thesehypotheses. Additional network effects may occur or existing networkeffects may be potentiated if NSE sites are located close to drugtreatment programs (methadone or drug free programs), hospitals,psychiatric facilities, homeless shelters or other facilitiesthat attract concentrations of individuals who are vulnerable toinitiating drug injections, relapsing to drug use or injections,having sex with injections users or becoming victims of crimeassociated with injections users. As is addressed in the Report, the surveyed NSEs variedgreatly in along many parameters including estimates of theproportions of injection drug users reached by the program, theamount of education offered, the degree to which injectionequipment beyond needles/syringes were distributed, emphasis ondrug treatment referrals, costs, the extent of ongoingevaluation, acceptance by the local community, legalacceptance/tolerance, etc. These are major program design andfeasibility that could determine differences between highlyeffective programs and those with a substantial negative impact.Support for grams without consideration of these issues would bethe equivalent of support for all treatment programs in any areain the absence of standards and quality assurance. Finally, the interrelationships between NSEs and the use ofbleach need to be examined. For example, we have evidence thateven IDUs who use bleach tend to not use it effectively. Does theexistence of needles from NSEs decrease the probability that IDUswill even attempt to use bleach if the share? Will they feel thatthe needles are at least relatively safer and thus real thatbleach use is not necessary? Does the distribution of bleachincrease the probability that IDUs will share NSE distributedneedles? Are NSEs attempting to intervene in terms of educationwith respect to bleach use? This, of course is not an exhaustive list of questions orissues, but is meant to represent a set of problems whoseexistence has not been addressed by the data available to theUniversity of California study. However, even in the absence of Federal Support, NSE is agrowing part of HIV prevention efforts. This Report appropriatelysuggests a substantial Federal commitment to research in thisarea. With respect to the funding of services, it appearsreasonable, as the Report suggests, that the ban on funding belifted. Nonetheless, it would appear prudent in light of theincomplete data and the aforementioned set of concerns that noservices e funded that do not included a substantial evaluationcomponent with appropriate instrumentation and methodologies toidentify adverse as well as beneficial contribution of theseprograms to HIV and other infectious disease transmission anddrug use patterns. Perhaps as a prelude to defining standards forFederal funding of NSE services, there should be funding forincorporating evaluation in existing NSEs and setting upresearch/demonstrations projects that address NSE program designissues. Beyond the issue of NSEs per se, the argument is made in thisReport in favor of immediate implementation of the entire varietyof interventions that increase the availability of sterileneedles/syringes, including pharmacy sales and the abolition ofprescription and paraphernalia laws. Given the stated priority ofthe objective, presumably this support would extend to otherforms of needle/syringe distribution, e.g., vending machines likethose used in Europe. While the objective appears reasonable, it would be helpful ifthe Report addressed more of the complexities of this issue sothat sterile needle/syringes are not viewed as a "magicbullet" that obviates the need to continue work onbehavioral interventions. For example, there have been extensiveobservations of "secondary sharing" in which addicts ingroups use frontloading and backloading to distribute"cooked" drugs to their syringes. In these situation ifan addict brings his/her own syringe, but has previously used thesyringe even once and engaged in "booting" (drawingblood back into the syringe and reinjecting after initialinjection to make sure that any residual drug in the syringe isused), blood may be distributed to others' syringes. Moreover,contaminants of "cookers', "cotton" and"rinse water" may be similarly distributed. Finally, all strategies for distributing needles/syringes maynot be equivalent. For example, it is questionable whetherpharmacies will provide other forms of injections equipment, HIVeducation, HIV testing and counseling, referral to drug treatmentprograms, on-site medical car, etc. Similarly, these servicewould presumable not be available through such distributionsources as vending machines. Sander G. Ganser, M.D., M.P.H. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH & HUMAN SERVICES Public Health Service Memorandum Date From: Special Assistant to the Acting Administrator, SAMHSA Subject: Draft Response an Needle Exchange To: James W. Curran, M.D., M.P.H Associate Director for HIV/AIDS CDC Thank you for the opportunity to review the latest draft ozresponse to the University of California, San Francisco reportThe Public Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in theUnited States and Abroad." We concur in the response and appreciate the inclusion of ourprevious comments on the report-being included as an appendix. Myron L. Belfer, M.D. N0V-12-93 ~T 13.26 ADAMHA/IOA FAX N0. 3014430284 P.02 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Rockville MD TO: Associate Director HIV/AIDS CDC FROM: Special Assistant to the Acting Administrator, SAMHSA SUBJECT: Response on Needle Exchange In general we are fully supportive of the University ofCalifornia report on "The Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs in the United States and Abroad." Thereport and its . recommendations are a valuable contribution toour understanding of the important role of needle exchange inaddressing the spread of HIV/AIDS. We look forward to theopportunity to develop the appropriate implementation of thereport's recommendations. Attached are specific comments on the University of Californiareport prepared by the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment.These comments reflect concerns that we believe should beacknowledged in any overall commentary on the report. Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the University ofCalifornia report. In response to your request, I Will serve as the SAMHSAcontact person regarding this report. My telephone number is(301) 443-5305 and my facsimile number is 3Q1-443-0284. Myron L. Belfer, M. D . Attachment cc: T. Stephen Jones, M.D. Center for Disease Control Prevention November 9, 1993 NOTE TO: George Lewis RE Comments on Needle Exchange Study As you may be aware, Beny asked me to review this reportduring the early of it's preparation earlier this year. While thefinal summary report does reflect many of the changes werecommended, there are several noteworthy areas which warrantsome attention. Page 4, Paragraph 4. The report indicates that, "althoughNEPs may make referral to drug treatment an important part oftheir services, they acknowledge that many IDUs, including somein drug treatment programs, continue to inject drugs and shareinjection equipment. They therefore seek to reduce the harmassociated with these practices...". While there may be someinjecting drug users in certain treatment modalities who continueto inject drugs, the reference here implies that this practicehas more significance than the evidence warrants. Moreimportantly, the statement, in a somewhat convoluted fashion,implies that referral to treatment in contrast to NEP does notoffer assurance that drug users will not inject drugs. Page 11, Paragraph 5. The report notes that. NEPs vary greatlywith respect to the emphasis they place upon making referrals todrug treatment and other public health services. This stems inpart from the desire to make the NEP "user friendly",the recognition that many active IDUs express no interest inentering drug treatment, and the related belief that an overemphasis on drug treatment could alienated potential NEPclients." This assertion for which two literature referencesare cited is a dangerously misleading generalization. First it isunclear what the authors mean by "user-friendly". Thisimplies that drug treatment is somehow not user friendly which isclearly not the case. Secondly, the references to drug treatmentare based published papers which were published before OTI/CSATcame into existence, a development which has had an enormouseffect on the nature and quality of national drug treatmentservices. We must remember that many of staff of these NEPs areonly casually familiar with the various treatment modalities, thebehavioral characteristics of drug using populations and aregenerally not qualified to make determinations about who isinterested in treatment or not. In point of fact many drug usersare not interested in treatment, enter treatment for many otherreasons, e.g. secure primary care or to take a respite from theiraddiction lifestyle, other than to address their addictions. Itdoes not follow, even from the limited evidence provided in thecited studies, that emphasizing or overemphasizing treatmentproduces alienation. finally, the determination of who should bereferred or not should never be left to so-called perceptions ofstaff regarding "readiness for treatment". Page 12, Conclusion. There are a number of reasons whyreferrals to drug treatment are limited other than the paucity ofdrug treatment slots. One important consideration which may be alimiting factor to referrals may in fact have more to do with howvarious NEPs have evolved in relation to drug treatment programsin the same area. It is abundantly clear that these programs havenot been in philosophical agreement regarding how to address theneeds of the addict. Page 13, Conclusion. I don't think there is any seriousdisagreement that the cost of NEPs are substantially cheaper thanany form of treatment including methadone. It is also true thatNEP is cheaper than coronary angioplasty, renal dialysis and arange of other health care expenditure. The reference made tomethadone seems to suggest that there is contrast, or perhapsimply that there is tacit substitution effect. The reference madeto methadone should be deleted since its incorporation in thecontext of the conclusion is largely irrelevant. Page 14, Paragraph 5. Our understanding of injecting drug useamong women is not as well developed as for men. While there isevidence which suggest that men initiate women, this is by nomeans an absolute. the fact remains that there are IDUpopulations of women which operate independently from those ofmen. Our limited knowledge of injecting behaviors among womenclearly indicates that there may be other factors involved withrespect to injecting behavior which may make it problematic toapply NEP directed at male IDUs to female IDUs. Page 16, Conclusion. The conclusion tragically fails toappreciate the full range of antipathy and fear which AfricanAmericans communities have for the "symbolicsanctioning" of drug abuse by endorsing NEP in theircommunities. After years of "Just Say No", theperception of many leaders in these communities is that NEPrepresents a step back and not forward. Irrespective of whetherthis perception is valid or not, the presence of these compellingbeliefs cannot be dismissed lightly. It is insulting to thesecommunities, also contrary to all of our Public Health platitudesaround cultural sensitivity to dismiss these visceral communityconcerns by stating that "newer African Americanorganizations established specifically to address HIV preventiongenerally support NEP as did several mayors..." Thisstatement literally indicates that the view of traditionalleaders from the African American communities and from churchleaders can and should be ignored in favor of those who supportNEP. This statement by it's intent, fosters divisiveness and isantithetical to efforts made by other segments of public healthincluding those concerned with preventing HIV disease to engageand not alienate the African American community. Page 18, Conclusion. The overall issue here is the questionwhich frames this section, "Do NEPs result in changes incommunity levels of drug use?" Clearly this is very complexquestion which could not be answered within the scope of thestudy, but one which nonetheless warrants a poignant level ofinquiry. However, the conclusion seems to go beyond the paucityof evidence to conclude that there is "no evidence that NEPsincrease the amount of drug use by NEP clients or change overallcommunity levels of non-injection and injection drug use."This convoluted logic would have us believe that if it cannot beestablished that NEP has an effect on drug use, then the absenceof correlates, irrespective of methodological limitations, istantamount to saying it has no effect. This conclusion is furthersupported by indicating that interview with NEP clients and byIDUs not using NEP, confirmed that they did not believe thatincrease needle availability would increase drug use. It is notclear how these two groups would qualify to speculate on newincidence, especially by younger members of the community. Ingeneral, this ipso facto logic is not only distressing, butraises very real questions overall scientific validity of thisreport. Page 21, Conclusion. Though the majority of studies citedindicated a decreased rate of HIV drug risk behavior, the realissue here which is not addressed are whether these behavioralchanges are sustainable overtime. While there are clearlycompelling finding of short term behavioral change, theseindications do not provide definitive conclusions regarding theeffectiveness of NEP overtime. The proper statement of thisconclusion should insert the caveat that the studies reviewed donot conclusive evidence at this time that these behaviors aresustained overtime. Warren Department of Health and Human Services Public Health Service MEMORANDUM Date: November 16, 1993 From: Associate Administrator for AIDS HRSA Subject: CDC Report on the Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs To: James Curran, M.D. Associate Director for HIV/AIDS, CDC We at HRSA have reviewed this very thorough report on needleexchange programs and concur with its major finding andrecommendations. We believe that needle exchange programsdefinitely have a place in what must necessarily be acomprehensive approach to the prevention of HIV infection amongdrug users. In addition, we were pleased that the report wentbeyond needle exchange programs per se to discuss the need forchanges in current prescription and paraphernalia laws at theState level. Thank you for giving us the opportunity to review thisexcellent report. G. Stephen Bowen, M.D., M.P.H. Assistant Surgeon General Department of Health and Human Services Public Health Service MEMORANDUM Date: December 2,, 1993 From: Associate Administrator for AIDS HRSA Subject: Draft Response on Needle Exchange To: James Curran, M.D., M.P.H. Associate Director for HIV/AIDS, CDC In general we think the CDC's draft response to Jo IveyBoufford, M.D. concerning the University of California report onneedle exchange programs did an excellent job of covering thesalient issues. We do have a number of specific comments, whichfollow: page 2, paragraph 2: We suggest adding a sentence to the effect that :"Substance abuse treatment programs also require substantialfunding increases in order to accommodate the needs ofindividuals who decide they want to enter treatment as a resultof their involvement in needle exchange and other outreachefforts to IDUs. page 7, first paragraph: We think it is important to mention the fact that needleexchange remains an issue of special concern issue amongAfrican-American and other minority politicians and communityleaders. Whether or not we think this concern is justified, weneed to acknowledge that it exists. page 8, last paragraph: We think it should be acknowledged that the degree to whichnew HIV infections are reduced is strongly affected by (1) the"penetration" of needle exchange in a particular cityand (2) the complexity of the drug-using populations and networkin particular communities (i.e., the number of, and kinds ofconnections between, drug injection networks). page 9, "Impact of Needle Exchange Programs on DrugUse": Again, we think it is crucial to acknowledge and discuss thefact that many African-American and other minority politiciansand community leaders fear that needle exchange programs condonedrug use and should be opposed on those grounds. The last paragraph in this section should provide morespecific data to address this concern. page 10, last paragraph: The fifth sentence should read, "Third, NEP clientsreport decreases in their HIV drug-risk behaviors." We disagree that the relationship between NEPs and HIVinfection may be impossible to study conclusively, particularlysince "conclusiveness" depends on the criteria beingused. This issue could be studied with several replications(different cities or neighborhoods) to obtain better data thannow exist on this point. page 11, last paragraph: We suggest adding a sentence to the effect that, "The CDCshould develop and foster the use of standardized data elements,methods of data collection, and protocols forevaluation/analysis." page 12 first paragraph: In the last sentence, we suggest adding the phrase,"using standardized methodologies." page 15, first paragraph: Again, we suggest adding to the last sentence's phrase aboutthe use of standardized data collection and evaluationmethodologies. We appreciate the opportunity to review this response. G. Stephen Bowen, M.D., M.P.H. Assistant Surgeon General MEMORANDUM DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Public Health Service Food and Drug Administration Date: Dec 2, 1993 From: Nancy L. Stisic, Health Program Coordinator Office of AIDS an special Health Issues (HF- 12) Subject: Comments on Draft CDC Response on Needle ExchangePrograms To: Associate Director for HIV/AIDS We appreciate the opportunity to review the CDC draft responseon Needle Exchange. Dr. Wykoff has requested that I review thedocument on behalf of the Office. I have no further commetnsconcerning the Needle Exchange Program other than the commentsprovided to Dr. T. Stephen Jones on November 12, 1993. November 22, 1994 From: Assistant Director for Substance Abuse and HIVPrevention, Office of the Associate Director for HIV/AIDS To: Associate Director for HIV/AIDS Re: Request for Update on Needle Exchange Studies and LawsRelated to Needle and Syringe Sale and/or Possession 1. Background The following information is provided in response to therequest of Brian Biles, Office of the Assistant Secretary forHealth, for an update on (a) studies of needle exchange programs(NEPs) since the 1993 release of the University of California(UC) three-volume, 700 page report on NEPs[1] and (b) recentdevelopments related to laws related to NEPs and possessionsand/pr sale of syringes. 2. New York City NEP evaluation reported at 1994 APHAConference * At the 1994 American Public Health Association (APHA)Conference, Dr. Don Des Jarlais presented and estimate of anapproximate 50% reduction in rates of new HIV infections amonginjecting drug users (IDUs) using NEPs in New York City (NYC). * This estimate was based on several small follow-up studiesof HIV incidence among IDUs using NEPs compared to HIV incidenceamong IDUs in a vaccine preparedness cohort and cohort studies inmethadone maintenance.[2] A manuscript based the APHA oralpresentation is being prepared. Until this study is more fullydescribed, it is difficult to assess the basis for this estimateof NEP impacting NYC. However, although the numbers are small,the estimate is plausible. 3. Legal aspects of needle exchange, possession, and sale ofsyringes * In 1993 and 1994, three states (Maryland, Massachusetts, andRhode Island) enacted laws authorizing pilot NEPs; two states(Connecticut and Hawaii) enacted laws expanding existing NEPlegislation. * In September 1994, the Mayor and City Council o Los Angelesdeclared a "local state of emergency." The declarationwas based on "... finding that an emergency in connectionwith the AIDS epidemic and the transmission of HIV throughcontaminated needles does exist, and that this emergencythreatens to cause extraordinary loss of life."[3] Thisstate of emergency was used as a basis for authorizing supportfor "responsible" NEPs. * In 1993 and 1994, similar declarations of states ofemergency have been made in nine other California cities andcounties - Alameda, Berkeley, Marin, Oakland, Salinas, SanFrancisco, Santa Clara, Sonoma, and West Hollywood. * A major reason for NEPs is the existence of several lawsthat restrict the purchase, distribution, and possession ofsyringes. These laws include "prescription laws," underwhich a prescription is required to purchase syringes and"drug paraphernalia laws," which establish felonyand/or misdemeanor criminal penalties for the possession and/ordistribution of syringes for nonmedical purposes. About ninestates have prescription laws and more than 40 states have drugparaphernalia laws. In 1993, Maine repealed its prescription law. * In 1992, Connecticut partially repealed it drugparaphernalia and prescription laws. The new laws allow purchaseof as many as 10 syringes without a prescription and possessionof as many as 10 syringes without a medical condition. A CDC andConnecticut Health Department evaluation of the impact of thesenew laws found that IDUs reported substantially less multipersonuse ("sharing") of injection equipment. Also, after thechange in the laws, more than 80% of Connecticut pharmacies sellsyringes without a prescription and, for drug injectors, therewas a dramatic shift from "black market" sources ofsyringes to purchases in pharmacies[4]. 4. Limitations of bleach disinfection and recommendation touse sterile syringes Several studies published in a special section of the July1994 "Journal of AIDS" indicate that while bleachdisinfection can reduce the HIV transmission risk of IDU reuse ofsyringes, it is not as safe as using a new, sterile syringe. Thefollowing quotation summarizes the argument: We reiterate that IDUs who cannot stop injecting drugs shoulduse sterile needles and syringes; ideally only once and thensafely dispose of them. IDUs should be told never to re-useinjection equipment that had been previously used by someoneelse.... If one re-uses injection equipment, consistent andthorough cleaning of equipment with disinfectants, such asfull-strength household bleach for longer rather than shorterperiods of time, should decrease, but may not eliminate the HIVtransmission risk[5]. The following sections present additional information on NEPsthat has become available since the release of the UC report. 5. Decreases in HIV risk behaviors among NEP clients The following data from San Francisco and New York, citieswith high volume NEPs, indicate decreases in HIV risk behaviorsreported by NEP clients: * Decrease in needle-sharing rates associated with increaseduse of the NEP among street recruited San Francisco IDUs[6]. * Reduction in needle-sharing rates among IDUs attending NEPsin New York City[7]. * Reductions in the proportions of IDUs attending drugdetoxification programs in New York City who injected with a usesyringe and who lent used syringes to others, associated with theopening of NEPs in that city. 6. No evidence of an increase in drug use in San Francisco, acity with a high-volume NEP The San Francisco NEP opened in 1987. It is a now one of thehighest volume NEPs in the United States; 343,888 syringes wereexchanged during the Spring of 1992. The following data come fromrepeated surveys (from 1988 to 1992) of IDUs in San Francisco: * The median number of injections decreased from 1.9 per dayin the Fall of 1987 to 0.7 per day in the Spring of 1992.[6] * The mean age of IDUs in the repeated surveys in SanFrancisco increased from 36 years in the Spring of 1987 to 42years in the Spring of 1992[6]. * The proportion of San Francisco IDUs reporting that theyfirst injected drugs in the previous year decreased from 3.0% inthe Spring of 1989 to 1.1% in the Spring of 1992[6]. Taken together, the last two finding suggest that significantnumbers of persons have not begun injecting drugs in a city witha high-volume NEP. 7. Increase in estimated reduction of HIV incidence among IDUsusing the New Haven NEP Earlier estimates derived from mathematical models indicatedthat the rate of HIV infection among clients of the NEP in NewHaven, CT, was reduced by 33% by their use of the NEP. Updatedestimates from that model suggest that the reduction is more than40%[9]. 8. Lower incidence of hepatitis B and C among IDUs using theTacoma NEP A study of hepatitis B and C among IDUs in Tacoma, Washington,using multivariate analysis to adjust for the demographiccharacteristics of the IDUs found that, compared with nonusers ofthe NEP, IDUs who had ever used the Tacoma NEP were seven timesless likely to become infected with hepatitis B and eight timesless likely to become infected with hepatitis C[10]. This studydemonstrates more clearly than any previous research that use ofNEPs is associated with decreases in blood -borne infections. 9. Substantial entry in to drug treatment of New Haven NEPclients Between September 1992 and July 1993, 112 of 596 NEP clients(19%) in New Haven entered drug treatment. In addition, 205 IDUswho did not exchange syringes were referred to drug treatment bythe NEP[11]. 10. Substantial IDU utilization of high-volume NEPs One issue about NEPs is how much they will be used by IDUs.Studies from tow cities with high-volume NEPs, New York City andSan Francisco, indicate that substantial proportions of IDUssurveyed report use of the NEPs. * Des Jarlais reported data indicating that in 1993 nearlyhalf (46%) of IDUs surveyed in New York City had used an NEP[2]. * Surveys of IDUs in San Francisco in the Spring of 1992 foundthat 45% "usually" obtained their syringes from the SanFrancisco NEP[6]. 11. Increasing Number of NEPs in the United States The UC report found at least 37 active NEPs in the UnitedStates as of September 1993. As of October 1994, an estimated 70NEPs were in operation in the United States[12]. 12. Support from the general public for NEPs for AIDSprevention In the first national opinion poll on NEPs, a 1994 nationaltelephone survey of 1,001 people, the majority (55%) ofrespondents favored "Implementing needle exchange programsto reduce the spread of diseases such as AIDS."[13] 13. Support for federal funding of NEPs from the NationalAcademy of Sciences A study on AIDS behavioral research published in 1994 by theInstitute of Medicine, described NEPs as "highlypromising" and called for the lifting of the ban on the useof federal funds for NEP services. "The weight of evidencesuggests that needle exchange does more good than harm,"concluded the authors[14]. 14. High HIV seroconversion among Montreal IDUs The highest levels of HIV seroprevalence among IDUs in Canadahave been reported from Montreal. Bruneau reports from the St.Luc IDU cohort that among 850 IDUs recruited 1989-1993, the half(54%) reporting use of a Montreal NEP had higher HIVseroprevalence (18.2% vs. 5.6%) compared with nonattenders. Amongthe 507 IDUs with multiple visits to the study site, theseroconversion rate was higher (11.6 vs 3.5 per 100 person-years[p<0.0001]) among IDUs using NEP[15]. A study of incarcerated IDUs found that IDUs using a MontrealNEP reported higher rates of HIV risk behaviors (vs. IDUs who didnot use a NEP). Montreal NEP attenders were more likely thannon-attenders, to have same sex partners, to work in the sexindustry, to report injecting with needles used by anHIV-infected IDU, and re-use borrowed injection equipment withoutcleaning[16]. The higher HIV seroprevalence, HIV seroconversion, and HIVrisk factors among IDUs attending the Montreal NEP requirefurthers study. 15. Comments and conclusions Since the 1993 release of the UC report: * The number of U.S. NEPs has increased, and more states andlocalities have approved NEPs by legislation or declaration ofsates of emergency; * In communities with high-volume NEPs, substantialproportions of IDUs report using the NEP; * Biological evidence suggests decreases of bloodborne virustransmission among NEP clients, with the evidence stronger forhepatitis than HIV; * There is additional evidence that in most cities with NEPs,NEP clients have lower rates of HIV risk behaviors; and * Higher HIV seroconversion rates among IDUs using theMontreal NEP were documented and must be further investigated. Appendix IV Legal Barriers to Federal Funding of Needle Exchange Programs EXCERPTED FROM March 1993 report by General Accounting Office(GAO), titled "NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS -- Research SuggestsPromise as an AIDS Prevention Strategy. Since 1988, Congress has passed at least six laws (in additionto the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration(ADAMHA) Reorganization Act of 1992) that contain provisionsprohibiting or restricting use of federal funding for needleexchange programs and activities. These provisions are containedin: the Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAmendments Act of 1988; the Health Omnibus Programs Extension of1988; the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act of1990; and the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services,and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts of 1990,1991, and 1993 (the Appropriations Act of 1992 did not containsuch a provision). The Comprehensive Alcohol Abuse, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAmendments Act of 1988 required states, as a condition forreceiving ADAMHA block grant funds under title XIX of the PHSAct, to agree that funds would not be used to carry out anyprograms of distributing sterile needles for the hypodermicinjection of any illegal drug or distributing bleach for thepurpose of cleansing needles for such hypodermic injection...." This provision was repealed by the ADAMHA Reorganization Act(1992). The Health Omnibus Programs Extension of 1988 authorizes fundsand programs aimed at combating the AIDS epidemic and preventingits transmission. Among other things, the act authorizes grantsand contracts through the Director of the National Institute ofAllergy and Infectious Diseases to assist public and nonprofitprivate entities in conducting research and training in advanceddiagnostic, prevention, and treatment methods for AIDS. Thesegrants may be used to operate demonstration projects in long-termmonitoring and outpatient treatment of HIV-infected individuals.The act also authorizes funds for AIDS education. Additionally,the Director of the National Institutes of Health is to establishprojects to promote cooperation among public health agencies andwith private entities in research concerned with the diagnosis,prevention, and treatment of A[DS. The act provides further: None of the funds provided under this Act or an amendment madeby this Act shall be used to provide individuals with hypodermicneedles or syringes so that such individuals may use illegaldrugs, unless the Surgeon General of the Public Health Servicedetermines that a demonstration needle exchange program would beeffective in reducing drug abuse and the risk that the publicwill become infected with the etiologic agent for acquired immunedeficiency syndrome." The Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act ofl990 (42 U.S.C.  300ff et seq.) authorizes grants to localitiesdisproportionately affected by the HIV epidemic. The actprohibits use of funds made available under this Act, or anamendment made by this Act . . . to provide individuals withhypodermic needles or syringes so that such individuals may useillegal drugs." The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, andEducation, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts of l990 and1991 contained identical prohibitions regarding needle exchangeprograms (section 520 of P.L. 101-166 and section 512 of P.L.101-517). The provision stated: None of the funds appropriated under this Act shall be used tocarry out any program of distributing sterile needles for thehypodermic injection of any illegal drug unless the President ofthe United States certifies that such programs are effective instopping the spread of HIV and do not encourage the use ofillegal drugs." In contrast, the Departments of Labor, Health and HumanServices, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriation Actof 1993, states in section 514 of the General Provisions": Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no fundsappropriated under this Act shall be used to carry out anyprogram of distributing sterile needles for the hypodermicinjection of any illegal drug unless the Surgeon General of theUnited States determines that such programs are effective inpreventing the spread of HIV and do not encourage the use ofillegal drugs, except that such funds may be used for suchpurposes in furtherance of demonstrations or studies authorizedin the ADAMHA Reorganization Act (P L. 102-321)." CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B40-27IA031-000655-B046-179http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/selcom89.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115053 text/html 91587HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:50:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:11:05 GMTContent-length: 91369 LEGALIZATION OF ILLICIT DRUGS : IMPACT AND FEASIBILITY 101st Congress COMMITTEE PRINT Ist Session I LEGALIZATION OF ILLICIT DRUGS: IMPACT AND FEASIBILITY (A Review of Recent Hearings) REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL ONE HUNDRED FIRST CONGRESS FIRST SESSION together with ADDITIONAL VIEWS SCNAC-101-1-2 Printed for the use of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 96 475 WASHINGTON: 1989 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Sales Office U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402 JACK BROOKS, Texas FORTNEY H. (PETE) STARK, California JAMES H. SCHEUER, New York CARDISS COLLINS, Illinois DANIEL K. AKAKA, Hawaii FRANK J. GUARINI, New Jersey DANTE B. FASCELL, Florida WALTER E. FAUNTROY, District of Columbia WILLIAM J. HUGHES. New Jersey MEL LEVINE, California SOLOMON P. ORTIZ, Texas LAWRENCE J. SMITH, Florida EDOLPHUS "ED" TOWNS, New York JAMES A. TRAFICANT, JR., Ohio KWEISI MFUME, Maryland JOSEPH E. BRENNAN, Maine NITA M. LOWEY, New York SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL (101st Congress) CHARLES B. RANGEL, New York, Chairman LAWRENCE COUGHLIN, Pennsylvania BENJAMIN A. GILMAN, New York MICHAEL G. OXLEY, Ohio STAN PARRIS. Virginia F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, JR., Wisconsin ROBERT K. DORNAN, California TOM LEWIS, Florida JAMES M. INIIOFE, Oklahoma WALLY HERGER, California CHRISTOPT4FR L,HAYS, Connecticut BILL PAXON, New York BILL GRANT, Florida Committee Staff EDWARD H. JURITH, Staff Director ELLioTT A. BROWN, Minority Staff Director (11) Introduction The Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control held a 2day hearing in the 2d session of the 100th Congress to examine the legalization of all illicit narcotics. These informational hearings, entitled "Legalization of Illicit Drugs: Impact and Feasibility," were held in response to public debate that began in early 1988, after the mayor of Baltimore told a Washington, DC meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors that existing U.S. drug policy had failed. The mayor suggested legalization and decriminalization as possible approaches to solving the problem. The hearings were designed to consider the seriousness of a variety of legalization proposals that had been offered by drug policy observers who, after the Baltimore mayor's call for a look at legalization, stepped up their own criticisms of U.S. antidrug policy. In effect, they pronounced the symbolic war on drugs lost. Now that the hearings have been completed, and testimony has been studied and restudied, the committee, led by Chairman Charles B. Rangel and Ranking Member Benjamin Gilman, has produced a list of findings resulting from the many hours of testimony. The findings are not for any specific legislative purpose. Instead, they are intended solely as an advisory to any Members of the U.S. Congress and the public as to what the committee believes was established by the proceedings. How the Hearings Evolved In the spring of 1988, Baltimore Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke was speaking to his colleagues at the U.S. Conference of Mayors annual meeting on crime and drugs. During the speech, Mayor Schmoke surprised the gathering when he suggested that elected officials should consider the legalization or the decriminalization of illicit drugs in response to America's escalating drug crisis. In his speech, Mayor Schmoke criticized America's current antidrug approach as a wasteful proposition bent too far toward law enforcement and not far enough toward treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts. Recalling his days as a prosecuting attorney, Mayor Schmoke cited what he viewed as the miniscule impact of arrests and convictions of drug traffickers and drug users on the overall drug problem. Schmoke's comments were the proverbial "shots heardaround the world," as few, if any, public officials had treaded into such politically explosive waters before on the sensitive narcotics issue. Select Committee Chairman Rangel (D-NY) responded almost immediately to Mayor Schmoke's legalization calls. Chairman Rangel decried the notion as stemming from frustration and exhasperation with the Nation's mushrooming drug crisis. Chairman Rangel contended in interviews and opinion articles that legalization would be a tactical error in the war on drugs that would quite possibly lead to a nation full of drug addicts. Throughout the ensuing months after the hearing was announced, people on both sides of the issue began tangling publicly over the question. An informal national debate had begun, and many looked toward the hearings scheduled by Chairman Rangel as a final commentary on the subject at least for the time being. in calling for the hearings, Chairman Rangel expressed a desire to get to the heart of suggestions being proposed by legalization proponents. Although pro-legalization advocates claimed they were simply calling for a debate on the issue, Chairman Rangel impressed upon them that they should come forward with specific plans and proposals, rather than just debate the subject. Chairman Rangel made a special plea with public officials suggesting legalization or decriminalization to come forward with specifics to satisfy the burden of their responsibility to the American public. Throughout the debate, Chairman Rangel asked legalization advocates a series of questions in order that they might clarify their positions. Among them: (1) has anybody ever considered which narcotic and psychotropic drugs might be legalized? (2) would we allow all drugs to become legally sold and used, or would we select the most abused few, such as cocaine, heroin, and marijuana? (3) who would administer the dosages-the State or the individual? (4) what quantity of drugs would each individual be allowed to get? (5) what about addicts, would we not have to give them more in order to satisfy their craving, or would we give them enough just to whet their appetites? (6) what do we do about those who are experimenting? Do we sell them drugs, too, and encourage them to pick up the habit? (7) furthermore, will the government establish tax- supported facilities to sell these drugs? (8) would we get the supply from the same foreign countries that support our habit now, or would we create our own internal sources? (9) would there be an age limit on purchases, as is the case with alcohol? (10) how many people are projected to become addicts as a result of legalization? (11) what about pilots, railroad engineers, surgeons, police, cross-country truckers and nuclear plant employees who want to use marijuana and cocaine during off-duty hours? (12) what about crack cocaine as a legalized drug? Would we want to legalize something as harmful and as destructive to our youth as this? Legalization: A Recurring Theme The legalization debate seems to rise to the surface when the drug crisis reaches alarming levels, as it has recently. The drug issue eventually moved to the top of the list of Americans' concerns during 1988, given the spate of news stories on the growing influence of the narcotics trade in everyday lives. Throughout the year, there were revelations from the Select Committee on Narcotics and other congressional committees about the suspected involvement of some foreign leaders in the drug trade. Americans were also bombarded by reports of the increased prevalence of deadly, addictive crack cocaine; growing gang involvement in the narcotics trade; a tripling of cocaine imports to the United States in the 1980's; a significant rise in drug- related violence sparked by tension between warring traffickers and by street dealers bent on attention- getting retaliatory tactics. At the time of the hearing, one major news poll revealed that the American public was more concerned about the crisis of illegal drugs than about any other issue- including the budget deficit. The ABC News polling data also indicated that Americans were wary of legalization, Nine out of ten opposed legalizing all drugs and about 50 percent of the respondents feared drug use would rise under legalization. In a Gallup survey released 2 months prior to the hearing, about 75 percent of those surveyed were opposed and nearly 70 percent felt that legalization would aggravate the Nation's drug problem. Through the years, advocates of legalization have favored an end to existing drug laws, often using the end of Prohibition in the 1930's and the end of organized crime's involvement in the illegal liquor trade as an example in making their case. Chairman Rangel, on the other hand, asked of legalization advocates in 1988: What drugs would we legalize? Who would manufacture and distribute them? In what neighborhoods would they be sold and marketed? Would crack cocaine be legalized in a legalization scheme? Would there be age and quantity limits on purchases? How much would we give addicts, enough to satisfy their craving? Other opponents of the legalization theory suggested that in addition to a potential meteoric rise in addictions, there is no guarantee that the black market for drugs would close down, especially if restrictions are placed on purchase quantity and on the quality of various narcotic substances. Overview of the Proceedings Thursday and Friday, September 29 and 30, 1988, were 2 significant days in the 100th Congress regarding the drug issue. In those 2 days, a total of 34 witnesses representing Congress, law enforcement, government, academia, and various drug-related interest groups testified before the Select Committee on Narcotics on legalization. By the time the hearing commenced, the legalization issue had gained such national exposure that the proceedings were carried live over public television and public radio, and was covered by a large contingent of print media. At this point and time in 1988, legalization was a very important topic to many Americans concerned about the worsening drug crisis. In addition to the announced lineup of witnesses, several Members of Congress who do not serve on the Select Committee on Narcotics offered testimony on the subject. Representative Carroll Hubbard (D-KY) and Representative Roy Dyson (D-MD) both told the panel that the Nation's drug crisis had become more than just a problem in urban America. In rural areas served by both those Members, there has been a noticeable increase in narcotics-related problems. Representative Benjamin Cardin (D-MD) warned about the confused messages that would be sent to the youth if drugs were legalized. Representative Kwesi Mfume (D-MD) also outlined his opposition, but said that more attention should be given to demand reduction. Following is a summary of the statement of each witness. The summary is intended to capture the essence of what the witness presented to the panel in his or her opening statement, and is not a verbatim translation of the actual testimony. Findings 1. The ideas and recommendations of pro-legalization forces remain varied and wide ranging. There is no commonly agreed upon approach that should be taken to legalize illicit narcotics. 2. The American public remains largely opposed to the notion of legalizing illicit drugs. 3. There is no data to support the theory that legalizing illicit drugs would result in less crime, more affordable narcotics or decreased drug experimentation, abuse or addiction. 4. There is no agreement on the types of currently illicit drugs that should be considered for legalization. 5. No definitive information exists that would show how America's youth would be affected by legalization, whether positively or negatively. 6. There should be a stepped up effort to look at the expansion of treatment and rehabilitation resources around the country. 7. The Federal war on drugs must devote more resources to curbing drug trafficking and abuse in major U.S. cities. 8. Narcotics law enforcement efforts need to be improved, especially in major U.S. cities) 9. Training for the staff of drug abuse treatment centers needs to be expanded and improved. 10. Federal drug abuse policies need more input from residents of major American cities and not just from governmental leaders,police chiefs, and substance abuse professionals. 11. The burden of proof regarding the benefits of drug legalization must be placed on the advocates of such a policy. Until the proponents of drug legalization can demonstrate that the benefits of such a policy outweigh the risks to health and drug-related violeiiee, drug legalization should be rejected. 12. American schools should continue to convey the message that drug abuse is against the law, harmful to health, and a detriment to optimal academic performance. 13. Employee assistance programs [EAP's] in government and industry must be strengthened to help employees and their families deal effectively with drug abuse, 14. We have not yet begun to fight the war. Consequently, legalization should not be considered an alternative. Summary of Statements by Members of Congress CHAIRMAN CHARLES B. RANGEL (D-NY), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROT. Legalization has been widely discussed in academic settings, and on radio and TV talk shows. But this is the first time in a long time the issue has made its way to the Congress. Most of those who have been advocating legalization have been calling for either a debate, a discussion or a consideration. But after an advance reading of some of the testimony, it does not appear that any of the witnesses are truly'advocating legalization. Some are saying legalization ought to be discussed because the war on drugs is being lost with law enforcement. But the Nation has yet to declare a real war on drugs. For 8 years, the Congress has met resistance to antidrug efforts. The Reagan administration has shied away from providing funds to State and local governments so that they can fight the war on drugs. How can we say we have a war on drugs when a total of 2,800 DEA men and women are dedicated to fighting the war on drugs at the Federal level? Some legalization proponents are calling for a greater educational and rehabilitative commitment, but we do not even have a single federally run rehabilitation program. Some say we must do more with drug education, but so far we have only had slogans like "Just Say No" and"Zero Tolerance." No opium or coca leaves are grown in this country, yet the Secretary of State never utters his contempt for the nations where these poisons are grown. Legalization proponents must be prepared to discuss their ideas and recommendations in detail. HON. LAWRENCE COUGHLIN (R-PA), RANKING MINORITY MEMBER, SELECT COMMITTEE: ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Having a hearing on legalization could send a wrong message to America's young people that drugs are OK. Having a discussion could be a copout in the war on drugs. The hope is that the hearing will not be interpreted as an indication that legalization is being suggested. To quote the attorney general of Pennsylvania, Leroy Zimmerman, "In Philadelphia, over 50 percent of thechild abuse fatalities involved parents who heavily used cocaine. Cheaper, legal cocaine would result in more children dying and more babies being born addicted." HoN. BENJAMIN A. GILMAN (R-NY), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Drug kingpins are Continuing to cash in on America's insatiable appetite for illicit drugs. These multinational criminal syndicates have built evil empires from the drug trade. The power of the drug trade threatens the authority of governments worldwide. Colombia, for example, is virtually under siege from the traffickers, When the narcotics trade recently offered the Colombian people the money to pay off the nation's foreign debt, the people refused, resisting the financial temptation and opting to take the moral high ground. Those calling for legalization in America are seeking to compromise the same values and morals that remain at stake in Colombia. They are looking to cut a deal with the drug trade. Legalization would not put an end to the international cartels, who would figure out ways to adapt and penetrate the U.S. market. It would not end drug-related crime, as many addicts on the street would continue to commit criminal acts because of impaired judgment and instability from illicit drug use. It is hoped that fresh, new ideas will emerge from the hearings that will make the Nation more effective in the war on drugs. HON. FORTNEY H. (PETE) STARK (D-CA), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL In New York and Oakland, only about 10 percent of the cocaine and heroin addicts are able to be treated for their addictions. In both cities, people seeking drug treatment are required to wait at least 6 months for treatment. Drug-related crime has skyrocketed as a result of a lack of treatment slots. Legalization is not the answer. We must find a way to treat the drug abuser. I am introducing a bill to provide treatment for addicts seeking help. The bill would be financed through the Social Security Programs' disability insurance provisions and utilize a Medicare-like payment principal for outpatient and inpatient services. HoN. JAMES H. SCHEUER(D-NY), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The ultimate copout in the war on drugs is to stand pat with the current ineffective drug control policy. Pumping more resources into a transparently failed system would be an admission of defeat in the war on drugs. Our system has totally failed. If seizures, arrests, and convictions are going up, then so is violence and addiction. We must end the preoccupation with the criminal justice aspect of the problem and focus more on education and treatment. A new system and a new strategy would involve changing people's behavior. We have successfully changed attitudes and behavior on alcohol and tobacco consumption. The question is, How do we reduce the demand for drugs? We need to examine the costs and benefits of police crackdowns. We have to address a broad spectrum of options and put substantially more resources into those programs that really work. HON. CARDISS COLLINS (D-IL), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Drugs have been a problem for many years. It is one of the greatest public evils in the United States. The present administration has demonstrated a profound lack of understanding on the drug issue. The First Lady has told us to "Just Say No," while the Presidenthas said no to an effective policy to rapidly eradicate drug crops from society. It seems incontrovertible that the immediate effect of legalization would be rampant drug use. This would occur for at least a short period, as the lion that has been held captive for many years would be let out of the den. Even if legalization were to have the desired effect, it would not work until the lion became accustomed to the new liberties. That could be a very long time, and the Nation could not afford to wait. Legalization could lead to a legal and constitutional quagmire, in which the newly legal rights of individuals must be merged with the obligation to protect society. HON. DANIEL K. AKAKA (D-HI), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The issue is not whether we ought to sanction the use of drugs, but whether legalization can break the stranglehold that drugs have had on our communities. We have contended that drugs affect all of us, not just users and pushers. That has never been more apparent than it is today. HON. FRANK J. GUARINI (D-NJ), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Legalization is not the cure for the Nation's drug problems. It is the wrong policy, and it sends the wrong signal. It sends the signal to the drug lords that the Nation has lost, and they have won. It tells America's youth that the U.S. Government says yes to drugs. People should be motivated so that they don't need drugs. They need to be given something to believe in. A sense of purpose and a spirit of idealism need to be renewed in America. Hope and dreams should replace despair and hunger. There should be a dialog on the issue, as it may in the long run contribute to bringing an end to the drug crisis. HoN. DANTE B. FASCELL (D-FL), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The fight against drugs must focus on interdiction, education, and rehabilitation. We just passed an oninibus drug bill in the House, but no matter how vigorously we attack the problem, we must key on reducing demand. The issue should be discussed, and all views should get a fair hearing. But legalization and decriminalization are not the solutions to the drug problem. A clear connection has been established between crime and drugs. While many individuals commit crimes to get drugs, others who commit crimes are found to have used illicit drugs just prior to the commission of the crime. Legalization will compound the situation because drugs will be easier to obtain. It sends a misguided and contradictory signal. If drugs were legalized, how would we be able to tell our kids to stay off drugs? How can we urge other countries to work with us in interdiction and eradication efforts? We must increase aid to State and local law agencies. Efforts must be concentrated on interdiction, demand reduction, and on rehabilitation and education. HON. WILLIAM J. HUGHES (D-NJ), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL I am very much opposed to legalization. This view comes after reflecting on 24 years as either a prosecutor or a Member of Congress. Where in the entire world has legalization worked? Witnesses would do well to indicate this to the committee in testimony. Also, indicate to the committee how the profits are going to be removed from the drug trade under legalization. The black market will not be eliminated. Policies of recent years are workable if they are followed with the proper commitment. To date, the commitment has not been made in terms of effort and resources. The Nation's strategy is good. Many of the provisions in the omnibus drug bill advance us in the right direction. Once the Nation gets serious about the problem, we will begin to turn the corner. HoN. SOLOMON P. ORTIZ (D-TX), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL Drugs take away the God-given gift of human potential that we all have. Illegal drugs are damaging our children, our communities and our Nation as a whole. None of this would change under legalization. The question of legalization is not one of economics or money or the black market. The position of those who advocate legalization is recognized. But when reasonable people discuss unreasonable proposals, it is a sad commentary on the impact that illegal drugs have had on society. HoN. KWEISI MFUMF (D-MD), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL I am extremely opposed to the concept of legalization. However, it is important that the debate take place. Both sides in the debate agree on one thing: Illicit drugs are tearing our Nation apart. It is estimated that some 23 million Americans use illicit drugs once monthly. A total of 6 million of these people use cocaine. Young people in the United States use illicit drugs more than their counterparts in any other nation of the world. Proponents argue that legalization would remove the profit motive. That may very well be, but drug use is driven by demand and that's where more attention needs to be focused nationally. History shows that drugs made legal for adult consumption cannot be kept out of the hands of children. Under legalization, more children and young people would experiment with drugs, as is the case with alcohol. It has been estimated that about 75 percent of all drug users become addicted. Proponents often point to England and Holland as models for a legalization proposal. But the concept has not worked in either of those two countries. The policy of legalized heroin had to be discontinued in England as the number of heroin users increased and the black market continued to thrive. In Amsterdam, Holland, where marijuana is legal, crime and hard drug use remains a problem. An additional consideration is the threat of babies born to drugaddicted mothers. That probably would be exacerbated under legalization. So would other problems, such as car and train accidents and corruption. The U.S. focus on eliminating the drug problem should expand beyond the one-dimensional effort to stop the supply. More focus should be placed on demand reduction, specifically treatment and rehabilitation. If the United States is fighting a war on drugs, the battlefields are not in Colombia and Bolivia, but rather in our schools and our communities. HON. MICHAEL OXLEY (R-OH), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL The idea of legalization should not even be dignified with a 2-day hearing by the committee. Consideration of the notion of legalization sends a bad message to the rest of the Nation and to the rest of the world. America's teenagers who may be considering experimenting with drugs may see that legalization is being considered and think that it is now OK to use drugs. Legalization is unacceptable in a civilized society. My hope for an outcome to the hearings is that the book on legalization will be closed once and for all. HON. Tom LEWIS (R-FL), SELECT COMMITTEE ON NARCOTICS ABUSE AND CONTROL It is contradictory that those committed to fighting drugs have agreed to give a hearing to the legalization issue. Making drugs more affordable and more available could be detrimental to society. Particularly objectionable is the view of legalization advocates that the government itself can make a profit from the drug trade. Legalizing drug profits and making dealers out of the government and private citizens is appalling. HON. CARROLL HUBBARD, JR. (D-KY) The urban drug problem is well known. But the war on drugs needs to be fought in rural America, as well. The drug problem is acute and serious in outlying areas. In my own congressional district, in western Kentucky, the U.S. Customs Service is aware of the severity of the drug problem. They and the Drug Enforcement Administration know of contraband-carrying flights from Colombia and Mexico that arrive at our rural airports. These small airports are safer for drug dealers than flying into places like New Orleans and Miami. I hope that the Congress will be able to lead the public and our government away from legalization. I hope that those who are proposing legalization would realize that more people would experiment with drugs under Such a plan. In my district, even the schools are not immune to the drug trade. At a grand jury hearing last December in Bowling Green, I testified that there were individuals selling drugs to Western Kentucky University students. My wife and I received death threats as a result of my testimony, in which names were revealed. Like others, I wonder what we can do to increase education about drug abuse, and move as a nation toward a spiritual, rather than chemical, dependence. HON. ROBERT GARCIA (D-NY) Legalization poses dangerous repercussions for the Nation. It cannot be risked. It could not be sustained. The legalization proposal comes at a time when public opinion toward drug abuse is beginning to take a turn for the positive, and after the House has just passed major antidrug legislation to improve on the 1986 antidrug bill. Given the problems we continue to experience with tobacco and alcohol, the risks of legalization are just too great. The biggest concern about legalization is the effect that it would have on America's youth. Legalization would result in the widespread use of drugs, especially among youth. The greatest impact would be felt in minority communities and in the inner city. As long as there are drug users who cannot afford drugs legally, there will be a black market. Unless we legalize all drugs-including crack, PCP, LSD-and unless we make them universally available, there will be crime. Legalization fails to take into account whether special restrictions would have to be placed on pilots, law officers, truck drivers and others in hazardous occupations. It also fails to consider the spread of AIDS through intravenous drug use. HON. Roy DYSON (D-MD) Legalization is a foolhardy and reckless proposal that would have a negative impact on the family. The drug problem has filtered down to rural America. In one of the counties located in my district, the number of drug offenses rose 114 percent from 1986 to 1987. Activists like Timothy Leary, Alan Ginsberg and Jerry Rubin 20 years ago advocated that drug use was okay and should be accepted as a form of escapism from the rough times of the real world. But over the past 20 years, we have seen the personal and financial ruin that drug use brings about. Under legalization, America would become enslaved to drugs. Decriminalization is simply a backdoor way of legalizing narcotics. Legalization would send a bad message. It would increase drug use and addiction. It would result in the expenditure of billions of additional dollars in health care costs and in lost productivity. We must begin teaching our children at an early age about the dangers of harmful drugs. Though education must play a vital role in our antidrug efforts, we must still initiate stiff sanctions against those who grow, use and sell illicit narcotics. HoN. BENJAMIN L. CARDIN (D-MD) In a survey of my Third Congressional District (portions of Baltimore City, Baltimore County and Howard County), 69 percent of the respondents oppose legalization and decriminalization. A war on drugs cannot be won unless the profit is taken out of the drug trade. But decriminalization is not the way to accomplish that. Constituents are saying that our discussions on the national drug debate should also take into account the damage from other harmful substances, such as alcohol and cigarettes. More money should be focused on establishing effective treatment and education programs if a real war on drugs is going to be waged. What is needed is a comprehensive approach combining foreign and domestic policy sensitive to the urgency of interdiction efforts, stricter enforcement, more resources to educate our youth to the dangers of drugs and treatment programs without waiting lists. Summary of Testimony From Thursday, September 29, 1988 MAYOR KURT L, SCHMOKE, BALTIMORE America needs to reexamine its current drug policy. The Nation is spending about $10 billion annually to enforce drug laws that are catching only a fraction of the violators. The drug problem in America is defined in two components: addiction and crime. Law enforcement is unable to resolve either of these two problems and actually has worsened the crime problem. The black market is a result of the manufacture and sale of cocaine being criminalized and profits from drug sale-, are enormous because the substances cannot be obtained legally. Nationwide, there were 750,000 drug arrests in 1987 and Baltimore had 12,000 drug arrests, yet both represent only a fraction of the drug violators. Prisons and jails are packed with drug offenders, One-third of all Federal prisoners are incarcerated on drug offenses. Cigarettes kill hundreds of thousands, but no move has been made to make them illegal. Antismoking campaigns and other Neither PCP nor LSD should be legalized. But a maintenance system involving designated hospitals should be implemented for cocaine and heroin abusers, with the opportunity for abusers to enroll in a treatment program aimed at reducing the intake of either of these drugs down to zero. MAYOR EDWARD I. KOCH OF NEW YORK CITY Mayor Schmoke's proposal to maintain heroin and cocaine addicts is not new. The concept has been tried in Great Britain, and it has failed. Addiction and crime both rose as a result of doctorprescribed drug maintenance in that country. Legally received cocaine could be turned into the derivative crack by mixing in baking soda or some other base in the heating process. This would be a surreptitious way for crack addicts to obtain their fix if cocaine and heroin were legalized and prescribed. Organized crime still, would play a role in drug production and distribution for those who are either underage or cannot get the amount and quality they desire. In Great Britain, 84 percent of the government-registered addicts during that country's heroin maintenance program were discovered to be using other drugs illicitly. With a population of 240 million people and about 6 million regular drug users in that group, drugs still remain unacceptable and drug users remain a sizable minority in the Nation. If legalization were to go into effect, there would be a gradual acceptability that would lead to an increase in users. There is little distinction between decriminalization and legalization, and both are bad ideas that should be opposed. MAYOR DENNIS CALLAHAN OF ANNAPOLIS, MD The most compelling argument for not supporting the notion of legalization comes from the problems our society currently experiences with alcohol. According to the Research Triangle Institute in North Carolina, alcohol abuse costs America about $117 billion annually in medical, property, productivity and other losses. Of this amount, only about $2,5 billion related to law enforcement costs while the rest concerned accidents and other problems associated with the abuse of alcohol. Even marijuana should not be legalized. Advocates for legalizing only this drug claim an overdose of it would only put the user to sleep, but they could be asleep while at the controls of a locomotive or another vehicle. In Alaska, marijuana can be grown legally on private plots and it can be consumed on the premises. A survey of 250,000 high school students done by the Atlanta-based organization, Parents' Resource Institute, indicates that about one in five of those surveyed admitted to smoking marijuana. About one in two of those surveyed in Alaska admitted to smoking marijuana. It appears that the sanctioning of marijuana use has contributed significantly to the much higher usage figure in this State compared to the rest of the Nation. HoN. JACK LAWN, ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION Drugs are not bad because they are illegal. Instead, drugs are illegal because they are bad, and legalization advocates are missing the point in blaming drug laws for the crime and violence that has resulted from the Nation's drug crisis. The problems that we continue to experience with legalized alcohol use provide strong evidence that legalization would be a bad idea. Greater availability results in greater use and greater abuse. The National Council on Alcoholism reports that one of every three American adults contends that alcohol has brought them family trouble. About 100,000 10- and 11- year-olds reported getting drunk once weekly in 1985, and about 100,000 deaths a year in the United States can be attributed to alcoholism. Of that number, 23,000 are killed on highways and cirrhosis of the liver is the sixthleading cause of death in America. The United States is signatory to the Single Convention on Drugs of 1961, and to the Convention of Psychotropic Drugs of 1971. Both these treaties require the country to establish and maintain effective controls on illicit substances. The sanctity of these treaties and U.S. credibility in the international right against drug abuse would be severely damaged if these substances were legalized. Legalization would adversely affect.young people and the crime rate. The American public has said in recent opinion polls that it opposes legalization. Legalization is a simple answer to a complex problem. The answer in fighting the drug crisis comes from focusing more on demand reduction efforts. ARTHUR C. "CAPPY" EADS, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD,NATIONAL DISTRICT ATTORNEYS ASSOCIATION, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, 27TH JUDICIAL CIRCUIT, BELTON, TX The whole notion of legalizing drugs ignores the reason why drugs were made illegal in the first place. They are bad for the user, the community and society as a whole. Drug use often translates into child neglect and abuse, runaways, molestation and other crimes and maladies that result from individuals being under the influence of drugs. It is wrong to assume that funding for enforcement versus funding for treatment and rehabilitation are distinctly different, and that they are competing categories, as both areas must be adequately funded for an effective antidrug strategy. Effective treatment programs are essential in sentencing drug offenders, while sanctions against drug use are critical components of a treatment and prevention strategy. We have yet to implement in the United States, a full- scale attack on the drug problem combining law enforcement, treatment and prevention efforts into an effective strategy. HON. STERLING JOHNSON, JR., SPECIAL NARCOTICS PROSECUTOR, NEW YORK CITY Calls for legalization are borne from frustration with an inadequate response from the executive branch of the government. Unfortunately, not one single piece of antidrug legislation has come from the executive branch of the government. The only major antidrug legislation has come from Congress. It is improbable that heroin addicts could be maintained, as Mayor Schmoke contends. If an addict's habit is maintained at a certain level, over time the level of that addict's habit will rise. The black market would remain in existence under legalization. Further, the matter of whether doctors, pilots and other people in sensitive occupations would be allowed to use legal drugs must be examined closely. Legalized drugs will not stop crime, and the experience with prescribed heroin in Great Britain provides evidence that a downward trend in crime is not necessarily the case of lessened restrictions on drug use. Finally, the concept of free needles, which is supported by Mayor Schmoke and also New York Citv Mayor Koch, is a bad idea. It sends out erroneous signals that conflict with any and all efforts to put an end to the use of harmful illicit drugs. JERALD VAUGHN, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CHIEFS OF POLICE The IACP represents more than 15,000 top-level law enforcement executives in the United States. The group is unequivocally opposed to drug legalization. Overcrowded jails and prisons and loaded court dockets indicate success, rather than failure, of law enforcement in the battle against illicit drugs. Money is not being wasted on law enforcement, as only 3 percent of all expenditures at the Federal, State and local level involve the civil and criminal justice system. A total of 1.4 percent of Government spending goes toward the provision of law enforcement services, and less than 1 percent of the Federal budget is earmarked for law enforcement. Less than 500,000 law enforcement officers are assigned to protect more than 245 million American citizens, and the lead antidrug agency has just 3,000 officers. The IACP, in conjunction with the Justice Department, the Bureau of Justice Assistance and DEA, called together law enforcement authorities from all levels for five drug strategy sessions in 1987. A major finding from those sessions was that crime could be reduced through cooperative community strategies. This information was produced in manual form. The United States has seen fit to protect Americans from substances that may be harmful through the regulation of the sale and distribution of these products. There has lieen little complaint about the infringement on individual rights in the process. It is understood that these products-meats, milk, prescription drugs, serums and vaccines-are regulated because the manufacturer alone cannot be depended upon to put the interests of the consumer ahead of the interests of profit. Legalization is not a realistic option. At best, it is a last resort when all else has truly failed. WILLIAM CHAMBLISS, PH.D., PROFESSOR, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY The drug trade was estimated at about $1 billion a year 50 years ago in 1938. Today, it is valued at somewhere around $130 billion, which is larger than the gross national product of most nations in the world and many multinational corporations, Drug profits remain essential to the survival of organized crime. Churning out these profits and protecting them involves engendering corruption of law enforcement authorities, and this remains an ongoing goal of organized crime, which remains a hazard of trying to stop the flow and use of drugs by criminalizing it. Because of the level of poverty and other factors, it is impossible to expect a complete end to the drug trade even if police were able to arrest each and every drug pusher tomorrow. The costs of enforcing drug laws outweighs the benefits, A new drug policy should first take into account that marijuana should be considered separately from such substances as cocaine and heroin. States that have decriminalized marijuana have had positive experiences as a result. Although the experiment with prescribed heroin in Great Britain has not been totally successful, it is more successful than what the United States has experienced with criminalized heroin. Both heroin and cocaine should be legalized and dispensed by medical professionals. DR. CHARLES R. SCHUSTER, PH.D., DIRECTOR, NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE NIDA is strongly opposed to the legalization of illicit narcotics. First, there are a series of questions-including the many posed by Chairman Rangel-that must be answered before we can even begin to consider something as complicated as legalization. For example, the pharmacological effects of cocaine differ so that it is impossible to consider how much would be considered enough, or a legal limit. Second, there appears to be an attitude readjustment occurring regarding drug abuse. According to the latest national high school survey on drug abuse, drugs are being seen by this group as more dangerous and there is a reporting of more self-abstention from illicit drug use than in other recent high school surveys. In the 1980 survey, 11 percent of the respondents reported daily marijuana use. The 1986-87 survey indicated that figure had dropped to 3.3 percent. As attitudes among adults and teenagers change, so will behavior. What is also needed are more good treatment programs, since we know that effective treatment works. DR. ARNOLD TREBACH, PH.D., FOUNDER, DRUG POLICY INSTITUTE America would be better off if all drug laws were removed today. Americans are at their best when they negotiate settlements, and at their worst when arguments are pushed to the wall. It is absolutely essential that we remove laws restricting use of marijuana and heroin for medicinal purposes. It is also important to begin viewing drug addicts from a different perspective. We should be more concerned about getting them treatment rather than branding them criminals. This would include some form of maintenance, which is admittedly controversial. There should be limited experimentation with recreational drugs. The 1973 Nixon Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse as well as the 1982 report of the National Academy of Sciences suggest an attempt at limited decriminalization or legalization. ADM. JAMES WATKINS, U.S. NAVV (RET.), CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT'S AIDS COMMISSION An emerging problem stemming from rampant drug abuse is that of AIDS. One of the conduits of the deadly HIV virus that leads to AIDS is contact with an individual who is an abuser of drugs intravenously. The IV drug abusers make up only 25 percent of all AIDS victims, but about 70 percent of heterosexual native citizens have contracted the disease from contact with an intravenous drug abuser. About 70 percent of perinatal AIDS cases involve a parent who is either an IV drug abuser or who has a sexual partner who abuses drugs intravenously. More treatment is needed for IV drug abusers. There are some 1.2 million IV drug abusers in the United States, but only about 148,000 are in some form of treatment at any given time. What is needed is a full-scale effort that addresses both supply and demand. During its time as functioning body, the President's AIDS Commission heard testimony regarding the use of needle exchange programs. The overriding opinion of many black leaders who testified at an inquiry held in New York City is that IV drug abuse is killing the black community. However, these same leaders were opposed to needle exchange programs, and view them as a copout answer to a very serious problem. They are considered the first step to full-fledged legalization. The most important thing that can be done to lick the drug problem is to help young people avoid using drugs in the first place. DR. TOD MIKURIYA, M.D., PSYCHIATRIST, BERKELEY, CA It is good to see an increase in public awareness about the dangers of alcohol and tobacco and about the increasing tendency to classify them as drugs of abuse. While we focus heavily on the problems of drugs like cocaine and crack, very little attention has been paid to the problems caused by poisoning from alcohol and tobacco. We need to move closer to acceptance of these substances as dangerous drugs. A comprehensive proposal regarding drug use in America would encompass the following six points: (1) The removal of product liability exemptions for alcohol. (2) The removal of price supports for tobacco. (3) The establishment of a drug users' cooperative. (4) The legalization of home cultivation of cannabis. (5) The disallowance of searches of citizens' homes without a warrant. (6) A testing of those who test others for drug use. JOHN GUSTAFSON, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, NEW YORK DIVISION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES Our agency oversees about 400 local treatment and prevention programs, with a capacity to treat 46,000 people and to provide counseling services to another 17,000. About 22 percent of New York's population has abused some type of substance within the last 6 months. Half of this number abuses drugs on a regular basis. More than 600,000 people art- considered non-narcotic substance abusers and about 260,000 are narcotics addicts. The social and health consequences of legalization would be too great. Legalization advocates are ignoring the seductive properties of drugs like cocaine, which laboratory tests show leave the user craving for more. While alcohol Prohibition may have been a law enforcement failure, it was a success healthwise. During the 1920's, alcohol-related mental illness declined significantly, but shot back up after the repeal of Prohibition in 1933. From 1917 until 1921, New York State made narcotics available through clinics. But that practice was discontinued after it was discovered that many people were supplementing their legal supply with drugs purchased from the black market. This is a lesson for those considering legalization today. We cannot overlook the impact that legalization would have on health and health care systems. Many illicit drugs lead to chronic health problems for users, and this problem would be pronounced under legalization. STEVEN WISOTSKY, PROFESSOR OF LAW, NOVA UNIVERSITY An independent national commission should be set up to take a fresh look at U.S. drug policy. Such a commission should have two fundamental goals: To reduce drug abuse, and to reduce the social problems stemming from the existence of the black market illicit drug trade. A clear definition should be reached and agreed upon in terms of what "the drug problem" in America is. Isit drug use in general? Is it drug use by children and teenagers? Is it drug use that proves to be injurious to others or to the drug users themselves? Is it the black market and the events associated with that market in terms of crime and violence? Detailed studies and polls should be conducted to determine how drugs should be legalized. This should be along the lines of marketing surveys done to prepare for the sale and distribution of other products. For example, focus groups can be set up, and groups of individuals-such as prison volunteers serving life sentences-can be used for tracking the effects of certain drugs and also for gauging the addictive qualities of narcotics. Among the priorities of drug control should be the protection of children, the protection of the safety and health of the public and the preservation of individual liberties in the process. The real moral high ground in finding a Solution to the drug crisis is one that will allow responsible, competent adults to have the freedom of choice so long as they do not intrude on the rights and privileges of others. No drug control policy should affront the Constitution. DR. MITCHELL ROSENTHAL, M.D., PRESIDENT, PHOENIX HOUSE, NEW YORK, NY Drug legalization would increase drug use and would further aggravate all the destabilizing influences that plague societv today. Addiction to illicit drugs has an enormous impact on the character, behavior and values of the abuser. While just as many cigarette smokers have become dependent on that product, the number of cocaine users, the power of cocaine addiction and the amounts that addicts would use if it were readily available and less expensive is ignored by those pushing legalization. Illicit drug use rapidly diminishes one's ability to lead a normal, productive life. Drug abuse causes self- destructive behavior, lowering the self-esteem and creating the potential for violent, antisocial behavior. Projections that drug use would double or even triple under legalization should be taken seriously. The greatest increase would come from those between the ages of 12 and 21 years old. Projections of drug-related deaths post-legalization range from 100,000 to 500,000. The social order will suffer. Drug users are generally irresponsible people whose deviant behavior ranges from destroying relationships to inability to lead productive work lives to crime. All of these possibilities will be raised with legalized drugs. We can realistically expect to overcome the drug crisis with a shifting public attitude and a stronger effort to enforce drug laws on the street. ETHAN NADELMANN, PH.D., ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY Neither legalization nor decriminalization should be considered a surrender. They are the policies that drug dealers fear most. What is legalization? It is a model of analysis. It is a cost benefit analysis of current policies. We have to look at our policy and costs and compare to other systems and figure out which has the most benefits for the money- What is the drug problem? This must be defined before going further. In the 1920's, people did not talk of"the alcohol problem." Instead, they separated the probleminto one of crime--the Al Capone types and their influence on the consumption of alcoholand into another category of alcohol abuse. It was decided that Prohibition was not worth the costs, even if it reduced abuse to a degree. Nevertheless, today the drug problem is not separated as such and "the drug problem" is defined as bothcrime and abuse. We will not be able to move forward until we make the distinction as was made with alcohol in the 1920's. Nearly 20 percent of all State and local resources go to fighting drugs, In Washington, DC, more than half the people in jail are there on drug-related charges, and the figure in New York City is about 40 percent. SUE RUSCHE, NATIONAL DRUG INFORMATION CENTER, FAMILIES IN ACTION It is important that the perspective of families be included in the national debate on legalization. In looking at both the alcohol and cigarette industries they spent more on advertising in the previous year than Congress appropriated to fight the drug crisis. We do not need any more legal industries of this sort amassing large profits in selling their products to our children and to ourselves. Some legalization proponents make the argument that alcohol is legal and is not sold to young people. But alcohol sales to minors are routine as sales clerks fail to ask for identification or look the other way when obviously underage young people make an alcohol purchase. If we cannot expect the alcohol and tobacco industry to prevent sales to minors, then how can we expect a cocaine or opiate industry from doing the same? At the very least, illicit drugs are as harmful as alcohol and tobacco. Fewer people die from them than from alcohol and tobacco because fewer people use them, and fewer people use them because they are illegal. There are 18 million marijuana users compared to 116 million alcohol users; and there are 6 million cocaine users compared to 60 million tobacco users. Alcohol and tobacco are leading killers in the United States. We do not live with alcohol and tobacco, we die with them. It would take two walls like the Vietnam Memorial shrine in Washington, DC to memorialize all those killed by alcohol in a year. It would take 7 to 10 walls to cover all those who die from tobacco. Some say taxes from drugs sales could go toward treatment and education, but no money from the sale of alcohol and tobacco ever goes toward education and treatment for those problems. Legalization would not eliminate profits- They would simply be shifted from the drug traffickers on the street to the people who run legitimate businesses. It is unreasonable to think that drug use would not increase under legalization. A total of 11 States have decriminalized marijuana. From 1972 to 1978, in those States, marijuana use, as a result of the decriminalization, rose 125 percent among young adults, 130 percent among high school seniors, 200 percent among older adults and 240 percent among teenagers. We are beginning to see drug use drop off in this country. We would like to see the Congress create a National Drug Corps similar to the Peace Corps, where parents and children could be trained to give I or 2 years of service fighting drug abuse in their communities. Summary of Testimony From Friday, September 30,1988 DR. DAVID F. MUSTO, M.D., DRUG HISTORIAN, YALE UNIVERSiry Around the turn of the century, drugs such as cocaine, heroin and morphine were legally sold and consumed in the United States, Consumption of these drugs reached a peak around 1890 to 1900. Because of the high rate of consumption and the effects these then-legal narcotics were having on individuals and families, America moved toward enacting laws and controls that have led to today's drug laws. We are currently experiencing our second epidemic with cocaine. The first occurred around the mid 1880's, when this drug was made available in 14 different forms. One could smoke it, rub it on in a salve, inject it, or even sniff it. Cocaine's image as the "All-American tonic" endedaround 1900, when it came to be known as the most dangerous drug in the country. The first congressionally passed legislation regulating cocaine was in 1914, and was called the Harrison Narcotics Act. A key to reducing the demand for drugs will be a changing of the public's attitudes. Those supporting a look-see at legalization must be reminded that there are many things in our society that we do not attempt a look-see because we know in advance it is bad and would lead to worse problems. One of them, for example, is racial discrimination. We ask for laws restricting it because we know it is bad. Ending the drug crisis will be a very gradual thing. It cannot be done in just 2 or 3 years. Drug use in America peaked around 1979, and at that time there was a call for legalization. The argument for legalizing cocaine in the 1970's was that cocaine was a harmless drug unless misused. Today, the argument is that legalizing it will remove the criminal influence. We now see cocaine as bad in itself, and this is a tremendous attitude turnaround that can be used as a foundation for a further decline in cocaine usage. DR. DALE MASI, PROFESSOR, SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK AND COMMUNITY PLANNING, UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND The workplace cannot afford the legalization of illicit drugs. In previous testimony before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, my position was that there was a dramatic need for an increase in industry drug programs in this country. That need is greater today: (1) A majority of illicit drug users are in the workplace. (2) Alcohol is the primary drug of abuse in the workplace. (3) Prescription drugs are the second largest drug of abuse in the workplace. (4) The most recent surveys indicate that 19- to 25-year- olds are the biggest abusers of cocaine, with 25- to 30- year-olds being the second largest group. If cocaine is legalized, it would outdistance both alcohol and prescription drugs as the most abused drug in the workplace. Drug abuse in the workplace translates into escalating health insurance bills. In addition, it contributes to the problems of absenteeism, sick leave, accidents, other rising health costs and more worker compensation claims. More emphasis will have to be placed on companies educating workers about the dangers of drug abuse, as has been the case with tobacco. Few companies, a study by Cook and Harrell shows, have drug education promotion programs. The IBM Corp. stands out as a model for the rest of the industry in the country. Schools of medicine, social work and psychology today rarely require that students take a course in alcohol or drug addiction. Fewer schools of psychology require a course in drug addiction than was the case in 1950. The council on social work education, the accrediting arm for such schools, does not even require that such courses be taught for master's and social work candidates. We need employee assistance programs that concentrate on reaching employees early. New funds are needed for meaningful programs, especially outpatient services. DR. LAWRENCE BROWN, M.D., CLINICAL INSTRUCTOR, DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE, HARLEM HOSPITAL CENTER AND THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS Legalization advocates seem to be motivated by two arguments, One is that current response to the drug crisis has been shamefully inadequate. Number two, legalization appears to represent a reasonable alternative to the current response. Our current policy on drug abuse can be addressed from two angles. We can look at it either from the perspective of those who use drugs, or from the perspective of the consequences of drug use. A most common problem of those admitted to Harlem Hospital for treatment of kidney failure and in need of dialysis is prior drug abuse. Our approach to drug abuse as a nation is that we continue to view it as a stigma, rather than the public health problem that it truly is. It is ridiculous that so little of the educational training involves the study of drug abuse, Professional and health professional schools should be encouraged to try to include drug abuse studies in their curriculums. Existing drug treatment facilities must be improved as well. The least attractive facilities are often allocated for outpatient drug treatment services. An expansion of treatment capability must focus on both quality and quantity. The legalization debate provides the country with an excellent opportunity to reassess Federal drug policy. These discussions will far exceed their potential if they are used to chart a bold new course in responding to America's drug crisis. DAVID BOAZ, VICE PRESIDENT FOR PUBLIC POLICY AFFAIRS, CATO INSTITUTE, WASHINGTON, DC Alcohol did not cause high crime rates in the 1920's. Prohibition of alcohol was the problem. With today's drug crisis, it is not the drugs, but rather the prohibition of these drugs that are causing problems with crime and violence. There are six ways in which drug laws impact negatively on society: (1) Drug laws drive up the price. Users are forced to commit crimes to support their habits. Prohibition pushes some prices as much as 100 times higher than normal. Some experts say half the crime in major cities results from drug prohibition and many policemen will say the same thing if they were free to express themselves honestly. (2) Drug laws cause corruption. The extraordinary profits become an irresistible temptation to policemen. (3) Buyers are forced to come in contact with criminals, unlike those who purchase alcohol without the help of criminal,q because it is no longer illegal. (4) Intense law enforcement forces the creation of stronger, more potent drugs. Crack, for example, is a result of drug prohibition. (5) Civil liberties are abused under drug prohibition. (6) A final negative result of drug prohibition is that it leads to futility. In the case of today's drug crisis, the drug war simply is not working. GLORIA WHITFIELD (RECOVERED DRUG ADDICT), VOCATIONAL REHARILITATION SPECIALIST, REHABILITATION SERVICES ADMINISTRATION) DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA GOVERNMENT, WASHINGTON, DC As a rehabilitation specialist in drug and alcohol abuse, it is frightening to consider what the caseload would be if drugs were legalized. How can anyone with any insight or perception believe that legalizing drugs would be the answer to the drug crisis? If the main reason to legalize drugs is to remove the profit from the criminals and drug traffickers, then it is also saying that the U.S. Government "wants a piece ofthe action." Uncle Sam would become the biggest dope pusherof all time. Generations of young Americans are dying from drug abuse. Minds and motivation are being destroyed. Families are being destroyed. America is being weakened. Legalization could not be accomplished without having to rely on imports. Small, drug-producing countries would soon become superpowers and nations with gross national products inflated by cocaine and heroin production would have access to nuclear warheads. Fraudulent prescriptions are already a big business in the United States. The future for America would be very dim under legalization. Medical schools, laws schools and other institutions of higher learning would not touch students who use drugs, even if they were legal, because it is known that drug users are a detriment to themselves. Under legalization, there would not be enough hospitals to take care of everybody. Doctors and nurses would be in demand like never before. Long lines of dope fiends waiting for a fix or a hit would replace the winos in the streets. Those favoring legalization are being insensitive. Legalization is a further step toward the perpetuation of evil influence over society, rather than a positive step toward resolving some of the criminal problems in society like poverty, insufficient health care, and insufficient education. America should wage a real war against drugs, using any means necessary to prevent it from entering our ports and coming across our borders. RICHARD KAREL, JOURNALIST Across the board legalization is not the answer to the drug crisis that plagues the country today. More dangerous drugs should continue to be prohibited, while less dangerous narcotics be made legally available. During the time that America was under alcohol Prohibition, Great Britain was attacking the alcohol problem through a combination of higher taxes, rationing and limited hours of distribution. When the Volstead Act was repealed, alcohol abuse rose in the United States while Great Britain had already began experiencing a leveling off of alcohol use. Alcohol abuse has remained relatively low since. Recent Studies indicate a decrease in cirrhosis of the liver in the United States despite alcohol being a legal substance. With tobacco, limited restrictions and education have cut sales of this product to minors. Prohibition is neither necessary nor advisable for either of these products. The focus should be on keeping dangerous drugs like crack and PCP away from children, and on preventing clinically controlled drugs from being diverted. This would provide a moral justification for the antidrug activities of law enforcement. PAUL MOORE, DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR, THE SCOTT NEWMAN CENTER, Los ANGELES, CA The Newman Center unequivocally opposes drug legalization. The more time spent debating the issue, the more credibility it receives. Time should be spent developing more sound policies regarding treatment, rehabilitation and prevention. Society seems to be hooked on hyped miracle solutions that look good but would not work. Drugs, drug abuse and the associated crime are all symptoms of deeply rooted problems in our society. Drugs did not invent poverty, broken homes, latchkey children, greed or the human desire for a quick- 'ix. Drugs did not contribute to the general breakdown of moral and ethical values. Without drugs, these problems would not disappear and with drugs they are pronounced. There is a perception that the drug problem can be sanitized through legalization, giving residents of ghettos and barrios all they want so long as they refrain from committing crimes against the rest of society. The threat of legalization is that it stands to send a whole new set of mixed messages to America's youth. Drugs already have a glamorous image. If drugs were legalized, the gains from national efforts of the past decade-such as a decrease in consumption and a change in attitude of the Nation's youth-would be lost. MARVIN MILLER, MEMBER, BOARD OF DIRECTORS, NORML, WASHINGTON, DC Drugs are a problem and they create a tremendous strain on the Nation's financial resources. It is commonly known that there are no funds available for desperately needed educational and training programs. The underground narcotics trade is being allowed to run rampant and control the marketplace. It controls purity as well. All iirugs are, being treated as if they are the same. A combined total of $10 billion is spent annually on State and Federal antidrug efforts. Most of this expenditure goes for enforcing marijuana possession laws. About 40 percent of all drug arrests relate to marijuana. Of the 40-percent figure, 9 of 10 cases involve simple possession. There are some 50 million marijuana smokers in the United States. They are otherwise law-abiding citizens who pay taxes and are productive. The Nation's $10 billion antidrug budget allots only about 5 percent for education programs. No money exists for national education or treatment programs. NORML has put together a bill to make marijuana available legally as a controlled and regulated substance. An administrative law judge has ruled that marijuana is the most benign substance known to man. It is not addictive. It does not generate violence. The Nation should look at new ways to battle the drug crisis. Not every drug can be legalized, yet at the same time, 50 million marijuana using Americans should not be branded criminals. RAY WHITFIELD (RECOVERED DRUG ADDICT), DRUG ABUSE CONSULTANT, WASHINGTON, DC Legalization is not a positive proposal. It is based on what may be a false assumption, that legalization is a proposal intended to reduce drug abuse. Drug-related murders would not necessarily decrease as a result of legalization. Drug-related murder should take into account drug related death, which is less glamorous, but also a tragic consequence of drug abuse. Many in our society have turned to drug abuse simply because they are hopeless and helpless. Drugs ease the pain of their reality. Many people have lived lives much worse than what the criminal justice system can mete out. The Nation's Government has been duplicitous in dealing with the drug crisis. While Government does not officially sanction drug use, it has pushed policies that contribute to it-such as the lack of antidrug education and treatment centers in ghettos during the 1940's, 1950's and 1960's, and the closing of the only two Federal treatment centers in Lexington, KY and Texas. Drugs generally have not been considered a national problem so long as there was the perception that it was a problem of minoritics and poor whites. Middle and upper income individuals, meanwhile, generally have looked at cocaine as a suitable, nonaddictive drug. Now that cocaine and its negative consequences have reached suburbia, it is a national problem. This is duplicity. Drug abuse is not the root problem. It is a very destructive symptom of other maladies. SENAT0R JOSEPH GALIBER, NEW YORK STATE ASSEMBLY In the last 20 years or so, little or nothing has happened in terms of solving the Nation's drug crisis. I introduced a bill in the State assembly earlier this year to set up a commission to study legalization and decriminalization in the State of New York. America has always been the noble experiment on freedom that other nations around the world have looked to as an example. But now, out of frustration, Americans are beginning to espouse violations of freedoms and civil liberties as the answer to this frustration. Drug trafficking must be eliminated through the legalization of narcotics. Responsible officials are suggesting arming our police with more powerful weapons. They have suggested shooting down suspicious planes. They have called for a doubling of agents and resources, martial law and the death penalty for drug traffickers. We fail to realize the coexistence of two separate problems regarding the Nation's drug crisis. There is drug abuse and there is drug trafficking. It is the trafficking that causes shootouts, raids, deaths and injuries. If all drugs were legalized right now and given away free, then the traffickers would cease coming in immediately. The profit would be gone. Drug abuse would not be eliminated under legalization, but the horrible problems associated with the drug trade would be gone. The questions posed by Chairman Rangel can be answered in the context of the alcohol industry: Question. What narcotics and drugs would be legalized? Answer. All. Question. Who would be allowed to buy these narcotics? Would there be an age limit? Answer. The same limitations as those for purchasing alcohol. Question. Would we sell drugs to people who just want to experiment and encourage them to pick up the habit? Answer. We would sell drugs in the same fashion and with the same restrictions as the selling of alcohol. Question. Where would these drugs be sold? Answer. In the same places and under the same controls as alcohol, Question. Where would we obtain our supply of these legal drugs? Answer. In the same way that there are manufacturers of alcohol. Do you for one minute think the tobacco industry has not put together long ago contingency plans to produce marijuana cigarettes when legalization becomes a reality? Question. Would private industry be allowed to participate in this market? Answer. Of course. In the same way as in alcohol. Question. If drugs would become legal, would we allow pilots, railroad workers and nuclear plant employees to use them? Answer. Do we permit them to use alcohol? Question. If drugs were legalized, how would we back up our argument with our children and youth that drugs are harmful? Answer. In the same way that we do with alcohol. The Volstead Act, which made liquor illegal, created violence, warfare, bloodshed, corruption, illicit dealers and sellers on a sale that was unprecedented until now. Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past by continuing to escalate a war which is totally unnecessary. ADDITIONAL VIEWS OF HON. LARRY SMITH OF FLORIDA Legalization will not alleviate the drug problem. Drugs such as heroin and cocaine destroy both the mind and the body. The new form of cocaine known as crack or rock is highly addictive. Legalizing drugs would be the same as admitting that we, as a people and society, cannot control our actions and prefer self-destruction. Who among us wants the U.S. Government to be in the business of distributing cocaine, heroin, PCP or any other killing, brutalizing substance? Very few people believe that legalized drugs would reduce the impact of drug abuse on society. Such a proposal might eliminate some of the existing criminal element involved in drug trafficking, but it would not stop somebo4y (whether the government, tobacco companies, or pharmaceutical companies) from profiting from the human misery associated with drug use and abuse. If we would not legalize drugs for juveniles (and we would not), a flourishing market would still exist to sell to them illegally. What about crime? If we distribute or make legal drugs that cloud the mind or remove inhibitions, does anyone believe that there will be less crime? Does anyone believe that people who are on only a fixed ration of free or legal drugs will not want more and that someone will sell it to them illegally? And that to pay for those extra" drugs the drug users will notcommit crimes? Congress should do everything it can to eliminate drug trafficking and drug abuse. The task will not be easy, but that does not mean that we cannot try to alleviate this devastating problem. Legalization would be the easy way out, but it would not solve the underlying problem. LARRY SMITH. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-28IA031-000655-B046-205http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/anahord.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115110 text/html 2380HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:51:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:23 GMTContent-length: 2163 The Anaheim Park Ordinance on drugs The Anaheim Park Ordinance In our continuing effort to bring to you the news on thisissue, we ran across the following item. It seems that the cityof Anaheim, California (Disneyland, USA) decided to pass anordinance banning anyone who had ever been convicted of a drugoffense from visiting a public park. I could go on for hoursdescribing all the reasons this is a really dumb idea, but let itsuffice to say that the ordinance was repealed after the localprobation officers complained that their office was right acrossfrom a park and the ordinance would mean that many of the peoplethey had to deal with would have no place to sit while waitingfor their appointments. Just another outstandingly dumb approach to the drug problem. Excerpts of AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF ANAHEIM 13.08.100 EXCLUSION FROM RUSTIC PARKS .010 No person shall enter or remain in any public park whohas been convicted of unlawful sale, or possession for sale, of any controlled substance (as defined in Health andSafety Code Section 11007), regardless of whether the offenseoccurred in the City of Anaheim or in another jurisdiction. ... .020 No person shall enter or remain in any public park whohas been convicted of unlawful use, possession or being under theinfluence, of any controlled substance (as defined in health andSafety Code Section 11007), if the conviction was based onconduct which occurred, wholly or partly, in any public park,regardless of whether such park is in the City of Anaheim ... CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-29IA031-000655-B046-228http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/solom1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115122 text/html 5025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:51:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:48 GMTContent-length: 4808 Drugs and the Internet Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy DRUGS AND THE INFORMATION SUPERHIGHWAY [Page: E2111] HON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEW YORK in the House of Representatives Thursday, October 6, 1994 Mr. SOLOMON. Mr. Speaker, it was recently brought to myattention that drug legalization advocates are using theelectronic information superhighway to organize the legalizationmovement and share information on drug use. The informationsuperhighway was certainly not created to propagate suchmisinformation and the criminal activity associated with it. Thisuse was brought to my attention by drug legalization opponentswho use the information superhighway everyday in their vocations. Apparently, the National Organization for the Reform ofMarijuana Laws recently entered remarks which I personally madein opposition to drug legalization on this House floor as anexample of `rabid, right-wing prohibitionist propaganda.' BecauseI believe, along with 95 percent of America, that the use ofillicit drugs is wrong, I was singled out as an enemy of drugusers. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am honored. The use of illegal drugs inan anathema to the social and moral fabric of our Nation.President Reagan's and President Bush's `War on Drugs ' waspremised on the belief that society was better served andprotected if our Nation universally and actively opposed druguse. This program worked as planned. The use of cocaine,marijuana, heroin, and most other illegal drugs declined. OurNation's young children and teenagers who grew up during the1980's were told and made aware of the evils and the hardshipsassociated with drug use. I fear for the kind of message thechildren growing up in the 1990's are receiving. Pro-drug use andlegalization messages on the information superhighway throughInternet are wrong. I was appalled to learn that this information even includessuch things as tips on growing marijuana and ways to evade lawenforcement. As more and more Americans jump onto this latesttechnological advancement, more and more citizens will haveaccess to this ill-advised information. For example, theinformation superhighway is now available in most elementary andsecondary schools and in many American homes. Now elementarystudents like my own grandson can obtain valuable informationabout an obscure nation in the South Pacific during a socialstudies class and then flip a screen to discover the glories ofdrug use and criminal activity. Drug legalization advocates from all over the country areusing this universal technology to further their movement anddeceive more Americans. As Congress reviews this very importanttechnology during the 104th Congress, the use of this service bypro-drug organizations and individuals for the propagation ofthis ilk must be addressed. As a nation founded on the freedomsof speech and press, the rights of life, liberty, and the pursuitof happiness must not be trampled by the disease of illegal drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B40-30IA031-000655-B046-251http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/solom2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115140 text/html 7879HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:51:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:44 GMTContent-length: 7662 Drug Decriminalization In Holland Has Increased Crime andAddiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug Policy DRUG DECRIMINALIZATION INHOLLAND HAS INCREASED CRIME AND ADDICTION [Page: E499] HON. GERALD B.H. SOLOMON OF NEW YORK in the House of Representatives Thursday, March 2, 1995 A Note to Readers: If you want some currentinformation, direct from Europe, to compare with Mr. Solomon'sstatements here, take a look at DrugText Europe. Mr. SOLOMON. Mr. Speaker, let me commend to you the followingarticle written by a distinguished doctor and chairman of theInternational Drug Strategy Institute, Eric A. Voth, M.D. Dr.Voth advocates retaining tough drug laws to guard against risingcrime and experimentation. Citing Holland as an example, thelegalization of drugs has resulted in greatly increased crime andaddiction. The only way to combat the increase of drug use inthis country is to stand firm against recent attempt by prodruggroups to mute public awareness. These groups attempt to disguisethe dangers of drug abuse and consequently jeopardize futuregenerations. REPEATING HISTORY'S MISTAKES The international drug policy debate rages regarding decisionswhether to fundamentally change drug policy toward legalizationor decriminalization of drug use, or to remain with restrictivepolicies. If we examine two examples of softening of drug policy,we will find ample reason to continue with restrictive policy. In the mid to late 1970's during the Carter administration,drug policy visibly softened. Several states decriminalizedmarijuana, and in fact Alaska legalized marijuana. Drug policy`specialists' in their infinite wisdom supported the flawedconcept called `responsible use' of drugs as a way that userscould maintain personal use of drugs and avoid the ravages ofaddiction and physical problems. Permissive drug policy originated with organizations like theNational Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. PresidentCarter's drug policy advisor Peter Bourne, as well as others likeArnold Trebach, Mathea Falco, Peter Reuter, Mark Kleiman helpedto press for the lenient policy. Interestingly, during that time the use of marijuana and otherdrugs drastically increased. Use also increased in adolescentsdespite the fact that drugs never become legal or decriminalizedfor that age group. The use of marijuana among high schoolstudents in Oregon during decriminalization was double that ofthe national average. National averages of marijuana use amonghigh school seniors increased to 50% of seniors having used inthe previous year, and 10.7% used daily. Ultimately, parents began to object to the rampant use ofdrugs , especially marijuana, among their children. In the early1980's the `parents' anti-drug movement began. Because of thedrastic failure of lenient drug policies, steady pressure wasexerted at national and local levels for restrictive drugpolicies. A huge national wave of high quality research,grassroots prevention organizations, and tightening of drug lawsbegan. Predictably, the use of drugs among `recreational' usersdropped. High school seniors use of marijuana dropped to 23% ofseniors using within the last year and 2% using on a daily basis.The use among hard addicts did not drop. Strangely the cry hasbeen sounded by some that the drug war did not work. That outcry,however, was almost exclusively being sounded by individuals whofavored legalization or decriminalization back in the 1970's. Thesame individuals who called for soft policy in the earlier eraare calling for the new harm reduction policy today. Hiddenwithin such policy is the intent to gain decriminalization ofdrugs . Holland has decriminalized drugs and tried harm reduction.Since the softening of drug policy there, shootings haveincreased 40%, robberies 62%, and car thefts 62%. This experimentwhich was meant to decrease organized crime has resulted in anincrease in organized crime families from 3 in 1988 to 93 today. The number of registered marijuana addicts has risen 30% andthe number of other addicts has risen 22%. The major difference between today and the 1970's is that theprolegalization effort is more organized and better funded. Themillionaire Richard Dennis from Chicago has given millions to thedrug legalization effort. Billionaire George Soros has given $6million to the Drug Policy Foundation to help seek legalizationof drugs . He created the Open Society Fund which in turn fundsMathea Falco's Drug Strategies organization. Steadily, thesegroups put a happy and acceptable face on the idea of druglegalization or decriminalization. Their public relation campaign has softened public attitudes.Moves such as full page ads in national newspapers suggestingalternatives to drug policy are examples. Organized efforts atsuch ideas as hemp as a fiber alternative, medical marijuana,needle exchanges, therapeutic LSD, and others pervade the media.The Internet is bristling with pro-drug talk groups discussingrecent drug experiences and how and where to obtain drugs . In the face of these facts, the holdovers from the 70's drugpolicy makers are still asking for lenient drug laws. Asubstantial number of today's addicts started their use under thelenient policies of the 1970's. We have had our experience withdecriminalization, and it is time that we recognize it and putthat concept to bed. The only hope for drug policy is a concerted effort of drugprevention which upholds the notion of no drug use, druginterdiction, and drug treatment. If we soften our hold on analready vexing problem, we will lose the war. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Miscellaneous Statementson Drug PolicyWT01-B40-31IA031-000655-B046-315http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/ahmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115224 text/html 3786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:52:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:39 GMTContent-length: 3569 America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &Organized Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Overview of America's Habit Chapter I - The Impact of the DrugTrade Chapter II Portrait of DrugProduction and Use Chapter III Part 1: Drug Trafficking andOrganized Crime Part 2: Marijuana Trafficking Chapter IV Part 1: Federal Drug Strategy:Origins, Evolution, and Current Status Part 2: Federal Drug Abuse Policy:1981-Present Chapter V Drug Enforcement, Policy,and Reducing Drug Demand Chapter VI Part 1: Current Supply Strategies:Analysis and Recommendations Part 2: Interdiction Chapter VII Reducing the Demand forDrugs Chapter VIII Summary ofRecommendations Consultant Paper: Data and AnalysisRequirements for Policy Toward Drug Enforcement and OrganizedCrime Consultant Paper: Recommendationsfor the Regulation of Selected Chemicals and Controlled SubstanceAnalogs Consultant Paper: Part 1: DrugPolicy and Organized Crime Consultant Paper: Part 2: TheImpact of the Legitimate Drug System Consultant Paper: Winning the WarAgainst Drugs Consultant Paper: Preventing DrugAbuse: What Can We Do? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications WT01-B40-32IA031-000653-B002-281http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhab1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133458 text/html 5401HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:34:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:35 GMTContent-length: 5184 Overview of America's Habit Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Overview of America's Habit This is the final report from President's Commission onOrganized Crime. It contains material on the nature, scope andextent of organized crime, particularly as it relates to drugtrafficking, money laundering, and labor racketeering. The President's Commission on Organized Crime The President's Commission on Organized Crime was establishedby Executive Order 12435 July 28, 1983. The Executive Orderdirects the Commission to: Make a full and complete national and region-by-region analysis of organized crime; Define the nature of traditional organized crime as well as emerging organized crime groups, the sources and amounts of organized crime's income, and the uses to which organized crime puts its income; Develop in-depth information on the participants in organized crime networks; Evaluate Federal laws pertinent to the effort to combat organized crime; Advise the President and the Attorney General with respect to its findings and actions which can be undertaken to improve law enforcement efforts directed against organized crime; Make recommendations concerning appropriate administrative and legislative improvements and improvements in the administration of justice; and Report to the President from time to time as requested, and to submit its final report by March 1, 1986. The Commission is authorized to issue subpoenas for thetestimony of witnesses and the production of information, toissue orders compelling testimony over a claim of the privilegeagainst self-incrimination, and to seek the assistance of theDepartment of Justice in applying for writs of habeas corpus adtestificandum or judicial orders requiring testimony or theproduction of information before the Commission. In addition, theCommission may obtain, use, and disclose electronic surveillancedata obtained by law enforcement agencies under Title III of theOmnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, and otherinformation from Federal departments and agencies under the BankSecrecy Act and the Privacy Act of 1974, as well as fromfinancial institutions under the Right to Financial Privacy Act. In the discharge of its responsibilities, the Commission hasprepared this report on organized crime's role in drugtrafficking and drug abuse. Based on the totality of the evidencebefore it, the Commission has concluded that drug trafficking andabuse together constitute the single most serious organized crimeissue confronting this Nation. Therefore, in contrast to the other subjects covered in theremainder of it's final report, this topic is treated in aseparate volume. The research and drafting on this report wasperformed on the Commission's behalf by Chief Investigator ManuelGonzalez (FBI). Research assistants Abigail Johnson and MaryKarol, Deputy Counsel Kevin McEnery, Investigator Thomas Sheehan(DEA), and Contract Consultant Susan Mellody, under thesupervision of Deputy Executive Director Rodney G. Smith. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's HabitsWT01-B40-33IA031-000653-B002-293http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133507 text/html 12344HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:34:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:31 GMTContent-length: 12126 Chapter I The Impact of the Drug Trade Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter I The Impact of the Drug Trade Drug trafficking is the most serious organized crime problemin the world today. The drug trade generates billions of dollarsfor organized crime each year, imposing incalculable costs onindividuals, families, communities, and governments worldwide.But drug trafficking is only part of a broader, unifiedphenomenon, which also includes the illicit use of drugs. It isdrug users who finance organized crime through their drugpurchases, and it is they who must accept responsibility for thebroad range of costs associated with the drug industry. Drug abuse ruins individual lives, drains billions of dollarseach year from American society, and erodes the nation's qualityof life. The violence and corruption that are an integral part oforganized crime drug trafficking take the lives of American andforeign officials and private citizens, undermine drug controlefforts, and threaten entire governments. To the extent that thestability of friendly nations is threatened, particularly in thishemisphere, our own national security is jeopardized. The impactof organized crime and drug trafficking on society thus hasfar-ranging consequences, from the mental or physical destructionof the individual drug user to questions of national security. This Commission has found drug trafficking to be the mostwidespread and lucrative organized crime activity in the UnitedStates. According to this Commission's survey of local lawenforcement agencies, marijuana, cocaine, and dangerous drugtrafficking are the three primary activities of organized crimegroups, as defined by local agencies, nationwide. Drugtrafficking accounts for almost 38 percent of all organized crimeactivity across the country and generates an income estimated tobe as high as $110 billion. A concept fundamental to this report is the dual nature of thedrug phenomenon: drug supply and drug demand are mutuallydependent aspects of a single global problem. All strategic andtactical evaluations in this report have been arrived at in thiscontext, and it is imperative that the planning undertaken bythis government and its allies be performed within the sameframework. The gaps that now exist between strategists who seekto reduce supply and planners who want to reduce demand must beclosed. The situation confronting us is a crisis both nationallyand internationally. Our response can be no less than nationaland international mobilization. As this report sets out indetail, the menace of drugs is not restricted to a particularsegment of society, but is now of a scope and severity that is athreat to our national security and therefore a legitimatenational security issue. The appropriate response must therefore involve our entiresociety, not just our law enforcement and health professionals.Parents, educators, employers, the legal profession, financialinstitutions, the military, and the diplomatic and intelligencecommunities must all recognize that we are in a nationalemergency. Military strategists have warned and painful nationalexperience confirmed that a war must not be fought without aclear notion of the victory sought. In this war on drugs - aphrase worn by use but nevertheless the only accurate descriptionof what must be done - this Commission has adopted a definitionof victory: the dramatic reduction, if not complete elimination,of drug abuse in this society. The ultimate goal is a distantone, to be sure, requiring patience, determination and vision. Noless an objective is acceptable. Short fixes, compromises, andresignation are a breach of faith with ourselves, our children,and generations to come. Just as we must clearly define victory, so must we identifythe enemy. Here again, there is no room for compromise. We mustunite against drugs themselves, and anyone who is their ally.Producers, refiners, smugglers, and sellers, all those we know as"traffickers," are obvious targets. It is ourobligation to look further and recognize that those among us -friends, relatives, colleagues, and other "respectable"people - whose small, personal drug purchases at the base of theconsumption pyramid are the driving force behind the traffickers'assault on this country. It is the consumer's dollars that cometogether to finance the organized crime drug traffickingdescribed in this report, and it is thus their responsibility andours to confront this truth. This means an end to tolerance ofdrug use at every level of society. While all drug trafficking, by its nature, requires somedegree of organization, it is essential for the purposes of thisreport to identify the threshold at which the organizationinherent in drug trafficking can be distinguished from organizedcrime drug trafficking. The Commission's definition of organizedcrime, which sets out the six characteristics of organized crimegroups, is helpful in making this distinction. Thesecharacteristics are: continuity, structure, defined membership,criminality, violence, and power as its goal. These elements,together with a reliance on the "buffer" that thisCommission has found to be an integral part of organized crime,are common to the world's most notorious traffickingorganizations. This report examines the organized crime groups that trafficin illicit drugs. To the extent necessary to grasp the dynamicsof worldwide drug traffic, it also details the nature of thedrugs themselves. It describes the array of enforcement agenciescurrently in place, analyzes their various strategies andtactics, and presents specific recommendations for more effectiveanti-drug efforts. In the portion of this report devoted to efforts to reduce thesupply of illicit drugs, "Supply Strategies," it isclear that our law enforcement and other government agencies,particularly on the Federal level, are deployed with a degree ofdetermination, imagination, and resource commitment unparalleledin American history. This government must continue to pursuestrategies to reduce supply with all possible vigor, or it is thegovernment's obligation to do all within its power to protect itscitizens, no matter how formidable the foe. Nevertheless, if thedemand for illicit drugs continues at its present voraciouslevel, improvements in the area of reducing supply will continueto be slow, expensive, infrequent, and too often only temporary. This report places great emphasis on the need for completenational resolve in this area and for that resolve to betranslated into fully coordinated governmental action.Compartmentalization and parochialism, which have been far toocommon in past efforts, must be brought to an end. In thisregard, we are at a particularly propitious moment in history.The slow and painful evolution of our strategy has finallyachieved a centralized authority for our national effort: theNational Drug Enforcement Policy Board. Not just another advisorybody, this Board is a true congregation of every component of ournational government's anti-drug effort. It provides the means forachieving a thoroughly coordinated national attack on everyaspect of drug trafficking and abuse. It is vital that the PolicyBoard move effectively, thoughtfully and decisively, but it ismost urgent that it move. Indecisiveness are signals inthemselves, the wrong signals, to drug traffickers, users,concerned parents, health and social planners, and even foreigngovernments. Perhaps most critically, indecisiveness and delayare the wrong signals to those U.S. governmental agencies thatmust choose where anti-drug efforts will fall on the list ofcompeting priorities in a time of hardening fiscal austerity. Byaction, not mere promises, the Policy Board must send the propermessage: we are in a fight for our lives, and every agency mustarrange its priorities accordingly. Our strategies to reduce supply will require not onlydedication, but patience and objectivity. The war against drugswill not be won until individuals stop using them. Strategies toreduce supply can do no more than hold the line against illegaldrugs while public attitudes and private choices change. That isnot to say that our enforcement strategies should not beaggressive and persistent. On the contrary, this report makesclear that there is much in this area that is being done andshould continue, and much more that might be done. Many of thespecific recommendations in this report are devoted to thistheme. What is necessary at the outset, however, is anunderstanding that such efforts must not be judged by anunrealistic standard. As long as this society is willing toprovide its enforcement agencies scarcely more than a penny forevery dollar our citizens squander on illicit drugs, it has noright and no reason to expect more. Ultimately, the curse of drug abuse will be broken, but onlyby a nationwide dedication to persistent and unyielding assaultson both supply and demand. The supply is already under siege byour enforcement, diplomatic, and intelligence communities.Because an end to consumption is our ultimate goal, it is aconcerted and direct attack on demand that must be mounted. Illicit drugs are an attack upon the integrity, character, andhealth of the individual. Although discussions of drugs are oftenframed in terms of costs to society and society's responses, thefact is that individuals, not societies, take drugs. It is theindividual user who finances all of the violence, corruption, anddegradation that this report describes. The powerful,sophisticated, and thoroughly evil organized crime drugtrafficking groups described herein are a reflection of nothingmore than our self-destructiveness. It is as a result ofindividual acts of will that such groups came to be and aresustained, and it is by individual acts of will that they willfinally be defeated. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-34IA031-000653-B002-315http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133518 text/html 42390HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:35:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:26 GMTContent-length: 42172 Portrait of Drug Production and Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter II Portrait of Drug Production and Use Cocaine Scope of the Problem Once considered a fashionable drug for the wealthy, cocaineand its deleterious effects are now beginning to be betterunderstood. In the past scientists made a clear distinctionbetween physical and psychological drug dependence, but thehealth and social consequences of cocaine use have demonstratedthat the two courses lead to the same end: cocaine, like otheraddictive drugs, ruins lives and kills. Widely available acrossthe United States, cocaine is now used by individuals of allsocioeconomic groups. The cocaine industry generates an estimated$11 billion in illicit income annually, and it is growing.Cocaine production, importation to the United States andconsumption have all increased significantly in recent years. Thecocaine industry is fueled by the approximately 25 millionAmericans who have tried cocaine, of which five to six millionuse it at least once per month. Of the regular users, it isestimated that almost half may be considered addicted. Althoughthe total number of users appears to have leveled off in the lastfew years, cocaine consumption has increased 12 percent between1983 and 1984, from 50-68 metric tons to 55-76 metric tons. Ascocaine consumption has increased, so too have more dangerousforms of use of the drug and the deleterious effects associatedwith it. Cocaine-related deaths increased 77 percent from 1983 to1984 and cocaine-related emergency room visits increased 51percent. Requests for treatment for cocaine use have increased600 percent during the past three years. In 18 states, cocaine isreported as the primary drug of abuse for clients in treatmentfacilities. There is no indication that without a comprehensiveeffort at reduction of both the supply of and demand for cocaine,the increases in cocaine use or its deleterious medical andsocial effects will subside in the near future. From a lawenforcement perspective, the consequences of this tolerance andaddiction are the intense, steady and increasing demand for theproduct, which generates vast revenues for organized crime.Today's Cocaine User The cocaine industry is sustained by the appetite of thecocaine user. With the possible exception of marijuana, cocaineis used by a wider demographic cross-section of society than anyother controlled substance. Facts demonstrate that the popularbelief that cocaine use is restricted to the wealthy is a myth.For example, a study of 6,406 males arrested for serious crimesand processed in New York City's Manhattan Central Booking policeoffice in 1984 reveals that 42 percent tested positively forcocaine in their system, the drug most frequently detected. Theuse of cocaine in combination with other drugs appears to beincreasing. Fifty-nine percent of the cocaine-related deaths in1984 involved other drugs, particularly alcohol, heroin and PCP.In addition, more dangerous routes of cocaine administration arenow being used. Use of "speedballs," injections ofheroin and cocaine, which are often lethal, increased 37 percentfrom 1983 to 1984. Smoking of coca paste and base, forms ofconsumption with particularly dangerous health consequences, havealso increased. Surveys of cocaine users demonstrated there is no"typical" cocaine user. Results of a 1983 survey ofcallers to the national 800-COCAINE hotline indicate that theaverage caller was a 31-year old, white, middle class male withat least some college education and a job with an annual salaryexceeding $25,000. Results of the 1985 survey of callers to thehotline reveal that more women, minorities and adolescents calledthan just two years earlier, and 73 percent of callers in 1985reported an income of less than $25,000 per year. While almosthalf of the calls to the hotline in 1983 came from the northeast,calls were fairly evenly geographically distributed in 1985. Justas it has spread geographically and to different socioeconomicgroups, cocaine use has increased among certain age groups. Mostalarmingly, an increase in adolescent use of cocaine has beenreported in the 1984 and 1985 surveys of drug use among highschool seniors. The surveys found that current use of cocaineamong respondents climbed from 4.9 percent in 1983 to 5.8 percentin 1984, and to 6.7 percent 1985. According to the surveys,annual and lifetime use of cocaine also increased. HealthConsequences of Cocaine Use One reason that use of cocaine is sowidespread is because of the properties of the drug itself.Cocaine is derived from the leaves of the coca plant(Erythroxylon coca) and has been identified by Dr. Donald IanMacDonald, administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse and MentalHealth Administration, as one of the most powerfully addictivesubstances known to man. Cocaine is a stimulant traditionallyused to produce euphoria. Other initial effects, however,typically include excitation, increased alertness, insomnia, lossof appetite, increased heart rate, increased respiration andincreased blood pressure after even one use. Death can alsoresult from first time use as discussed below. Repeated use ofcocaine can cause chronic fatigue, convulsions, depression,irritability, loss of sex drive, memory problems, nasal bleeding,paranoia, severe headaches, increased body temperature and death.These symptoms are neither theoretical nor infrequent. Chroniccocaine use causes tolerance, withdrawal symptoms and addiction.Tolerance is evidenced by the fact that chronic cocaine usersneed to increase their dosage of cocaine to achieve the sameeffects as lower dosages. As dosage increases, the effect ofcocaine use become more pronounced. According to cocaineresearcher Dr. Reese T. Jones, "The existence of a truewithdrawal syndrome following cocaine use seems compelling."This syndrome includes "depression, social withdrawal,craving, tremor, muscle pain, eating disturbance,encephalographic changes and changes in sleep patterns." The addictive nature of cocaine and its toxicity have beendocumented in both animal studies and human experience. Accordingto the results of a study reported in the July 5, 1985 issue ofthe Journal of the American Medical Association, 90 percent ofrats self-administering cocaine intravenously died within 30days, while the mortality rate for rats self-administering heroinwas only 36 percent. The study found that rats using cocaine lostup to 47 percent of their body weight, ceased grooming themselvesand deteriorated in general health. Several rats experiencedseizures, but immediately self-administered more cocaine afterthe cessation of convulsions. The study concludes that in regardto human cocaine use: As the intake of cocaine increases and theconcentration of this compound becomes greater (through theavailability of higher-purity drugs, by IV injections or by'free-basing') the number of fatalities associated with cocaineabuse is likely to increase. Hundreds of fatalities each year areassociated with cocaine use. According to Dr. Mark Gold, directorof research at Fair Oaks Hospital in New Jersey: "We have noway of predicting who'll die from the drug and who won't. Itcould be a regular user or it could be a first-time user."Although overdose is the primary cause of cocaine deaths, deathcan also result after a regular cocaine user takes the sameamount of the drug that he usually takes. This phenomenon isknown as "kindling" and is not well understood byscientists. According to Miami's Deputy Chief Medical ExaminerDr. Charles Wetli, "What was a safe dose one day becomes afatal dose the next." The precise cause of cocaine-relateddeaths, regardless of dosage, include respiratory failure,cerebral hemorrhage, cardiac arrest or seizures. Because cocaineincreases blood pressure and heart rate, individuals withcardiovascular problems are at particular risk. Cocaine'stendency to induce convulsions also creates special risks forepileptics. Death by cocaine is often preceded by anxiety,hallucinations, high body temperature and seizures. One commonmyth about cocaine is that addiction and death cannot result fromintranasal use, or "snorting," which is the most commonroute of administration. While cocaine deaths are usuallyassociated with intravenous use, coroners have documented casesof death from intranasal use of cocaine. One particular dangerassociated with intravenous use of cocaine, or any drug, isinfection. Hepatitis and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome(AIDS) have both been associated with intravenous drug use.Cultivation The cultivation, refinement and trafficking necessaryto bring cocaine from the fields of South America to the streetsof the United States obviously requires organization. Coca bushesare grown primarily in the South American countries of Peru,Bolivia and Colombia. The plants are first harvested as early as18 months after planting, and can usually be harvested from threeto four times annually for up to 20 years. The cultivation ofcoca has increased significantly in recent years, primarily as aresult of the cultivation of new coca plants and the maturationof previously existing coca plants. Notwithstanding increased lawenforcement pressure in Colombia, the tremendous profitsassociated with cocaine trafficking have encouraged the spread ofcoca cultivation throughout the region. Processing In arelatively simple chemical process, coca leaves are convertedfirst to cocaine paste, then base, then cocaine hydrochloride(HCl), the form of coca most commonly abused in this country. Theconversion of leaf to paste to base usually occurs near thecultivation site. The dried leaves are first moistened in analkaline solution and then soaked in kerosene. The kerosene isremoved leaving a cocaine precipitate. This in turn is filtered,producing a paste. The paste is dissolved in a solution ofsulfuric acid and then potassium permanganate. This mixture isthen filtered, ammonium hydroxide is added and the precipitatethat forms is coca base. Traditionally, base has been smuggledout of Peru and Bolivia by small aircraft or boats to Colombia,where most of the refining from base to HCl takes place. Innumerous cocaine laboratories in the jungles of Colombia, cocabase is transformed into pure cocaine HCl by adding ether andacetone, and filtering this mixture, which is then dried. Toproduce one kilo of pure cocaine, approximately 500 kilos of cocaleaves are needed. The pattern of processing and transshipment issomewhat different from that of cultivation. In the area ofrefining and smuggling cocaine, it is estimated that 75 percentof the drug available in the United States comes from Colombia,15 percent from Bolivia, 5 percent from Peru and 5 percent fromEcuador, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. However, these figures aresubject to frequent changes because of the mobility of drugtraffickers. For example, while most of the conversion to HCltakes place in Colombia, and other South American countries, anincreasing number of cocaine laboratories are being seized in theUnited States. Six such laboratories were seized here in 1982, 11in 1983, 21 in 1984 and 25 during the first half of 1985. Reasonsfor this trend include increased law enforcement in Colombia andthe increasing cost of ether and acetone in Colombia. The cost ofthese chemicals has increased as a result of controls imposed bythe Colombian government on their importation and sale and aconcerted effort initiated by the U.S. Drug EnforcementAdministration to disrupt the supply of chemicals essential inthe cocaine refinement process. A 55-gallon drum of ether nowcosts approximately $7,000 in South America, while the sameamount costs only $500 to $600 in the United States. Further,acetone and ether are widely available for commercial purposes inthe United States, making control of their illicit use much moredifficult than it has been in South America. Heroin Scope of the Problem Traditionally viewed as the "hardest drug," heroin'sreputation is well-earned. Although there are fewer heroinaddicts than users of other illicit drugs, more deaths andemergency room visits are associated with heroin than with anyother drug. Heroin's "worst drug" status has alsodeveloped because of the crime generally associated with heroinuse, a stereotype of the heroin addict as an inner-city streetdweller who commits crimes as his sole means of support, the factthat heroin is most often used intravenously, the dramaticaddiction and withdrawal symptoms associated with use of thedrug, and the relatively quick and generally lethal effects of aheroin overdose. The Drug Enforcement Administration estimates there were490,000 heroin addicts and users in 1981. It is estimated thatthousands more individuals use heroin occasionally, but are notincluded in this number. While the addict population has remainedrelatively steady since 1979, indicators of heroin consumptionand effects have increased in recent years. Annual heroin-relateddeaths reached 1,046 in 1984, a 31 percent increase from 1983.Emergency room visits involving heroin use increased 55 percentfrom 1981 to 1984, with 10,901 such visits in 1984. Thisrepresents a decrease from the 11,028 emergency room visits in1983. Estimated heroin consumption increased 55 percent from 1981to 1984, with 5.97 metric tons of heroin consumed in 1984. As aresult of increased heroin purity and increased use of the drugin combination with other drugs, the number of heroin addicts andthe number of deaths and emergency room visits associated withheroin use should be expected to increase. Heroin is thus an extremely valuable commodity for organizedcrime: in fact, an ounce of pure heroin is approximately tentimes more expensive than an ounce of gold. Heroin users provideorganized crime with billions of dollars each year: it isestimated that illegal income from heroin sales in the UnitedStates totaled $6.12 billion in 1982. The Heroin Addict Historically, data collection and law enforcement experiencesupport the view that heroin use has been an urban phenomenon,confined in large part to minority populations. One recent studyof black inner-city heroin users across the country suggests theextent of heroin's grip in those areas: Because of the regular availability of heroin and thestructure of the relationship of intercity residents to society,the heroin lifestyle has become firmly established as analternative lifestyle for Black youngsters. Such studies typically reveal a portrait of the heroin addictas an unemployed, minority male with little education who commitscrime to support his habit: A 1985 study of heroin users in Eastand Central Harlem found the following: 75 percent were male; 55percent were black and 44 percent Hispanic; 36 percent were under30 years of age; 61 percent had less than 11 years of education;and 81 percent were unemployed. The annualized crime rate forthese heroin users was 1,075 crimes per person. Crimes committedby heroin addicts includes property crime, violent crime and drugoffenses. While regular use of heroin is generally addictive, thereappears to be a group of users, known as "chippers,"who are able to use heroin occasionally over a long period oftime without becoming addicts. In his study of heroin, StanfordUniversity professor John Kaplan maintains: It is now clear that there exists a sizable population ofnon-addicted but regular heroin users who seem well integratedinto society and in many ways indistinguishable from the rest ofthe population. Recently a new group of heroin users has emerged that includesboth addicts and non-addicts. These are the "middleclass" users, who are involved with heroin as a result oftheir cocaine habits. In order to counteract the effects of heavycocaine use, many began to use heroin intranasally, andeventually became addicted to the drug. Dr. Forest Tennant,director of a number of drug abuse clinics in the Los Angelesarea, observes: As cocaine use increases, we're seeing more addicts becauseheroin is the strongest neutralizer around for cocaine toxicity .. . And we're not talking about gang members and derelicts. I'mtreating people who pay their union dues, go to the PTA, taketheir kids to Little League. We've even got a program forexecutives. Health Effects of Heroin Use While narcotics serve an essential medicinal purpose asanalgesics, or painkillers, they are often abused. Heroin, themost abused opiate, is derived from the opium poppy (Papaversomniferum). Heroin is generally used intravenously, the mostefficient and dangerous route of administration."Speedballs," injections of heroin mixed with cocaine,are particularly dangerous. Heroin can also be usedsubcutaneously, called "skin-popping." All of theseintravenous forms of use are associated with AIDS and hepatitis,as discussed earlier. In addition, heroin can be smoked or usedintranasally. Heroin is a particularly dangerous drug because of the easewith which a user can overdose, A lethal dose of heroin is only10 to 15 times a normal dose. According to Dr. Donald C. ThomasIII, former director of emergency care at the District ofColumbia General Hospital: Heroin numbs you to pain, gives you a euphoria, takes you awayfrom reality, makes you slower and changes appetites . . . Thereal problem for an addict is that the threshold between the doseof heroin that gives that effect, as opposed to the dose thatwill kill him by suppressing respiratory or cardiac centers inhis brain, is very narrow. Multiple overdose deaths sometimes result from one"batch" of heroin. In March 1985, for example,according to local press accounts, 8 people died and 14 werehospitalized in a few days in Washington, D.C., after injectingsome particularly potent heroin. Seven months earlier, 10 peopledied in Washington within 8 days in a similar incident. It isstriking evidence of the drug's overpowering influence that thisrisk of sudden death apparently poses no deterrent to theseasoned user. As expressed by one heroin addict: A true, full-blown drug addict would follow a morgue wagon toits origin of overdose to obtain that substance. Cultivation Heroin entering the United States is produced from opiumpoppies, which are harvested in Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan(Southwest Asia, the Golden Crescent); Burma, Thailand and Laos(Southeast Asia, the Golden Triangle); and Mexico. In 1984, anestimated 51 percent of United States heroin came from SouthwestAsia, 32 percent from Mexico and 17 percent from Southeast Asia. From 1983 to 1984 illicit opium production decreased inSouthwest Asia. This change resulted from decreased figures foropium production in Afghanistan caused by adverse weatherconditions and a change in the methodology used to estimate opiumproduction in Afghanistan. While total opium production forSouthwest Asia decreased in 1984, significant productionincreases were noted in Southeast Asia and Mexico. Opium poppy cultivation has begun to appear in the UnitedStates as well. During a Federal raid in August 1985, more than4,000 opium plants were discovered in Vermont, Washington,Michigan and California. Although officials of the DrugEnforcement Administration believe this opium was used forsmoking, the potential for domestic heroin production exists. While America's heroin addict population has remainedrelatively stable, the problem of heroin addiction in Europe hasincreased significantly in recent years. According to a 1984United Nations report: The drug abuse and trafficking situation in Western Europe isgrim and deteriorating . . . Western Europe remains seriouslyaffected by heroin abuse which is a major public health problem. The number of heroin addicts in the opium producing and othercountries is also significant. There is a greater sense of the need for internationalcooperation on the problem of drugs, in part because drugproducing nations are now feeling the effects of drug abuse, withwhich the industrialized world has dealt for decades. Thisdevelopment is critical if drug control efforts, including croperadication, interdiction and drug education, are to besuccessful. Processing The production of heroin begins after the petals of the opiumpoppy flower have fallen. Several incisions are then made in theseed pod from which sap oozes. The sap dries, darkens and becomesgummy, and is scraped from the pod. This dried sap is raw opium.Each pod can be incised up to five different times. To produce one kilogram of heroin, a precipitating agent isadded to 10-12 kilograms of opium. This mixture is pressed,leaving one kilogram of morphine base. This base is treated withacetic anhydride, which yields one kilogram of heroin. In anotherproduction method, poppies are allowed to mature and dry.Alkaloids are then extracted from these plants leaving poppystraw concentrate, which is sold in a brownish powder form. Marijuana Scope of the Problem According to the most recent National Survey on Drug Abuse,which was conducted in 1982, 50-60 million Americans,approximately 20-25 percent of the entire population, have triedmarijuana; and 20 million people use the drug at least once permonth. Marijuana use has been widespread in this country for thelast two decades. Both the number of users and the duration ofmarijuana's popularity indicate that marijuana use is firmlyentrenched in American society. Although some surveys indicate that the number of marijuanausers has been declining recently, levels of use remainsignificantly higher than for any other illicit drug. TheNational Survey on Drug Abuse indicates a decline in marijuanause for some age groups. Yet the survey shows that in 1982, 11.5percent of 12-17-year-olds and 27 percent of 18-25 year olds usedmarijuana at least once per month. The study indicates a slight,but steady, increase in marijuana use among people over age 25.In 1977, 3.3 percent reported monthly marijuana use, comparedwith 6.0 percent in 1982. According to the survey of high schoolseniors conducted each year by the University of MichiganInstitute for Social Research, marijuana use among high schoolseniors peaked in 1978, when 37 percent of these studentsreported monthly use of marijuana and 11 percent reported dailyuse of the drug. By 1984 these figures had dropped to 25 percentand 5 percent respectively. However, this decline in marijuanause ended in 1985 when 26 percent of the survey respondentsreported monthly marijuana use. Marijuana consumption and the number of marijuana-associatedemergency room visits have remained relatively steady in recentyears. In 1984 Americans consumed an estimated 7,800-9,200 metrictons of marijuana, as compared with 8,000-9,600 metric tons in1983. Use of marijuana in conjunction with other drugs,particularly PCP, diazepam and cocaine, increased in 1984. The Marijuana User Marijuana is probably used by a wider demographiccross-section of American society than any other drug. Thiswidespread use was recognized by the 1972 National Commission onMarihuana [sic] and Drug Abuse: The stereotype of the marihuana [sic] user as a marginalcitizen has given way to a composite picture of large segments ofAmerican youth, children of the dominant majority and very muchpart of the mainstream of American life. While it appears that marijuana, like other drugs, is mostcommonly used by those between the ages of 18 and 25, its use isby no means confined to that age group. One analysis of marijuanause found that: Marijuana is now found at the Friday afternoon brainstormingsessions of a New York publishing house. In the cabs of long-haultrucks. In the office of a president of a cosmetic firm. Even, itis alleged, among executives of major American banks. According to the 1982 National Survey on Drug Abuse, 23percent of 16 and 17 year olds, 8 percent of 14 and 15 year olds,and 2 percent of 12 and 13 year olds used marijuana at least onceper month. Surveys have indicated marijuana use in children asyoung as nine years old. Health Effects of Marijuana Use Marijuana includes any part of the plant Canabis sativa. Inaddition to marijuana, the following forms of cannabis are alsoabused: hashish, a resin of the plant; hashish oil, a liquidconcentrate derived from cannabis; and sinsemilla, from thefemale cannabis plant. The effects of marijuana use have been the subject ofexaggeration and misunderstanding for decades. In 1936, forexample, the film "Reefer Madness" portrayed thoseeffects as instant violence and insanity. In 1972 the NationalCommission on Marihuana [sic] and Drug Abuse embraced theopposite extreme: No conclusive evidence exists of any physical damage,disturbances of bodily processes or proven human fatalitiesattributable solely to even high doses of marijuana . . . [The]few consistently observed transient effects on bodily functionseem to suggest that marihuana [sic] is a rather unexcitingcompound of negligible immediate toxicity at the doses usuallyconsumed in this country. Both views have been refuted by medical evidence gatheredsince the early 1970's. Today marijuana is described as "themost chemically complex of all commonly used illegal drugs."Marijuana contains 421 known chemicals, which when smoked arecombusted into more than 2,000 chemical compounds. Marijuana isvariously classified as a stimulant, depressant and hallucinogenbecause its effects vary among users. Those chemicals found only in cannabis are calledcannabinoids. The primary intoxicant in marijuana isdelta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). The concentration of The inmarijuana has steadily increased over the last decade as a resultof improved agricultural techniques. Analysis of marijuanasamples indicates that the average percentage of The in marijuanahas increased from .7 percent in 1973, to 3.1 percent in 1982, to5.6 percent in 1983. The potencies have been reported as high as14 percent in domestically produced sinsemilla. Since 1967 when the first intensive government researchprogram on marijuana began, over 7,000 scientific papers havebeen published on the subject. Contrary to the findings of the1972 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, adversephysical and psychological effects associated with marijuana usehave been demonstrated. The measurement of long-term effects ofmarijuana use are at present problematic because marijuanasmoking has been prevalent in the United States for onlyapproximately 15 to 20 years, shorter than the latency period formany marijuana-related diseases. In the case of tobacco it wasnot until after 50 years of heavy use that there was ampleevidence to issue warnings about its effects. Despite the common public perception that marijuana is lessharmful than tobacco, scientific evidence indicates thatmarijuana, in fact, causes substantially more adverse healtheffects, due in part to the properties of the drug itself and themanner in which it is smoked. Marijuana is not filtered, as aremost tobacco cigarettes, and marijuana smoke is generally inhaledmore deeply and held in the lungs longer than tobacco smoke.Marijuana smoke has been found to contain many of the samechemicals as tobacco smoke; indeed it has 50 percent more ofcancer-causing hydrocarbons than tobacco smoke. According to the American Lung Association, marijuana smokingharms the lungs and may cause bronchitis, emphysema and lungcancer. Evidence supporting this conclusion has been building fora number of years. For example, a 1976 study reported thatexaminations of human lung tissue "have found malignantcellular changes after shorter periods of exposure to marijuanasmoke than to tobacco smoke." One comprehensive review ofmarijuana projects that: Starting in the latter 1980's, we predict an increase in therate of lung cancer among middle-aged people, representing themarijuana epidemic that began in the mid-sixties. Those smokingboth tobacco and marijuana are most at risk. Marijuana use can also adversely affect both male and femalereproduction. Marijuana use by pregnant women is particularlydangerous and has been linked to lowered birth weight, fetalabnormalities and nervous disorders in offspring. These adversephysical effects are magnified because cannabinoids, being fatsoluble, collect in the fatty organs of the body, such as thetestis or ovaries, brain and liver. This is of particular concernbecause marijuana is used by a large population of young peoplewhose lungs, reproductive organs, and other parts of their bodiesare still maturing and are particularly vulnerable to the adverseeffects of drugs. In addition to these physical effects of marijuana use,several psychological and behavioral effects have also beenassociated with the drug. These behavioral changes have beencalled "the amotivational syndrome." Although lack ofmotivation may often precede marijuana use, many clinicians haveconcluded that: Motivational effects are directly related to use and . . .following cessation of marijuana use normal motivation mayreturn. In addition to the effects of marijuana on motivation,marijuana use has been found to affect short-term memory,concentration, and logical thinking. A 1982 report concerning theimpact of marijuana use on education concludes that: Every element of learning is incompatible with either theacute intoxication or the chronic mental change that marijuanause can bring. A 1980 study reported that use of marijuana 20 times or moreper month is "positively correlated with absenteeism andpoor school achievement among high school seniors." Theseconclusions are particularly disturbing given the fact that tensof thousands, perhaps even hundreds of thousands, of adolescentsuse marijuana every day. A final concern in this area, marijuana's role as a"gateway" to subsequent use of more dangerous drugs,cannot be categorized as either physical or psychological. Whilemany beliefs about marijuana have been proven wrong by subsequentresearch, this concept has been affirmed. This"gateway" theory does not indicate that marijuana usewill definitely lead to the use of other drugs; however,according to a review of marijuana studies conducted by theDepartment of Health and Human Services, Statistically, there is little question that use, particularlyheavier use, is associated with a likelihood of experimentationwith other drugs. Synthetic Drugs Scope of the Problem Many illicit drugs do not occur naturally. Unlike cocaine,heroin and marijuana, which are derived from plants, syntheticdrugs are produced solely from chemicals. These synthetic drugsinclude stimulants, depressants and hallucinogens, known asdangerous drugs; synthetic narcotics, such as methadone; andcontrolled substance analogs, often called "designerdrugs." A controlled substance analog has a chemicalstructure similar to a controlled substance, and is designed toproduce a similar effect. Use of synthetic drugs is widespread in the United States.More than six million Americans used synthetic drugs fornon-medical purposes in 1982. Over 2.5 million people abuseddepressants, approximately 2.8 million abused stimulants, andalmost 1 million abused hallucinogens. Consumption of"dangerous drugs" increased 15 percent between 1983 and1984, from an estimated 2.66 billion dosage units to 3.06 billiondosage units. The greatest increases were associated withmethamphetamine and phencyclidine (PCP). Methamphetamine-relatedemergency room visits increased 20 percent from 1983 to 1984, anddeaths associated with both amphetamine and methamphetamine alsoincreased in 1984. Statistics regarding the use of controlled substance analogsare difficult to compile. This is because the use of thesesubstances is a relatively new phenomenon, and medical examinershave generally failed to identify controlled substance analogs asa cause of death. Despite these difficulties, one syntheticanalog has been responsible for the deaths of at least 100 peopleon the West Coast. While most of these deaths occurred inCalifornia, many law enforcement authorities fear that productionand use of controlled substance analogs might spread across thecountry because of the ease of production and large profit marginassociated with these drugs. This spread has already occurred inat least one instance: drug treatment program directors inCalifornia, Florida, New York, Texas and Virginia have reportedcases of use of the controlled substance analog MDMA. Synthetic Drug Users While synthetic drugs are used for a wide range of medicinalpurposes, they are also widely abused by individuals from allsocioeconomic groups. According to a 1978 study of individuals intreatment for stimulant and/or depressant drug abuse, 68 percentwere men, 61 percent were white, 20 percent black and 19 percentof another ethnicity, 59 percent were unemployed, 77 percent hadpreviously been treated for drug abuse, 59 percent were 25 yearsof age or older, and 46 percent had less than a twelfth gradeeducation. While most people associate heroin use with crime, a 1982study by the RAND Corporation found violent crime to be committedmost often by multi-drug users, particularly those usingcombinations including dangerous drugs. Certain synthetic drugsare particularly associated with crime. A study of all arresteesin Washington, D.C., from May 1984 to April 1985 found that PCP,an hallucinogen, is the drug most often detected in thesearrestees. An average of over 30 percent of all adults arrestedin Washington, D.C., during this period tested positive for PCPuse. A study of almost 5,000 male arrestees in New York City in1984 found that 12 percent of those arrested had PCP in theirbodies. Health Effects of Synthetic Drug Use Tolerance to stimulants develops quickly. Because of the"crash," or depression, followed by stimulant use,users tend to take stimulants more often in order to compensatefor or avoid the post-stimulant letdown. Stimulant users aresubject to a vicious cycle in which they must take depressants atnight to be able to reverse the stimulant's effects. Stimulantscan cause physical dependence and death. Withdrawal ischaracterized by depression, fatigue and excessive sleep, whichmay last for several days. Other withdrawal symptoms, includinganxiety and thoughts of suicide, may last for weeks or months. Depressants can also cause tolerance and physical dependence.Abuse of depressants is marked by impaired judgment, slurredspeech and loss of motor coordination. Depressants areparticularly dangerous when used in combination with alcohol orother drugs. Heavy use of depressants can cause a weak, rapidpulse, shallow respiration, coma and death. Hallucinogens alter mood, and, in large doses, cause delusionsand hallucinations. This impaired judgment can lead a user tophysically harm himself or others. "Flashbacks," inwhich the user has a brief recurrence of the psychedelic effectsof hallucinogens, sometimes occur long after the drug is used.Tolerance and psychological dependence can also result. PCP,often called "Angel Dust," is one of the most dangerousand widely abused hallucinogens. Reactions to PCP areunpredictable and include euphoria, depression, anxiety or panic.PCP use is associated with extremely violent behavior, includingassault, rape, and murder. Feelings of omnipotence sometimes leada PCP user to suicidal behavior, including walking in front ofmoving vehicles or jumping out of windows. Controlled substance analogs are designed to mimic the effectsof various drugs and are particularly dangerous because of theirtoxicity. One synthetic analog, 3-methyl fentanyl, is up to 1,000times more potent than morphine. According to Dr. Robert J.Roberton of California's Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs,"You could kill 50 people with the amount that fits on thehead of a pin." Fentanyl analogs, the most commonly abused controlledsubstance analogs, produce a feeling of euphoria similar to thatassociated with heroin use. These drugs also produce respiratorydepression and muscle rigidity. MPTP, which is a synthetic analogof the narcotic meperidine, causes brain damage, Parkinson'sdisease and death. Although Parkinson's disease usually strikespeople in their fifties and sixties, people of various ages, whohave used MPTP, have contracted the disease, which causes slowedmovement, tremors, rigidity, dementia and death. The neurologicaldamage associated with use of MPTP is irreversible. Drug Abuse Fuels Drug Trafficking Drug abuse in the United States is a problem of vast andgrowing proportions Millions of Americans use cocaine, heroin,marijuana, or synthetic drugs, or combinations of these drugs.Consumption of cocaine and dangerous drugs has increased recentlyas have the deleterious health effects associated with then. Thedownward trend in marijuana use which began in 1979 appears tohave ended at least temporarily in 1985. Particularly dangerous forms of drug use have increased duringthe last few years. Use of "crack," coca base which issmoked and which has been called the most potent, addictive, andcheapest form of cocaine, has become prevalent in the New YorkCity area. Use of "designer drugs," some of which havecaused Parkinson's disease, have been blamed for over 100 deaths.There is evidence of a link between intravenous drug use and thecontraction of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Drug abuse affects much more than the individual drug user; italso impacts on families, communities and entire governments. Thetaint of drugs has reached into virtually every aspect ofAmerican life, from public safety to the integrity ofprofessional sports. These problems and the full range of massivegovernment and private responses discussed in this report,including increased education and enforcement efforts, expandedintelligence and interdiction programs, and diversions ofmilitary resources, costing billions of dollars, is the directresult of a single cause: the destructive self-indulgence ofindividual drug purchasers. Each time a drug user buys cocaine,heroin, or other drugs, he makes a contribution to organizedcrime. Such contributions are the sole sustenance of theviolence, corruption, illness and death that trafficking groupsbring to this and other societies. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-35IA031-000653-B002-332http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133527 text/html 63451HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:35:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:16 GMTContent-length: 63233 Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter III Part 1: Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime Introduction Drug trafficking is the most widespread and lucrativeorganized crime operation in the United States, accounting fornearly 40 percent of this country's organized crime activity andgenerating an annual income estimated to be as high as $110billion. Large trafficking organizations dominate the illicitdrug market. These groups include the "families" ofAmerica's La Cosa Nostra, as well as an array of more recentlyidentified crime groups such as the Sicilian "Mafia,"outlaw motorcycle gangs and groups based in the Nigerian andColombian communities. While La Cosa Nostra has historically beeninvolved in narcotics trafficking, newer organizations, in manyways quite different from La Cosa Nostra, now play a major rolein the drug trade. Generally, these newer groups develop solelyaround drug trafficking operations and are activity-specific,dependent only on drug-related criminal activity for income. Theytend to be more fluidly organized than La Cosa Nostra, and arenot as self-contained but are marked by a degree of violence andcorruption unsurpassed by any other criminal activity. Organized crime groups involved in drug trafficking, however,share a central feature with other organized crime groups in thatthey consist of a core criminal group and a specialized criminalsupport designed to facilitate illicit activity. This"core/support" configuration is one this Commission hasfound to be common to all organized crime groups today. Cocaine Trafficking America's cocaine supply at present originates exclusively inSouth America. Coca is cultivated principally in Peru, Bolivia,Colombia and Ecuador, and conversion laboratories have beenlocated in Colombia, Brazil and Venezuela. Other South Americanand Caribbean countries serve as transshipment sites. All phasesof the cocaine trade, including cultivation, processing anddistribution have expanded since 1984, and the industry shows nosigns of diminishing despite the fact that cocaine supply alreadyexceeds consumer demand. Control of the cocaine industry has traditionally beenmaintained by a cartel of Colombian traffickers. Colombian groupsare the largest, wealthiest, most sophisticated organizationstrafficking in cocaine. A key to their domination of the markethas been their control of the processing laboratories used toconvert coca grown traditionally in Bolivia and Peru. Export ofthe drug to the United States has also been handled almostexclusively by Colombian trafficking organizations. WhileColombians currently control an estimated 75 percent of thecocaine distributed to the United States, their domination hasbeen lessened recently both by the Colombian government'simposition of severe restrictions on the importation of chemicalsessential to cocaine processing and by the destruction of cocaineprocessing sites throughout Colombia by government authorities.In 1984 three major Colombian conversion laboratories werediscovered and destroyed: at Tranquilandia, the largest facility,ten metric tons of cocaine and 10,000 barrels of processingchemicals were seized. In total, Colombian authoritiesconfiscated 16 metric tons of cocaine in 1984, a 600 percentincrease from the 2.5 metric tons seized in the previous year.The pressures on cocaine traffickers were compounded in that yearby the Colombian government's decision to extradite drugtraffickers to the United States, and by the subsequent issuanceof warrants for the arrest of several major traffickers. Intensified Colombian law enforcement measures have hadsignificant impact on trafficking operations. The initiativeshave prompted many traffickers to seek refuge in other SouthAmerican countries, and in some cases to relocate theirprocessing laboratories. These incidents have resulted in ageographic dispersal of cocaine processing and export activities,most notably to Bolivia and Peru. While it appeared initiallythat activity in these countries was sponsored and overseen byColombian traffickers, increasing evidence suggests that groupsin both countries are becoming self-sufficient. Suchdevelopments, however, remain an exception to the prevailingColombian dominance. Despite the spread of cocaine activity through South America,Colombian groups have left little room in the cocaine trade forsmall-scale smugglers. While some independent operators andsmaller smuggling groups occasionally work independently of theColombian cartel, most are tied to the larger organization in atleast a contractor relationship. The Colombian Connection: Origins The Colombian involvement in U.S. cocaine trafficking can betraced to the influx of Cuban citizens to South Florida after theCastro Revolution in the early 1960's. Some of the Cuban-settledcommunities became bases for the continuation of establishedCuban organized crime networks known as the "CubanMafia." The Cuban Mafia had been a major distributor of thecocaine in Cuba, where the drug has long been accepted as asocial luxury, and thus had existing connections with SouthAmerican cocaine trafficking organizations. At first, the FloridaCuban Mafia factions imported only enough cocaine to satisfymembers of their own community, but by the mid-1960's, they beganto import greater quantities of the drug in an effort to expanddistribution and increase profit. By 1965 Colombians suppliednearly 100 percent of the cocaine moving through the Cubannetworks. Colombians refined the drug and Cubans trafficked anddistributed it in the United States. The system worked for atime, but the Colombians increasingly desired control of theentire operation. Through the late 1960's and early 1970's theybecame more involved in cocaine production, and increased theirtrafficking role. By 1978 Colombian traffickers had cut all tieswith the Cubans and assumed the dominant role they now play insupplying cocaine to the American market. Colombian groups have continued to control the U.S. cocainemarket through the 1980's for a number of reasons.Geographically, Colombia is well-positioned both to receive cocafrom Peru and Bolivia and to export the processed drug to theUnited States either by air or by sea. In addition, the country'svast central forests effectively conceal clandestine processinglaboratories and air strips, which facilitate the traffic.Perhaps most importantly, the Colombians have a momentum bybenefit of their early involvement in the cocaine trade. Theyhave evolved from small, disassociated groups intocompartmentalized organizations and are sophisticated andsystematized in their approach to trafficking cocaine in theUnited States. Further, groups in the Colombian population in theU.S. provide traffickers access to this country and often servesas a distribution network for Colombian cocaine. The Colombian Organization The major Colombian trafficking organizations are structuredto control each intermediate step required in processing andexporting cocaine. Like traditional organized crime groups, theyare built of interdependent and essential component"divisions," each with a specialized area ofresponsibility. Different members act as laborers, processors,transporters, financiers and enforcers. In addition,organizations generally supplement their regular membership withcriminal support of affiliates who perform services on a feebasis. Few members of any organizational division are aware ofthe others involved in the enterprise, and trafficking bosses arewell-insulated and protected by their organizations. Organization laborers and processors prepare cocaine for U.S.consumption. Most laborers in the cultivation phase are Peruvianor Bolivian peasants who cultivate and harvest coca in remoteareas of the Eastern Andes, then process the coca leaves to basein nearby villages. The growers are allied in small, independentgroups, but are typically financed, overseen, and protected bymembers of a larger Colombian organization. Processed coca base is usually flown on light aircraft fromthe mountain villages to Colombian processing facilities by thosemembers of the Colombian organization responsible fortransportation. The planes land at clandestine airstrips, oftensimple mud runways, located near the processing laboratories. Thelaboratories vary widely in size, ranging from crudesmall-quantity operations to large, sophisticated complexes, andcan be found both in Colombia's jungle and urban areas. Coca base is typically processed to cocaine hydrochloride inthe laboratories, then bagged and taped into kilogram packages,which are sometimes coded to indicate a particular United Statesdestination. The packages are loaded into duffle bags or burlapsacks, then moved by the transportation group to a "stashhouse," a storage facility usually located near a seaport ora clandestine airstrip. The cocaine is held at the stash houseuntil it is exported from Colombia. Colombian trafficking organizations currently export anestimated 62 percent of the cocaine they process on privateaircraft. The remaining 38 percent is shipped on ocean vessels orsmuggled on commercial air carriers. Most shipments are smuggledout of Colombia from the country's northern coastal region, theGuajira peninsula. Principal smuggling centers include the citiesof Santa Marta, Barranquilla, Cartagena, and Medellin. Inaddition, a significant percentage of processed cocaine leavesColombia from airstrips located near larger processing facilitiesin the jungles. Typically, Colombian organizations oversee each cocaineshipment from cultivation through wholesale transactions in theUnited States. Retail and street-level sales are handled by avariety of smaller groups and individuals in this country. The money generated by the wholesale cocaine transaction ismaintained for the organization by financial experts familiarwith international banking, who are responsible for laundering,banking and investing drug profits, and for assuring that aportion of the drug profit is returned to Colombia forreinvestment in the organization's cocaine enterprise. Thecartel's own financial experts are supported by a complement ofbankers, lawyers and other professionals in the United States,who play a crucial role in facilitating these transactions. Colombian trafficking organizations, like other organizedcrime groups, rely on "enforcement" through violenceand intimidation to protect their inventory and profits."Enforcement" occurs both in Colombia and in the UnitedStates and includes the collection of debts owed to theorganization and the elimination of interference fromcompetitors, informants and law enforcement officials. Pilots: The American Affiliates Cocaine is ordinarily smuggled from South America to theUnited States for major trafficking organizations by Americancitizens acting as mercenary pilots. Recruits includeex-military, commercial and private pilots, and in some cases,unlicensed aviators. The speed, mobility and evasive capabilitiesof air transport have made it the preferred node of shipmentamong Colombian traffickers, and many have built airstrips eithernear their processing centers or along the coastlines to permitthe fast direct export of cocaine. On Colombia's north coastalone, over 150 clandestine landing strips and threeinternational airports facilitate smuggling activities. Individual pilots are generally responsible for purchasing orleasing transportation vehicles and hiring flight crews.Obtaining a plane for purchase seldom presents any difficulty,since many aircraft are regularly advertised for sale in a numberof trade periodicals. One popular journal, Trade-a-Plane, ispublished three times each month and advertises thousands ofaircraft available for sale in each issue. Planes are alsoavailable for purchase at numerous government auctions of seizedproperties. These events often allow traffickers to repurchaseaircraft, which they were previously forced to forfeit. Because traffickers attempt to ship the largest possiblequantities of cocaine to the widest range of destinations in theUnited States, the aircraft selected for smuggling generallyrepresent the optimum balance between range and cargo capacity.The most popular of these are conventional light twin engineplanes, such as the Piper Aztec, Piper Navajo and the Cessna 400series. Most such planes can transport about a ton of cocaineover a range of about 1,800 miles and can stay airborne for 11and one hours with standard fuel systems. Larger airplanes suchas DC-3 aircraft are common on shuttle flights between the UnitedStates and various transshipment points; the fastest aircraft arealways preferred when available. To maximize range and capability, smuggling planes are oftenoutfitted with auxiliary fuel systems. These auxiliary systemsmay be attached to the outside body of the aircraft or the wing,but must be inspected and approved by the Federal AviationAdministration each time the outfitted aircraft prepares forflight. A favored auxiliary system for cocaine traffickers is thecollapsible rubber fuel "bladder," which may be placedin the plane's fuselage, and simply folded up or thrown awayafter the fuel contained within is used. The space occupied bythe bladder on the trip to Colombia can be utilized for cocainetransport on the return journey. Bladders are, under allcircumstances, prohibited by Federal law. Although the legitimate need for auxiliary fuel systems isvery limited, the systems are well-advertised and readilyavailable. One trafficker told the Commission he purchasedbladders and other long-range fuel systems regularly, alwayspaying the seller with "suitcases full of cash." Heclaims his cash was never questioned or refused. Traffic From Colombia to the United States: The Hydra's Head Smugglers use a vast number of both air and sea traffickingroutes to transport cocaine from South America to the UnitedStates. The most commonly travelled routes are through theWindward Passage between Cuba and Haiti, through the YucatanChannel between Mexico and Cuba, and through the Mona Passage,bordered by the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. Traditionally, 90 percent of the cocaine shipped by theseroutes has entered the United States at points along the Floridacoast; traffickers now, however, more frequently delivershipments to all the States along the Gulf Coast and elsewherethroughout this country. Cocaine traffic also now runs directlyfrom Colombia's west coast to California and other westernstates. These shifts are perceived as a response by traffickersto increased law enforcement pressure in South Florida,specifically to the intensified efforts of the SouthFlorida/Caribbean Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force.The theme is a common one: as law enforcement closes off onepoint of entry to drug traffickers, traffickers develop many newpoints of entry as replacements. Air Shipment Nearly two-thirds of the cocaine exported from South Americato the United State is transported by general aviation aircraft.Planes of all sizes, ranging from small turbo-prop craft to largeC-123 cargo transport planes, are used for drug shipment. Smallaircraft, which cannot carry adequate fuel to allow direct flightfrom Colombia to the United States, must refuel at transshipmentpoints between the two countries. These contact points areindispensable, and are located throughout Central America, theDominican Republic, Cuba, the Bahamas and Puerto Rico.Transshipment points may be simply refueling stations, or may bebases or stations equipped to allow cocaine off-loading andrepackaging. From the transshipment points, cocaine is generallyferried to the United States by small planes or boats. Mexico has gained popularity as a transshipment point since1980. Although coca cultivation has not been observed in Mexico,an estimated 10 to 20 percent of the cocaine exported to theUnited States currently transits that country. Three Mexicantransshipment patterns are typical. First, Mexican traffickersobtain cocaine in South America, transport it to Mexico, thentraffic the drug overland into the United States. Second,Colombian or American couriers travel by commercial aircraft fromSouth America to Mexico, then cross the border into this country.Finally, Colombian or North American traffickers use Mexico'snumerous clandestine airstrips, especially in Yucatan, forrefueling and for loading purposes; the smuggling plane in usemay continue directly into the United States, or the shipment maybe broken into smaller loads, then trafficked overland by Mexicanorganizations. The majority of cocaine shipped through Mexico istransported to the United States by car, truck or bus, but asignificant amount is smuggled aboard small aircraft. The Mexicangroups, formerly limited primarily to trafficking heroin andmarijuana, have eagerly expanded their role as middlemen betweenColombian traffickers and American consumers. Maritime Shipment An estimated 18 percent (15 tons in 1984) of the cocainetrafficked into the United States is exported from South Americaby sea vessel. All types of ships are used for smuggling, fromsmall high-speed cigarette boats to large commercial cargocarriers. Colombians dominate maritime cocaine smuggling, andmost shipments depart that country's north coastline, whichfeatures three major seaports and countless debarkation ports forsmaller craft. Approximately one-half of the cocaine exported bysea is concealed in commercial vessels, and a smaller percentageis shipped in private boats which are frequently outfitted withspecial compartments designed for drug storage. Small amounts ofcocaine are also often shipped on with marijuana onnon-commercial smuggling vessels. Maritime trafficking routes have shifted significantly in thepast five years, primarily in response to increased lawenforcement surveillance. While a major portion of the maritimetraffic formerly flowed directly into South Florida, traffickersnow increasingly use the longer eastern routes through theCaribbean to the Mid-Atlantic and New England coasts, as well asdirect routes to the U.S. west coast. These routes make smugglingmore expensive for traffickers, since they require largervessels, larger crews and more sophisticated electronicequipment. Case Study: Devoe Airlines Devoe Airlines was a scheduled commuter air service operatingbetween Miami and smaller Florida cities during the early 1980's.Owned by Miami pilot Jack Devoe, the business was essentially afront for a Colombian drug trafficking operation, which includedregular large quantity marijuana and cocaine smuggling. In total,8 to 10 contract pilots employed by Devoe were involved in over100 trafficking flights over a five year period and carriedroughly 7,000 pounds of cocaine from South America to the UnitedStates. Jack Devoe estimates that his flying organization grossedmillions of dollars each month during peak smuggling periods. Devoe's trafficking pilots initially travelled non-stop routesbetween the United States and Colombia, but developed atransshipment point on Little Derby Island in the Bahamas forpurposes of "security . . . [and] police protection" inthe 1980's. Devoe hired six to eight employees to work as neededat the island base to unload and repackage drug shipments. Therewas no interference from Bahamian law enforcement at the LittleDarby base "as long as the payments [to officials] were ontime." Typically operating mid-size turbo-prop aircraft, Devoe pilotsdeparted for Colombia either from the base at Little Derby Islandor from Florida airports. Their route took them through theWindward Passage generally to Colombian locations about 60 milessouth of the equator. In the early stages of the operation,landings were made at official Colombian airports including theairfields at Santa Marta and Riohacha. In at least one instance,cocaine was openly loaded onto the smuggling aircraft at Riohachaairport. In the early 1980's Devoe shifted landings toclandestine jungle airstrips maintained by the organization'scocaine supplier, Pepe Cabrera. This system streamlined thetrafficking process by eliminating transport of the cocaine to anairport. The cocaine shipment was loaded directly onto theaircraft near the strip, where the plane was simultaneouslyprepared for the return flight. Generally, Devoe pilots returned to the United States withinone day. Their preferred return route extended along theColombia/Venezuela border, over Haiti, and to the Bahamian baseon Little Derby Island. There, cocaine was sealed into the wingfuel tanks of a small aircraft and flown directly into SouthFlorida for delivery to the cartel's representative there. The Devoe organization's methods for avoiding interdictionbetween South America and the United States were relativelysimple and typical of such smuggling operations. A Devoe pilotlearned the frequencies of DEA surveillance aircraft on oneoccasion by "acting like a helicopter buff" inspectinga DEA Cobra pursuit helicopter parked near the Devoe hangar.Inside the helicopter the pilot copied the frequencies from aclipboard hanging on the instrument panel. As the pilot explainedto the Commission: By [subsequently] using our scanner and our knowledge of thefrequencies in use, we could monitor the activities of DEA planes. . . we could learn not only the activities of the planes, butalso go up and check the plane out. By learning what types ofaircraft DEA was using we could plan our own strategy moreeffectively . . . Devoe also regularly sent "cover-flight" aircraftahead of the smuggling planes along the trafficking route tomonitor DEA and Customs Service surveillance patrols by radio.These planes, which carried no drug cargo, were also used todecoy pursuit aircraft. Once in the United States, Devoe strategyfor clearing Customs inspection was to: ". . . act normally and file a flight plan, come in andland, and let them inspect the airplane . . . Customs inspectorswere far less interested in a lengthy examination of my plane ifI came in on a Sunday afternoon in the middle of the televisedfootball game. If the Dolphins were playing, that was evenbetter." Using these tactics, Devoe Airlines was able to complete over100 trafficking flights from Colombia without interference fromlaw enforcement authorities. Case Study: Barry Seal Adler Berriman Seal, a former TWA 747 captain, flew cocainefrom Colombia to the United States for over seven years duringthe late 1970's and early 1980's. Seal was recruited as atrafficking pilot by a personal friend who worked for theColombian cocaine trafficking organization headed by Jorge Ochoa,and eventually worked directly with that organization'sleadership. Initially, Seal flew direct trafficking flights betweenLouisiana, and Colombia. He piloted a number of differentsmuggling aircraft, the largest of which was a Vietnam-vintageC-123 capable of holding tons of packaged cocaine. Seal alwaysdeparted and returned to his Louisiana base at night to reducechances of interdiction. His typical route took him over theYucatan Peninsula (not over the more heavily patrolled Yucatanchannel) and directly over Central America to the eastern tip ofHonduras, then south to any one of a number of airstrips andairports in north central Colombia. According to Seal, the Ochoa organization paid Colombianofficials bribes of $10,000 to $25,000, per flight for a"window," i.e., a specific time, position and altitudedesignated for the smuggling flight's penetration of theColombian air space. If this payment was not made, the aircraftwas susceptible to interception by Colombian authorities. Sealgenerally arrived in Colombia at dawn. His aircraft was loadedwith cocaine and refueled within an hour, sometimes withinfifteen minutes; and he returned immediately to the UnitedStates. Seal used two fairly simple techniques to avoid interdictionon his return trip to the United States: both were effectivebecause of the heavy helicopter traffic running between the GulfCoast States and the hundreds of oil rigs located off shore.First, when he reached the middle of the Gulf on his return trip,Seal slowed his aircraft to 110-120 knots and was thus perceivedby monitoring radar as a helicopter, not a plane. Secondly, at adistance of about 50 miles off the United States coast, hedropped the aircraft to an altitude of 500-1000 feet in order toco-mingle with the helicopter traffic, and thereby arouse evenless suspicion. Once in United States airspace, Seal proceeded to prearrangedpoints 40 to 50 miles inland. The points were mapped out inadvance with Loran C, a long-range navigational instrument.Further inland, he was generally joined by a helicopter. The twoaircraft proceeded to a drop zone, where the helicopter hoveredclose to the ground. Seal then dropped the load of cocaine fromthe airplane on a parachute; the helicopter picked up the loadfrom the drop zone and delivered it to waiting automobiles, whicheventually moved the cocaine to Miami. Seal proceeded to land hisdrug-free aircraft at any nearby airport. Seal was well paid for his services. He claims his top fee forsmuggling a kilogram of cocaine was $5,000; an average load was300 kilograms. His most profitable single load netted him $1.5million. He was never apprehended in connection with thisoperation. Specialized Electronics: The Smuggler's Edge Like many trafficking pilots today, both Seal and Devoe reliedon sophisticated electronic equipment to maintain and securecommunications within their organization and to monitor lawenforcement surveillance efforts. Most devices used, whileexpensive, are readily available in the United States, andtrafficking organizations, of course, fund the purchase of anyequipment that will facilitate their operations. Seal, forexample, once spent over $200,000 cash on communication andsurveillance equipment for the Ochoa cocaine traffickingorganization here in the United States in a two-day period.Payments for this type of equipment are almost always made incash - sometimes suitcases full of cash - and are rarely refused. The communication devices most commonly used by traffickersinclude state of the art radio equipment, communicationscramblers, pocket pagers and encrypting devices. The equipmentis used to prevent law enforcement interception of communicationbetween traffickers. A scrambler, for example, attaches to anordinary radio, and "scrambles" the normal radiofrequency with a number of different codes. Only someone with areceiver coded to the particular scrambler frequency can decipherthe transmitted message; the transmission is unintelligible toall other receivers. Digital encryption devices are used to sendmessages in code, and are often secured so that they can beaccessed only after a security number is punched directly intothe device. The security feature allows only members of thetrafficking organization, who know the access code, to send ordecipher coded messages. The speed with which a digital messageis transmitted precludes radio tracking, at least by traditionaltriangulation. Among the other specialized devices used by traffickers todetect and avoid law enforcement surveillance are radaraltimeters, beacon-interrogating digital radar, position trackingequipment and long-range navigation instruments. Latestgeneration night vision goggles are also frequently used bytraffickers flying at low altitudes in darkness. The strap-ongoggles intensify any available light by a factor of 50,000 andgreatly reduce a smuggler's risk of interdiction by allowing himto fly his aircraft without lights. The Combined Effort A number of independent Colombian trafficking organizations,among them the largest and most powerful operations, work incollaboration on individual smuggling ventures. As described byDEA special agent Michael Fredericks, the resulting organizationis fluid: There is a level of organization that may involve . . . ahandful of people at the top. . . Below that level . . . thereare many workers who move between one organization and another. .. It seems that in the Colombian organizations, a laboratoryoperator may work for 1 [specific] trafficker . . . and not evenbe aware of it simple because of the levels of insulation. At the time of the preparation of this report, three men,Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria, Jorge Luis Ochoa Vasques, andCarlos Enrique Lehder-Rivas, were reported to control the mostsignificant trafficking organizations in Colombia. Known as"Los Grandes Mafiosos" in the Colombian press, eachdirects a separate organization, but the organizations work inconcert and exchange personnel and equipment in various instancesto maximize efficiency and profit. The resulting cartel systemaffords these traffickers numerous advantages, among them controlover the price and the quality of Colombian cocaine, greateraccess to smuggling and processing equipment, and a wide varietyof methods by which to avoid law enforcement. A chart detailing a temporary cooperative venture based inMedellin, Colombia, between the Pablo Escobar organization andthe Jorge Ochoa organization was confiscated from a mid-leveltrafficker involved in the operation, and was provided to theCommission by the Drug Enforcement Administration (Figure 2). Asdiagrammed, the Escobar and Ochoa organizations combined anddivided the trafficking responsibilities typically completed by asingle organization. The same component parts - labor,processing, transportation, finance and enforcement - werecarried over from the individual organizations, with the Escobargroup taking responsibility for production activities, and theOchoa group handling enforcement and finances. Colombia Cracks Down Through the 1970's cocaine traffickers operated throughoutColombia with little interference, and in fact with considerablesupport from the Colombian government. The situation changed inApril 1984 when drug traffickers assassinated Colombia's Ministerof Justice, Rodrigo Lara Bonilla. Lara's assassination came twomonths after he authorized a raid on a major cocaine processingplant known as Tranquilandia in Southeastern Colombia's Llanosregion, which resulted in the destruction of over $1 billionworth of cocaine. Following Lara's assassination, ColombianPresident Belisario Betancur Cuartas declared a "war withoutquarter" on all drug smugglers and signed extradition ordersfor a number of known major traffickers. President Betancur alsoshifted trafficking trials to Colombia's military courts,increased eradication and interdiction efforts within hiscountry, and increased regulation of those chemicals necessaryfor processing coca base into cocaine. President Betancur's actions have had important ramificationsboth for traffickers and for other South and Central Americangovernments. When the intensified Colombian programs becameeffective, a number of major traffickers, among them Escobar,Lehder and Ochoa, went into hiding and moved their processingoperations to neighboring countries. In 1984 processinglaboratories as well as stockpiles of essential conversionchemicals were discovered and destroyed in Panama, Venezuela,Mexico and Canada. Evidence suggests that significant processingactivity is now also taking place in Nicaragua and Brazil. TheColombian regulation of ether and other essential precursorchemicals has resulted in an increase in cocaine processingactivity in the United States: 21 processing laboratories werediscovered and destroyed in South Florida in 1984 as opposed to11 in 1983. In March 1985 despite his status as a fugitive, Carlos Lehderappeared on Colombian television, filmed live from a jungleclearing by a Spanish film crew. Lehder used the televisionopportunity, which he had arranged, to appeal to the Colombianrevolutionary organizations to participate in the "cocainebonanza . . . the arm of the struggle against America." Healso characterized cocaine as the "Achilles heel of Americanimperialism." Lehder disappeared into the jungle after theinterview and remains at large, presumably in the remote junglesof Colombia. Heroin Trafficking Traditional Organized Crime: La Cosa Nostra and the FrenchConnection Heroin trafficking in this country first became big businessin the 1920's, when organized criminals based in New York City'sJewish community began to control the importation anddistribution of the drug. By the late 1930's, La Cosa Nostrajoined the Jewish groups in the heroin enterprise, importing thedrug from France, Asia and the Mideast. When these sources becameinaccessible during World War II, Mexico became the major U.S.heroin supplier. After the war, La Cosa Nostra took control of America's heroinmarket, this time importing most of its drug supply from Italianrefineries. When the Italian government banned the manufacture ofheroin in the early 1950's, La Cosa Nostra traffickers wereforced to look to other sources. A new system was quicklydevised, by which Turkish morphine base was refined to heroin inMarseilles, then shipped to Montreal or Sicily. Organized crimegroups located in these transshipment points then sent the heroindirectly to the United States. This arrangement, popularly knownas the "French Connection," allowed La Cosa Nostra tomonopolize the heroin trade from the 1980's through the early1970's. During the peak French Connection years, the LCNcontrolled an estimated 95 percent of all of the heroin enteringNew York City, as well as most of the heroin distributedthroughout the United States. The La Cosa Nostra heroin monopoly lasted until 1972, whenunder diplomatic pressure from the United States, Turkey bannedopium production and the French Connection collapsed. Amsterdamreplaced Marseilles as the center of European heroin traffic, andChicago, Los Angeles and Miami joined New York City as major U.S.distribution centers. Other trafficking groups rose to competewith the LCN for heroin dollars in New York City and throughoutthe country. Source Country Traffickers: Mexico In the five years after the collapse of the French Connection,Mexico became the major source of U.S. heroin. Mexico's rise waslogical: the country contains extensive regions suitable for bothopium cultivation and refining and shares a lightly guarded 2,000mile border with the United States. Mexicans could manufactureheroin and smuggle it into the United States with little risk ofdetection. This simplified trafficking system resulted inincreased Mexican heroin availability in the United States. For generations, opium has been grown in remote areas ofMexico's Sierra Madre Mountain states of Durango, Sinaloa andChihuahua. Culiacan, on the western side of the Sierra Madre, andDurango to the east, developed in the 1970's as major productioncenters for heroin destined for U.S. distribution. Traffickingorganizations are now entrenched in these areas, and are involvedin all phases of the heroin manufacture and distribution process.Opium gum is collected by peasants in isolated mountain areas andis transported by mule or carried by hand to nearby mountainvillages. Typically, village middlemen sell the opium to a drugtrafficking organization boss, who moves drugs to anorganization-held laboratory for processing to heroin. Mexicancouriers then transport the heroin to the members of thetrafficking organization in the United States. The major Mexicanheroin trafficking organizations supplying heroin to America aregenerally extended familial organizations, but loyal workerssometimes are given status as "quasi-family" members ofthe groups. The organizations work to eliminate competition andto control as completely as possible all aspects of the herointrade. Members act as opium cultivators, village middlemen, andheroin brokers and distributors. In the United States, theorganization typically controls distribution from the wholesalerto the retail distributor, but has little or no involvement instreet distribution. This is seen as an unnecessarily risky andlow-profit aspect of the business, and is left to outsiders. Violence is an integral part of Mexican trafficking.Organization members provide cultivators with semi-automatic andautomatic weapons to protect their crops; weapons are usedthroughout the trafficking system to eliminate informants, and tointimidate competitors and law enforcement officials. Corruptionof Mexican police officials is well-documented and is essentialto the smooth operation of the Mexican trafficking organizations. In 1984, Mexican traffickers provided 32 percent share of theheroin consumed in the United States. The figure is expected torise over the next several years due to the continued devaluationof the peso and improved agricultural technology. Case Study: The Herrera Family Since the early 1970's the Jamie Herrera-Navarres organizationhas been a major heroin smuggling power operative between Mexicoand the United States. The Herrera organization is aconfederation of families related by blood and marriage, althoughsome non-family members have been accepted into the group overtime. Older family members process opium and morphine base,younger members handle the drug sales and shipments in Mexico andin the United States. The Herrera organization is now estimatedto have 3,000 to 5,000 members, a significant portion of whom arenaturalized American citizens and illegal aliens residing in thiscountry. Despite the 1978 conviction and incarceration of JamieHerrera, and several key family members, the organization remainsactive. In July 1985, 135 persons in the United States,comprising eight separate Herrera-related distribution rings,were indicted in Chicago on drug trafficking charges. TheseHerrera groups allegedly trafficked heroin and marijuana fromMexico through El Paso to a middleman in Texas. From Texas, thedrugs were shipped to Chicago, then distributed throughout thecountry. This Herrera enterprise, only a small fragment of thetotal organization, is estimated to have had gross annual profitsof over $200 million. The arrests are expected to have asignificant effect on the Herrera organization, if only on atemporary basis. Source Country Traffickers: Southeast Asia Mexican heroin production decreased in the late 1970's due toenforcement, eradication and poor weather conditions. By 1980,Mexico provided only 25 percent of the heroin consumed in theUnited Stated, down from a peak level of 80 percent in 1975. Atthe same time, heroin production in Southeast Asia accelerateddramatically. By 1976, the "Golden Triangle" of Burma,Thailand and Laos supplied more than a third of the heroinconsumed in the United States; Mexico supplied the remainder.Golden Triangle heroin first gained popularity with Americanservicemen stationed in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam Warbecause it was readily available, inexpensive, and considerablymore pure than Mexican heroin. After the war, Golden Triangleheroin was exported to the United States in increasing amounts. Nearly 90 percent of the Golden Triangle opium is currentlyproduced in Burma. Two-thirds of this crop is produced in thenortheast area of the country, where control is shared by theBurmese Communist Party (BCP) and the Shan United Army (SUA).Both groups were at one time political insurgent organizationsbut are now almost entirely devoted to obtaining profit for theproduction, smuggling and sale of heroin base. They deriveconsiderable income from "taxes" and fees they levy onopium growers and heroin producers and traffickers. This incomeis used to purchase weapons, to be utilized not in furtherance ofpolitical goals, but for protection of each group's narcoticsenterprise. Traditionally, the two groups have coexistedpeacefully: the BCP has acted as the major opium supplier inSoutheast Asia and the SUA has been the area's major refiner andtrafficker. The BCP has recently become involved in refining anddistribution activities, and the organizations are currently inconflict. Opium and morphine base produced in northeastern Burmatransported by horse and donkey caravans to refineries along theThailand-Burma border for conversion to heroin and heroin base.Most of the finished products are shipped across the border intovarious towns in North Thailand and down to Bangkok for furtherdistribution to international markets. In the past major ethnicChinese traffickers in Bangkok have controlled much of theforeign sales and movement of Southeast Asian heroin fromThailand, but a combination of law enforcement pressure,publicity and a regional drought has significantly reduced theirrole. As a consequence, many less-predominant traffickers inBangkok and other parts of Thailand now control smallerquantities of the heroin going to international markets. Although Thailand is the primary transit center for SoutheastAsian heroin destined for international markets, alternatetrafficking routes are increasingly utilized as a result ofThailand's sustained enforcement actions. Some opium, morphinebase, and heroin base are moved South through Burma to southernThailand and Malaysia for conversion to heroin in laboratoriesalong the Thailand/Malaysia border. Refined heroin is alsotrafficked from Burma to India, then to the West. Heroin from Southeast Asia is most frequently brought to theUnited States by couriers, typically Thai and U.S. nationals andHong Kong Chinese, traveling on commercial airlines. Californiaand Hawaii are the primary U.S. entry points for Golden Triangleheroin, but small percentages of the drug are trafficked into NewYork City and Washington D.C. While Southeast Asian groups havehad success in trafficking heroin to the United States, theyinitially had difficulty arranging street level distribution.However, with the incarceration of Asian traffickers in Americanprisons during the 1970's, contacts between Asian and Americanprisoners developed. These contacts have allowed Southeast Asiantraffickers access to individuals and organizations distributingheroin at the retail level. Chinese organized crime groups, known as Triads, locatedprimarily in Hong Kong, and their U.S. counterparts, Tongs, arepositioned to participate in Southeast Asian heroin traffic, butthe extent of their activity in these enterprises is not known atthe present time. These organizations provide Asians directaccess to criminal groups in the United States, and couldpotentially assume a significant role in U.S. heroin traffickingactivities. Currently, there are major Triad organizations in NewYork, Los Angeles, Seattle, San Francisco, and Toronto. Source Country Traffickers: Southwest Asia Opium production in Southeast Asia was significantly reducedin the late 1970's and early 1980's due to a prolonged drought.This decrease, along with the unstable political climate in theregion caused by the fall of the ruling governments in SouthVietnam and Laos, resulted in a reduction of Southeast Asianheroin exports to the United States. During this period, opiumproduction in the Golden Crescent area of Southwest Asia,comprising the common border regions of Pakistan, Afghanistan andIran, markedly increased. In 1979 the Golden Crescent became theprimary U.S. heroin source. Southwest Asia continues to be thiscountry's major supplier: over one-half of the heroin enteringthe United States in 1984 originated as opium in the GoldenCrescent. The surge in Golden Crescent heroin exports to the UnitedStates can be attributed to a number of factors. Opium has alwaysbeen grown in the region, but traditionally, opium grown inAfghanistan and Pakistan was shipped directly to Iran to supplythat country's one million opium addicts. The situation changeddramatically after the 1980 fundamentalist revolution in Iran, aspolitical and social instability allowed greatly increaseddomestic opium production and curtailed the demand for opium fromPakistan and Afghanistan. The Iranian market was further closedto outsiders by the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, whichblocked several of the traditional smuggling routes into Iran. Concurrent with the reduction in Iranian demand fornon-domestic opium, growers in Afghanistan and Pakistan harvestedrecord crops. The opium crop in Pakistan alone increased by 400percent between 1974-1979, from 200 to 800 metric tons.Consequently Pakistani and Afghan traffickers learned to refinetheir opium into heroin, and sought new markets for theirproduct, mainly in Western Europe and the and the United States. Southwest Asian opium is grown in remote mountain areas andgenerally is transported to crude laboratories in thePakistan/Afghanistan border areas. Most of the refineries arelocated in Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province orAfghanistan's Nangarhai Province; many are clustered in the areaof the Khyber Pass. Refined heroin leaves Pakistan via severalroutes: through Baluchistan to Iran and beyond; by sea throughKarachi to Bombay and on to the Arabian Gulf States or Europe;overland through the Lahore area enroute to transit points inIndia; or by air through Islamabad or Karachi. Southwest Asian heroin is typically smuggled into the UnitedStates concealed in legitimate shipments of air and sea cargo,such as textiles or sports equipment manufactured by Pakistanicompanies, or it is carried by air couriers. Couriers generallytravel on commercial carriers, and many have connections withairline crews and station managers. The international postalsystem is also commonly used to ship heroin from Pakistandirectly to the United States in sealed newspapers andperiodicals. Golden Crescent heroin is trafficked into the United States bya variety of narcotics organizations. The following is anoverview of some of the more significant groups involved in theSouthwest Asian heroin trade. Pakistani Traffickers Pakistani nationals are responsible for trafficking asignificant percentage of Golden Crescent heroin in the UnitedStates, especially in the Northeast. The Pakistanis do not have asophisticated retail sales network in the United States andtypically rely on family or Pakistani friends in this country todistribute drugs. They also have relied on black traffickingorganizations in Los Angeles, Detroit and New York, and withItalian organized crime in New York City. One Pakistanidistribution system was described in testimony before thisCommission by a Pakistani national who was incarcerated for hisinvolvement in a distribution network. The Commission witness hasrelatives living both in Lahore, Pakistan, and in the UnitedStates; he was a resident of Houston, Texas and was employed asan engineer while involved in heroin trafficking. In the heroinoperation, a family member in Lahore sent couriers to JFK airportin New York with heroin concealed in false-bottom luggage. FromJFK, the couriers traveled "in transit" to La Guardia,then on to Toronto. Because of their "in transit"status, Customs Service officials did not search the travelers inthe United States, and Canadian Customs inspection was notdifficult to clear. In Canada, traffickers often held a particular heroin shipmentfor three to six months, until appropriate distribution contactswere established and it was certain that law enforcementofficials were not aware of the shipment. At that time,distribution contacts traveled by automobile to Toronto, pickedup a portion or all of the heroin shipment, and drove the heroininto the United States without Customs interdiction. Thisparticular network supplied heroin to Seattle, Houston, SanFrancisco, New York and Las Vegas. The contacts were all relatedby blood or marriage. Pakistanis also rely on the international postal system tomove drugs from Southwest Asia to the United States. In July1983, for example, U.S. Customs officials at JFK Airport seizedone kilogram of heroin concealed in rolled newspapers destinedfor Pakistani nationals residing in New York. The package hadbeen sent from the United Arab Emirates. Two other packages, eachcontaining one-half kilogram of heroin, were mailed to Berkeley,California from the same source. Rolled newspapers and magazinescan conceal up to one kilogram of heroin and are generally sealedin plastic. Drugs are also sent through the mail concealed inshipments of textiles, clothing and other durable goods. Lebanese Traffickers A portion of Golden Crescent heroin passes through Lebanon enroute to the United States, thus affording Lebanese nationals anopportunity to become involved in the trafficking activity. Asignificant percentage of the heroin exported from Lebanon leavesvia Damascus International Airport. In the United States, trafficking by Lebanese nationals isespecially prevalent in the Northeast. In one network,non-Lebanese couriers primarily from Canada traveled to Damascusand Beirut to pick up heroin which they then transported toHouston, Detroit and New York via commercial carrier. Heroin wasconcealed in false-bottom luggage and inside photo albums. Theheroin was transferred to Lebanese nationals living in Torontoand Ontario, Canada, and in various cities in the United States.Some of the money generated from the sale of this heroin waslaundered in banks in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. India A proportion of the heroin traditionally distributed abroadthrough the Pakistan cities of Karachi, Peshawar and Quetta isnow being shipped through Bombay and New Dehli. Traffickerssmuggle Southwest Asian heroin into India along the Indo-Pakistanborder and transport it overland to the Indian cities; SoutheastAsian heroin is brought into Bombay and Calcutta by sea andoverland routes. Bombay, Calcutta and New Dehli are now majorstaging, shipping and trafficking centers for heroin smuggled tothe West. Trafficking activity is frequent at Perlane Airport inDehli and at Bombay's Sahar International Airport, and Indianharbors and airports are used by Pakistani, Afghan and Indiantraffickers as points of embarkation to Western destinations. West Africa. In the past three years, West African countries, especiallyNigeria, have been documented as transshipments centers forGolden Crescent heroin. Nigerian couriers based in Lagos travelto Pakistan to obtain heroin, then continue on commercial flightsto their final destinations, or return to Nigeria to repackagethe narcotics into smaller amounts for smuggling to the West. A number of loosely associated Nigerian heroin traffickingorganizations have connections both with suppliers in Pakistanand with retailers in Western Europe and the United States.Typically, Nigerian couriers travel directly to Karachi oncommercial aircraft and purchase heroin in that city, but somecouriers continue to Peshawar to make their purchases. Couriersreturn to Nigeria transiting other countries in Africa andEurope. A different group of couriers, usually students or poorresidents of Lagos, traffic the drugs to Europe or the UnitedStates. Couriers typically enter the United States directly throughJFK airport in New York although in some cases, they come to thiscountry via cities in Europe and Canada. Drugs are concealed inbody cavities, and in false-bottom suitcases. After the heroin arrives in the United States, it is sold onlyto one or two American distributors in a given area. Distributionnetworks are most active in New York City and Washington, D.C.and are operative in Los Angeles, Houston and Boston. DEA reportsthat individuals in nearly every community of Nigerian nationalsin the United States has some link to heroin traffickers andcouriers. Profits from heroin sales are laundered through banksin the United States in Britain. The Post-French Connection LCN Traditional organized crime continues to play a significantrole in this country's heroin trade through the 1980's. The LCN'slong established connections with criminal organizations inSicily facilitate the movement of heroin from Europe to theUnited States, and while Sicily is no longer a major refinery forheroin, the country is a major transshipment center for Southwestand Southeast Asian heroin. Sicilian organizations supply LCNaffiliates with heroin; LCN networks either distribute the drugthemselves or sell it in large quantities to major distributors. The LCN As A Supplier: The Nicky Barnes Operation Black criminal groups have controlled some percentage ofheroin traffic in New York City since the 1940's. Their influenceincreased significantly in the early 1970's, after the FrenchConnection. The first major independent black traffickingorganization, a group of over one hundred distributors andcouriers, was headed by Charles Green. The Green organizationimported heroin and cocaine from South America and distributedthe drugs throughout New York City during the late 1960's. Greenwas arrested in 1970, control of this heroin network passed toFrank Matthews. Matthews was brought in to the heroin business byLouis Cirillo, a major LCN associate, and was continuallysupplied with LCN heroin. Leroy "Nicky" Barnes succeeded Matthews in 1971.Under his leadership, the organization controlled heroin salesand manufacture throughout New York State into Canada andPennsylvania. The Barnes operation was well-organized andlucrative. By 1976, Barnes had at least seven major lieutenantsunder his direction; each of them controlled a dozen mid-leveldistributors, who in turn supplied up to forty street-levelretailers. Barnes at all times remained well insulated from thedaily trafficking activities, and maintained a wealthy lifestyle.He owned five homes, a Mercedes, a Maserati, several Lincolns,Cadillacs and Thunderbirds, and hundreds of suits and coats. Heestimates that his total trafficking income was at least severalmillion dollars. Barnes joined with six other major New York dealers to form aheroin cartel called the "Council" in the mid 1970's.Members of the Council pooled funds to purchase multi-kiloamounts of heroin, worked to ensure a consistent supply of thedrug in their distribution area, combined their"cutting" and distribution networks in certain cases,and often used a common sources for diluents, weapons,automobiles and other resources. The Council had specific"departments" which arranged legal services, securityand enforcement, and financial services including moneylaundering. Barnes' most significant source of heroin, to whom he directedother Council members, was LCN associate "Natty"Madonna. Despite Barnes' assertion and belief that the Councilworked completely independently of the Mafia, through the Madonnaconnection, LCN heroin was prevalent in Harlem traffic from 1972to 1976. The Asian-LCN Links La Cosa Nostra actively seeks out Asian nationals asconnections to heroin sources in Southeast Asia. In testimonybefore the President's Commission on organized crime, FranklinLiu, a veteran Hong Kong clothier, explained how he was recruitedas a courier for a New York La Cosa Nostra family involved inheroin trafficking. Liu, who held a legitimate four year businessvisa which allowed him to travel without restriction, was firstcontacted by Antonio Turano, a reputed member of the SicilianMafia, in connection with Turano's money laundering operations.In one instance, Turano brought Liu a suitcase filled with$400,000 cash, and requested that Liu wire the money to a bank inZurich. Turano met with Liu in Milan in the course of theoperation to make certain that the money had been wired withoutincident. At a later date, after Liu had successfully participated in anumber of money laundering operations, Turano asked Liu if he hadany connections to drug traffickers in the Far East; Liu did not.Turano arranged a connection, and agreed to pay Liu $5,000 forevery kilo of heroin he trafficked into the United States. Liuwas subsequently contacted by Turano's agent, a Thai woman, andarranged to meet her at a hotel in New York City. When they met,each held half of a one dollar bill given to them by Turano asidentification. Liu gave the woman his car keys; the next day shereturned the car with heroin in the trunk and requested a paymentof $40,000 in cash and a $60,000 bank check. When Liu went tocollect the money from Turano, he found that Turano had beenarrested. Liu was subsequently arrested and convicted on chargesof conspiracy to import heroin in connection with this case. The Pizza Connection During the late 1970's and early 1980's members of La CosaNostra in the United States allegedly cooperated with theSicilian Mafia in a drug trafficking conspiracy which resulted inthe importation of heroin worth over $1.6 billion into the UnitedStates. In April, 1984, 38 individuals were indicted on chargesrelated to the trafficking operation, popularly known as the"Pizza Connection." The network that developed tofacilitate the traffic in this enterprise was reputedly one ofthe largest heroin importation operations in history, and usedpizza parlors throughout this country to distribute heroinsmuggled from Southeast and Southwest Asia via Sicily to theUnited States. Additional heroin that was trafficked through thissystem was produced in laboratories operating in Sicily. According to the indictment in the case, the "PizzaConnection" heroin network relied upon a faction of the NewYork Bonanno organized crime family headed by Salvatore Catalanoto distribute the heroin in this country. In turn, the heroinbusiness of this Bonanno crime faction was tied directly toorganized criminal groups in Sicily, the rest of Italy,Switzerland, Spain, and Brazil. Direct evidence of the existenceof the network was first obtained in 1980 when couriers wereobserved transferring enormous amounts of cash through investmenthouses and banks in New York city to Italy and Switzerland. Tensof millions of dollars derived from heroin sales in this countrywere transferred overseas in this fashion, apparently inviolation of the Bank Secrecy Act. Investigations related to the "Pizza Connection"case have revealed that factions of the Sicilian Mafia operate inthe United States independently of the American La Cosa Nostra.While the two groups apparently cooperate on certain venturessuch as the "Pizza Connection" heroin importationoperations, they appear to be distinct and separate organizationsunder different leadership. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-36IA031-000653-B002-366http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc3a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133559 text/html 63532HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:35:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:59 GMTContent-length: 63314 Marijuana Trafficking Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter III Part 2: Marijuana Trafficking Marijuana trafficking presents both unique opportunities andsignificant disadvantages for the smugglers who provide the drugto American consumers. The volume of demand for marijuanaprecludes domination of the market by any group of traffickersand allows a constant influx of small-scale and mid-sizeoperators as limited suppliers. These smaller groups are in largepart able to enter the market because of marijuana'scomparatively low wholesale cost. While an investment of tens ofthousands of dollars is required for entry into the U.S. heroinor cocaine traffic, a capital investment of less than $10,000 isgenerally sufficient in the marijuana trade. Finally, althoughmarijuana is supplied to U.S. consumers by growers in Colombia,Mexico and Jamaica, nearly one-sixth of the U.S. supply isdomestically grown. Because significant amounts of the drug arecultivated in all 50 States, American traffickers need not travelto a foreign source country for a marijuana supply. While the barriers to entry in the U.S. marijuana traffic arerelatively low, marijuana sales generate a small profit incomparison to other illicit drugs. This is primarily becausemarijuana, unlike heroin or cocaine, in not diluted or"cut" in the intermediate phases of trafficking, but issold in much the same form at the wholesale and retail levels.Marijuana is bulky and difficult to transport in high-profitquantity: the profit generated from the retail sale of 700 poundsof commercial Colombian marijuana could most probably be equalledfrom the retail sale of one kilogram of diluted cocaine. Finally,trafficking marijuana implies increased risks of interdictionbecause the bulk of the drug makes it most visible to lawenforcement authorities. Despite the relative ease with which small-scale traffickerscan enter the marijuana market, only large criminal organizationshave the resources and connections necessary to generate largeprofits from marijuana trafficking. Many of these groups deal inother drugs in addition to marijuana, and are organized tofacilitate the movement of any drug to the United States withminimal interference from law enforcement authorities. Their sizeallows group control of all aspects of a trafficking venture fromcultivation through the wholesale transaction, thus eliminatingmiddlemen, decreasing costs and maximizing profit. Unlike smalleroperations, the major trafficking groups have the capitalrequired to purchase the large vessels, trucks, or planesnecessary for smuggling high profit multi-ton quantities ofmarijuana. A final advantage is their willingness to use violenceand corruption, the tools traditionally associated with organizedcrime, to ensure the success of smuggling ventures. Historical Context From the 1930's through the mid-1970's, Mexican growers andtraffickers supplied nearly all of the marijuana consumed in theUnited States. Most shipments of the drug were smuggled into thiscountry by car or truck; a small percentage was transported byair. The Mexican monopoly ended in 1975, when in a joint venture,U.S. and Mexican authorities increased marijuana interdiction anderadication efforts in major Mexican cultivation regions andalong the U.S. borders. Paraquat, a potent herbicide toxic tohumans, was used widely in the eradication program, andcontaminated much of the Mexican crop. Despite the interdictionefforts, a portion of the tainted marijuana was successfullysmuggled into the United States, and many Americans who smokedthe drug subsequently suffered adverse health consequences.Eradication and interdiction of the Mexican crop, compounded bythe American marijuana smokers' reluctance to purchase apotentially paraquat-tainted drug, resulted in a simultaneousdecrease in the availability of and the demand for Mexicanmarijuana. By 1979 Mexico supplied only an estimated 11 percentof the marijuana available in the United States and by 1981 thatfigure dropped to 4 percent. Concurrent with the commitment of more manpower and resourcesto marijuana eradication and interdiction efforts in Mexico,authorities in Jamaica, which was the source of the 10 percent ofthe American supply not originating in Mexico, mounted a similarcampaign. The Jamaican initiatives significantly reducedmarijuana production and trafficking in that country, andvirtually eliminated Jamaica from the American marijuana tradefor a number of years. During the mid-1970's America's two marijuana supply sources,traffickers in Mexico and Jamaica, had only small amounts of thedrug available for export. The resulting vacuum was swiftlyfilled by Colombian criminal groups, who for years had beeninvolved in smuggling all manner of contraband. Through the late1960's these groups increased cultivation of marijuana in remoteregions of the Guajira Peninsula and began to develop systems tofacilitate the transport of multi-ton quantities of the drug tothe United States. At the same time, many Colombian groups wereestablishing themselves as major operators in the cocaine trade:the organizational structures, trafficking routes and corruptedofficials necessary for cocaine ventures often proved equallyuseful for marijuana trafficking. Once the Colombians established a position as marijuanatraffickers, their role in the traffic expanded rapidly. By 1975airstrips capable of handling heavy 4-engine planes with thecapacity to hold one ton of marijuana were common along theGuajira Peninsula. Loading facilities for"motherships," large vessels capable of transportingtons of marijuana, dotted the coast. By the early 1980's aCongressional committee estimated that between 15 and 60 thousandtons of marijuana were exported from that country to the UnitedStates each year. In 1985 Colombia remains the major supplier of U.S. marijuana,but the Colombian share of the market has declined significantlysince 1980. This decrease is attributed to increased eradicationin Colombia and to accelerated interdiction along majortrafficking routes. Colombia's reduced production has been offsetby increased cultivation and trafficking both in Mexico andJamaica. Mexico, now ranked second in world marijuana production,could become the leading producer in 1986, given a Mexican bumperharvest and continuing eradication in Colombia. This short history of marijuana trafficking demonstrates thatlaw enforcement pressure in a particular cultivation area iscompensated by production and trafficking increases elsewhere.Trafficking organizations are positioned in all major sourcecountries to handle increased volume when opportunities present. Trafficking Today: Colombia Colombia supplied 42 percent of the marijuana consumed in theUnited States in 1984. The major percentage of this traffic wascontrolled by large Colombian criminal organizations. Although the Colombian marijuana crop is cultivated in severalregions of the country, the largest production occurs along theGuijara Peninsula. Colombian traffickers purchase marijuana fromgrowers, and sometimes provide protection and additionalfinancing for cultivation. Crops are harvested twice each year,with the largest harvest occurring in the fall. The harvestpattern directly affects the level of marijuana traffickingactivity between Colombia and the United States; trafficking isnaturally heaviest after the fall harvest. Nearly 90 percent of the marijuana exported from Colombia isshipped to the United States by sea; almost all the remainder istransported on general aviation aircraft. Both maritime and airtraffic are primarily concentrated along Colombia's north coast,although some percentage of the traffic is centered along thecountry's Pacific coast. The major portion of Colombian marijuana is shipped to theUnited States on large motherships. These ships are typicallyfishing vessels or freighters and can hold tons of marijuana; a100-foot mothership can transport SO tons and a 400 footmothership can ship over 100 tons of the drug. These ships,generally owned or at least controlled by Colombian traffickingorganizations, remain at sea or in selected Colombian ports untila shipment is prepared for export and transported to a beach sitealong the Colombian coast. There are more than 100 such sitesalong the north coast from Barranquilla to Portete, all which arelinked by a network of roads, trails and airstrips to the majorgrowing areas. When preparations are complete on shore, themothership moves into a prearranged loading point typicallyone-half to 3 miles offshore. Small boats then ferry bales ofmarijuana from shore to the mothership; loading of many tons maybe accomplished within an hour. Motherships are nearly alwaysloaded at night to decrease risks of detection. The loaded motherships generally either sail from the Guajiracoast directly to the southeastern United States or to Caribbeantransshipment points, where cargo is off-loaded for futurepickup. Traffickers use the same maritime routes popular withcocaine traffickers; the Windward Passage between Cuba and Haiti,the Yucatan Channel between Mexico and Cuba, and the MonaPassage, bordered by the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, aremost frequently traveled. From these routes American ports alongthe Gulf of Mexico and the east coast are accessible tosmugglers. In addition, a small percentage of Colombian ships nowsail directly to the U.S. west coast. Those motherships that approach the U.S. coast typically hover50-100 miles offshore in international waters. There, they aremet by small ships, typically purchased or rented shrimp boats,which off-load and ferry the drug shipment to shore. Whiletraffickers traditionally made no attempt to conceal bales ofmarijuana, either on motherships or on off-loading vessels,increased law enforcement surveillance has recently promptedsmugglers to hide their drugs in secret compartments or in emptyor false fuel tanks. The Colombian trafficking organization normally oversees thecultivation and export of marijuana only through the off-loadingprocedure. Off-loading is accomplished by "serviceproviders" who never actually own the marijuana, but whomerely collect a fee for its safe transfer. Once on the U.S.shore, the drug shipment is delivered to a distributor, who inturn supplies lower level dealers. The traffic below thewholesale distributor level is vast and not well-understood. Motherships that do not travel to the United States generallytransit the Bahamas and/or the Caribbean. In both regionsmarijuana traffickers can either transfer shipments frommotherships to smaller crafts, which sail to the United States,or they can unload and store shipments at island storage bases.Use of island transshipment points has increased as lawenforcement efforts have intensified along the southeastern U.S.coast. Rampant official corruption in a number of island nationsfacilitates this traffic. An estimated 3 percent of the marijuana shipped from Colombiato the United States by sea is transported on commercial vessels.Typically, marijuana is concealed in containerized cargo, but insome instances crewmen or cruise ship passengers have beendirectly implicated in trafficking the drug. In terms ofquantity, cargo shipment provides great opportunities fortraffickers and presents a decreased risk of interdiction. Air Shipment An estimated 10 percent of the marijuana smuggled fromColombia to the United States reaches this country via generalaviation aircraft or commercial air shipment. Non-commercial airshipment of marijuana parallels the Colombian air traffickingpatterns common in cocaine smuggling. Many of the same air routesand transshipment points are used; the same airstrips areaccessible along the north coast of the country, and the samemethods used to avoid law enforcement interference areapplicable. Smugglers use both smaller twin engine aircraft andlarger four-engine planes for marijuana transport. When airtransport allows faster shipment, it limits export quantities andincreases the likelihood of interdiction. A small portion of the marijuana exported from Colombia isshipped by aircraft, then air-dropped over sea or land for pickupand further shipment to the United States. Most airdrop activityoccurs in the Bahamas, but an increasing number of drops havebeen intercepted in the Yucatan Peninsula, Jamaica, Haiti, theDominican Republic and Puerto Rico. Medium-size to large twinengine aircraft are typically used for air-drop operations. In addition to trafficking marijuana to the United States ortransshipment points, Colombian organizations sell marijuanadirectly to non-Colombian traffickers, who assume responsibilityfor the shipment in Colombia. The buyers then traffic the druginto the United States using maritime and air shipment systemssimilar to the Colombian methods. Mexico Mexican marijuana production nearly doubled from 1983 to 1984,positioning Mexico as the second leading supplier of the drug tothe United States. An estimated 20 percent of the marijuanaavailable for consumption in the United States originates in ortransits Mexico, and that figure is expected to increase with abumper harvest in 1985. PEA analysts predict that this increasedproduction, with concomitant eradication and interdictionsuccesses in Colombia, could make Mexico the top Americanmarijuana source in 1985. Although marijuana is grown in nearly every state in Mexico,heaviest cultivation occurs in the northern and western states ofSonora, Sinaloa, Chihuahua, Oaxaca and Cuerra. As in Colombia,crops are harvested twice each year, with the largest harvest inthe fall. Cultivation occurs both in small open fields and inwell-maintained, hundred-acre sites. Growers are typicallyoverseen and financed by larger trafficking organizations. Harvested marijuana is prepared for shipment near thecultivation fields. Mexican marijuana is transported to theUnited States by primarily overland methods, although aircraftare also used to smuggle drugs across the border. Overlandshipments are typically concealed in automobile trucks, falsetruck beds, camper tops and tanker trunks. The larger truckscommonly haul multi-ton quantities: U.S. officials at El Paso,Texas, seized nearly 6.5 tons of marijuana from a tanker truck inFebruary 1984, and nearly 30 tons from a cargo truck in March ofthat year. In addition, suitcases of marijuana are oftenforwarded on commercial bus lines to destinations beyond bordercheckpoints for subsequent pick-up. Air shipments generally run between private Mexican airstripsand clandestine runways or drop spots in the southwestern UnitedStates. Single engine aircraft are popular with Mexican smugglersbecause they can land on open fields, roadways and rough landingstrips common on both sides of the border, and typically carryabout 1,500 pounds of marijuana. While few details are availableconcerning marijuana air shipment, the great assortment ofairstrips on both sides of the border suggests a significantvolume of air traffic. A 1977 survey, for example, detectednearly 3,000 airstrips in Mexico; one-half of them wereconcentrated in ten major clusters. About 600 strips lie alongthe United States border and are ideally positioned to serveeither as launching sites for flights into the United States oras refueling stops for flights en route to this country fromsouthern Mexico. Strips in the other clusters most likely serveas refueling and transshipment points for aircraft travelingbetween South America and the United States. A large number ofairstrips in the southeastern United States serve as landingsites for the Mexican flights. Larger Mexican criminal organizations appear to control asignificant portion of the marijuana traffic between Mexico andthe United States. Many groups are active in both cocaine andheroin smuggling as well as marijuana trafficking. The centralorganizations are generally controlled by members of one extendedfamily, but often include non-family members in lower positions.Like other trafficking groups, the Mexicans rely consistently onan essential criminal support of attorneys, bankers and otherprofessionals, both in Mexico and in the United States. Prominent among the larger Mexican organizations are thegroups headed by Jamie Herrera Navarres, Rafael Caro Quintero,Ernesto Fonesca and Miguel Felix Gallardo. These groupscollaborate in smuggling ventures, much as the major Colombiancocaine trafficking organizations work in concert to maximizeresources and profits. In one recent instance, for example, aconsortium of traffickers led by Caro Quintero cultivatedhundreds of hectares of marijuana at five separate large-scalesites throughout the state of Chihuahua. All fields werelandscaped, fertilized and well-irrigated, demonstrating theMexican traffickers' knowledge of high-tech agriculturaltechniques. The cultivation sites, along with eight associatedprocessing camps, were seized by Mexican authorities in November1984. The seizures netted 10,000 metric tons of whole marijuana,or an estimated 1,900 to 2,400 tons of net marketable marijuana.In this single operation, officials confiscated 8 times moremarijuana than Mexican and American authorities at the timebelieved was produced annually throughout Mexico. The seizureraised serious questions both about the magnitude of drug trafficbetween Mexico and the United States and about continuingofficial corruption throughout Mexico. It seems highly unlikelythat an operation the size of the Chihuahua system could developor function without earlier detection by authorities. Jamaica Jamaica, from 1980 to 1984 this country's second leadingmarijuana supplier, provided 14 percent of the United Statesmarket share in 1984, trailing Colombia's 42 percent and Mexico's20 percent contributions. Jamaican traffickers, much less highlyorganized than their counterparts in Colombia and Mexico,supplied about 1800 metric tons of marijuana, as well as smalleramounts of sinsemilla and hashish oil to United States consumersin 1984. The greatest portion of Jamaican marijuana is transported tothe United States by general aviation aircraft, although somemaritime shipment also occurs. Over 70 island airstrips, one-halfof which are clandestine, facilitate the air traffic, whichcommonly includes shipment by single engine and light to heavytwin engine aircraft. Jamaican marijuana shipments are typicallyeither flown directly to United States landing sites or areair-dropped to small pleasure craft in waters near the Bahamas. Multi-ton marijuana shipments are occasionally transported tothe United States on small motherships, pleasure craft and cruiseships. A small percentage of Jamaican marijuana exported to theUnited States is concealed in containerized cargo on commercialmaritime vessels. The United States Crop The United States is currently a significant marijuana sourcecountry: about 12 percent of the marijuana consumed in the UnitedStates in 1984 was domestically cultivated. The largest crops aregrown in Hawaii, California, and Oklahoma, but there is now someproduction in every State. Growers can be landowners, but aretypically squatters who operate independently or in small groups.They cultivate their crops in Federal fields, forested land,private clandestine plots or greenhouses, scattering plants nextto trees or amid legitimate crops to avoid detection. Planting onFederal land offers growers the advantage of anonymity andshields them from recently enacted laws which authorize seizureof their property or other assets. Many plots, including those onFederal parkland are wired with devices, such as punji sticks,fish hooks hung at eye level, and trip wires attached to guns andboulders, designed to ensure the security of the crop. Growersare often armed and violent. There is presently no evidence of a highly developeddistribution system for the domestic marijuana crop in the UnitedStates. It appears that numerous smaller organizations trafficthe drug between states and that some individual growers supplylarger criminal organizations in major cities nationwide. Theseorganizations, which include both La Cosa Nostra groups andtrafficking specific groups, distribute domestic and importedmarijuana to brokers, retailers, and street-level dealers. Theextent of their control of the U.S. market is uncertain butestimated to be significant. The Role of the LCN In 1967 Federal officials reported that the LCN was notsignificantly involved In trafficking marijuana. Low profit wasthought to be the primary disincentive to La Cosa Nostrainvolvement; in addition, the large and loosely structured marketwas thought to be unattractive and uncontrollable. In the late1960's the United States marijuana supply was exported almostexclusively from Mexico. Entry into the trafficking businessrequired little capital and a simple border crossing, and thusattracted many small and independent operators. When Colombiabecame the major United States marijuana supplier in the early1970's, however, the LCN was provided with a more controllablesource. Concurrent with this production shift, the United Statesdemand for marijuana and the retail price level for the drugsteadily escalated, prompting some LCN families to becomeinvolved in trafficking marijuana. For a short period, thisactivity proved to be a high profit/low risk enterprise fortraditional organized crime. Additionally, trafficking marijuanacarried little of the social stigma associated with traffickingheroin or cocaine. As the following case study demonstrates, marijuanatrafficking has increased the vulnerability of some organizedcrime families and has led to a number of significant LCNarrests. Case Study: The Cleveland Connection In the mid-1970's, Carmen Zagaria, a Cleveland drug dealer,began to buy wholesale marijuana by the pound and sell it atretail in one ounce bags. He rapidly expanded his business in thecourse of a few years and developed a network of suppliers,couriers and distributors. Although the business prosperedgenerally, Zagaria lost a substantial investment in one foileddrug transaction in 1979 and borrowed money from Angelo Lonardo,the reputed underboss of the Cleveland LCN Licavoli family. Inreturn for the loan, the Licavoli family assumed control of theZagaria operation. Under Lonardo's oversight, the Zagaria enterprise expandedrapidly. By 1980 the organization was buying 400-800 pounds ofmarijuana per week and had incorporated over 20 couriers. PCP,LSD, cocaine and hashish were added to the traffic. The methods used by Zagaria were simple. His couriers flew tothe southeastern United States, usually to Florida via commercialairline, and established contact there with a Zagaria supplier.Suppliers included both LCN affiliates and non-LCN dealers.Couriers picked up large marijuana shipments, paid for them incash, and drove the drugs back to Cleveland in rental cars. InCleveland the shipments were stored in stash houses, thendistributed to a network of wholesalers and retailers. TheZagaria enterprise was a high-volume multimillion dollaroperation; in a single 10-day period in 1980 the group brought3,000 pounds of marijuana to Cleveland from Atlanta. In the course of his trafficking business Zagaria was involvedin numerous crimes, including murder. In 1982 he was convicted ofselling seven pounds of marijuana and 21 grams of cocaine and wassentenced to 10-30 years in prison. Zagaria became a Federalinformant and though never a member of the Licavoli familyhimself, provided sufficient testimony about family activities tobring the leadership before a grand jury. In 1983 Angelo Lonardoand five other Licavoli associates were convicted andincarcerated without possibility of parole for numerous crimes,including conspiracy to distribute marijuana. Other Drugs Millions of Americans abuse a number of licit and illicitdrugs other than heroin, cocaine and marijuana; these includestimulants, synthetic narcotics, hallucinogens, and depressants.Most popular among these dangerous drugs are diazepam (Valium),methamphetamine and PCP. In addition, controlled substanceanalogs known commonly as "designer drugs," have gainedpopularity with users since 1980. Dangerous drugs are available to the consumer from three majorsources. Many of the drugs are approved for medical use in theUnited States, and reach the illicit market through a variety ofdiversion methods. A significant portion of the United Statessupply of certain drugs, notably amphetamines and diazepam, isdiverted from licit channels in foreign countries and smuggledinto the United States. Finally, it is estimated that all the PCPand chemical analogs, nearly all the methamphetamine and about 80percent of the injectable amphetamine available on the illicitmarket in 1984 were produced in clandestine United Stateslaboratories. Only certain areas of the traffic in dangerous drugs clearlyreflect organized crime involvement. Most notably, the trafficappears to be dominated nationwide by outlaw motorcycle gangs.According to the Commission's survey of local law enforcementofficials, these gangs control nearly 40 percent of the"dangerous drug" traffic in the United States. Whilethese gangs have traditionally been active in trafficking a widevariety of illicit drugs, they have developed the technology tomanufacture methamphetamine and PCP, and have been a major forcein the wholesale and resale distribution of these two drugsnationwide. The major outlaw motorcycle gangs traffic dangerous drugswithin separate territorial boundaries: the Hell's Angels controlthe West Coast trade, the Outlaws dominate the Midwest and partsof the east coast, the Bandidos control the Southwest, andEastern Seaboard States are dominated by the Pagans. Officialsare uncertain of the total membership of the four groups, butestimate that nearly all the U.S. traffic in PCP, and up tothree-fourths of the illicit methamphetamine traffic falls undertheir control. The Hell's Angels, the oldest of the four groups, first becameinvolved in drug distribution in the late 1960's. Initially, thegroup trafficked marijuana, heroin, cocaine, seconal, PCP,amphetamines and methamphetamines. In the early 1970's theorganization recruited a chemist to manufacture methamphetamineand to instruct other organization members in the procedure.Hell's Angels' activity shifted as their production ofmethamphetamine increased and within a short period of time, theorganization dominated west coast methamphetamine manufacture anddistribution. In the eastern United States, the Pagan's gang leadership alsorecruited chemists and gained control of the methamphetamine andPCP markets from Florida to New England. Pagan drug activity iscentered in the Philadelphia/ South New Jersey area; severalPagan-controlled processing centers and small laboratories arelocated in the region. It is known by law enforcement officialsthat Pagan gang members have frequently cooperated in jointventures with the Philadelphia Bruno organized crime family,especially in methamphetamine and PCP manufacture anddistribution. Officials believe that the Bruno leadershipregularly finances a portion of Pagan drug activities in returnfor a percentage of the drug profits and enforcement andprotection services. In addition, it appears that the Pagans andthe Bruno family have arranged to divide control of themethamphetamine and PCP markets in certain territories and thatthe two groups coexist and cooperate in these regions. Case Study: The Pagan/Bruno Relationship. Between 1977 and 1981 both the Pagan motorcycle gang and theBruno organized crime family were active and competitivedistributors of methamphetamine throughout the mid-Atlanticstates. Both groups obtained P2P, an essential chemical inmethamphetamine production, from Ronald Raiton, the majorsupplier of the chemical in the eastern United States. Raitonsupplied P2P directly to Ronald Kownacki, a businessman closelyaligned with the Pagan leadership, and to Ronald Martorano, aBruno family associate. Though Kownacki and Martorano bothoperated in the Philadelphia area, their laboratories andclientele were distinct. Kownacki paid the Bruno family a $10,000 fee for every gallonof P2P he purchased from Raiton. He sold the methamphetamine heproduced to Pagan Walter "Buckets" Jozwiak, who cut thedrug and distributed it to Pagan mother club members in NewJersey, Delaware and Philadelphia. Martorano distributed hismethamphetamine through Bruno family channels. In 1980 Kownacki was assaulted and robbed by two Brunoassociates, who claimed they were collecting a debt owed to theBruno family. They stole a significant amount of gold fromKownacki, which he maintained belonged to the Pagans. In February1981 a number of Pagans confronted members of the Bruno familyand demanded that the gold be returned. The Bruno associatesrefused, but agreed to meet with the Pagans to negotiatedpossible joint ventures in trafficking methamphetamine and PCP.Finally in 1982 the Pagans and the Bruno family agreed that eachgroup would control methamphetamine and PCP markets in separateterritories and that competition between them in these areaswould cease. In 1983 after the agreement, the estimated streetvalue of the Pagan PCP and methamphetamine operations was $15.5million. Organized crime involvement in trafficking dangerous drugsother than methamphetamine and PCP in the United States is notwell-documented. La Cosa Nostra appears to be active intrafficking methaqualone from Colombia through Florida to majorUnited States cities, but the scope of their interest in thismarket is not known. Mexican traffickers have smuggledsignificant quantities of diazepam, methaqualone and amphetamineinto this country for at least ten years. A major portion of theillicit methaqualone traditionally available in this country wastrafficked to the United States by Colombian organized crimegroups; however, international controls adopted by virtually allmajor producing and exporting countries have led to worldwideshortage of the drug. The DEA currently reports that organized crime is not nowinvolved in the production or distribution of controlledsubstance analogs, "designer drugs." Given the enormousprofit potential of these substances, however, and the relativelysimple manufacturing processes required in their production, theformulation and distribution of controlled substance analogswould seem to be an endeavor perfectly suited to organized crime. Drug Trafficking, Terrorism, and Insurgency Drug trafficking organizations in many areas of the worldcoexist and cooperate with political insurgent groups andterrorists. Their typical relationship is mutually beneficial:traffickers supply terrorists with American currency and weaponsin return for protection and assistance in smuggling activities.While terrorists and insurgents do not currently controlsignificant portions of the drug trade, the profit potentiallyrealized from even isolated drug transactions could providesizable revenues for a militant cause. Terrorists and insurgentsfunded through drug trafficking could very conceivably becomepowerful enough to disrupt governments in a number of countriespresently allied with the United States, and thus pose a seriousthreat to this country's national security. The role of terrorists and insurgents in drug trafficking hasexpanded greatly since the early 1970's as drug trafficking hasspread across the world. At that time, heroin traffic wascontrolled by North American organized crime groups working withSicilian suppliers in the French Connection, marijuana wassupplied to the United States almost exclusively by Mexicantrafficking organizations, and cocaine traffic in this countrywas insignificant. Heroin now reaches North America from Europe,the Middle East, Mexico and Southeast Asia. Marijuana istrafficked to the United States by Colombian and Caribbean basedgroups as well as by Mexicans, and cocaine from nearly everycountry in South America satisfies a still-increasing demand forthe drug throughout this country. At the same time, the expanded United States market forillicit drugs has swelled the profit from trafficking to enormousproportions, and attracted terrorist and insurgent groups to thisactivity. In addition, this source of funding serves theideological purposes of many groups. As explained by terrorismexpert Michael Ledeen: Running drugs is one sure way to make big money in a hurry.Moreover, the directions of the flow are ideologicallyattractive. Drugs go to the bourgeois countries, where theycorrupt and where they kill, while the arms go to pro-Communistterrorist groups in the Third World. The links between terrorist and insurgent groups andtraffickers are most substantial in drug source countries,including Colombia, Peru, Burma and Thailand. In Colombia, fourmajor insurgent organizations work in collaboration with cocainetraffickers. The oldest, largest, and best-equipped of thesegroups is the Revolutionary Armed Force of Colombia (FARC), whichis the armed wing of the Colombian Communist Party (PCC) andclaims over 5,000 active members and supporters. The FARC forcesconsist of between 23 and 28 "fronts," essentiallyindependent company-level forces, nearly all of which are locatedin Colombia's rural areas. Over one-half of the fronts operate incoca and marijuana growing regions. FARC forces cultivate somecoca, but derive more profit by collecting protection paymentsfrom coca growers in their operating territory, often demanding a10 percent share of the drug profits. One FARC front reportedlyobtained over $3.8 million per month by assessing this protectiontax. Collected monies are used to buy weapons and supplies whichare often shipped into Colombia on return drug flights. Two FARCfronts have had documented direct dealings with cocainetraffickers to obtain arms and ammunition. In exchange for the levied fee, the FARC forces protectgrowing and trafficking areas, including air fields, and warntraffickers of nearby anti-narcotics police or military patrols.In certain areas of Colombia FARC fronts control enough strategicpoints to make police travel difficult or impossible. FARC encampments have recently been discovered in closeproximity to several major cocaine processing centers. Forexample, on April 6, 1984, during a raid of a fully operationalprocessing center in Southeast Colombia known as "LaLoma," officials discovered and subsequently destroyed aFARC guerrilla base camp. The FARC camp, complete with airstripsand large stockpiles of food and medical supplies, that group'sdirect involvement in providing protection for the cocainetraffickers. A month prior to the La Loma raid, when authoritiesraided another processing center nearby known as Tranquilandia,they were met by approximately 30 armed resistors in fatigueuniforms believed to be FARC members. A number of other militant organizations in Colombia have alsobeen associated with the drug trade. The leftist 19th of Aprilmovement (M-19) has been most notable for its October 1985takeover of the Colombian Palace of Justice in which 11 of thatcountry's Supreme Court Justices were murdered. Although M-19 wasonce hostile to traffickers, and on several occasions kidnappedrelatives of prominent drug smugglers, some officials maintainthat the October incident was related to drug trafficking. It isalleged that the attack was motivated by the M-19's desire todestroy records that might lead to the extradition a number ofmajor Colombian cocaine traffickers, and to intimidateauthorities in Colombia to force them to rescind the extraditiontreaty in effect between that country and the United States. M-19also at least once traded drugs for arms from Cuba throughColombian trafficker Jaime Guillot-Lara. In the early 1970's to1982 Guillot supplied M-19 with weapons in return for theirassistance in his drug smuggling activities through high-rankingCuban officials. The Cubans provided a safe haven for Guillot'sdrug smuggling vessels en route to the United States fromColombia in return for payments. M-19 received periodic weaponsshipments for facilitating the arrangement on Guillot Lara'sreturn trips to Colombia from the United States. In Peru, where an estimated 40 percent of the world coca cropis grown, insurgents and traffickers share much the samerelationship evidenced by the Colombians. Insurgents and growerswork in the same remote areas, primarily in the upper HuallagaValley, but operate separately. Smugglers supply arms and moneyare supplied in return for militant protection. The two groups donot maintain a structured relationship or pursue common goals;their collaboration is one of convenience. The most prominent insurgent group currently operating in Peruis the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso), which seeks arural-based revolution to rid the predominantly peasantpopulation of the "imperialistic" influences of theUnited States and other foreign governments. While existingevidence is insufficient to link the Shining Path to the drugtrade, the group has incited peasants, many of whom make theirliving from coca cultivation, to rebel against anti-coca projectsin major growing areas. During 1984 several anti-coca projects,including a United States-supported crop substitution program,were attacked by armed mobs, resulting in many injuries anddeaths. In Southeast Asia a number of political insurgent groups relyprincipally on heroin smuggling to finance their activities. Theycontrol or influence the main areas of opium production innortheastern Burma, where the Burmese government does not exertauthority. The insurgents range from ideological revolutionarieslike the Burmese Communist Party (BCP), to ethnic separatists,such as the Kachin Independence Organization (KIO), and opiumwarlords, like the Shan United Army (SUA). All of these groups,whatever their professed objectives, are heavily involved in theproduction, transport or sale of heroin. In Burma, where 90 percent of the southeast Asian opium cropis grown, the BCP controls an estimated two-thirds of the majoropium production areas and levies a protection tax oncultivators. While the BCP has traditionally controlled opiumcultivation and the SUA has exclusively dominated associatedrefining and trafficking activities, the BCP has recently begunto engage in processing and sales, and the groups have come intoconflict. The BCP remains an active political insurgency whilethe SUA now concentrates its resources almost entirely on thedrug trade. In Thailand the link between insurgency and drug traffickingis much weaker. Although Burmese groups operated with relativeimpunity on both sides of the Burma/Thailand border in the early1980's, government initiatives in Thailand have severelydisrupted their activities. The only indigenous Thai insurgentgroup of any consequence, the Communist Party of Thailand (CPT),is reportedly ready to engage in drug trafficking, but has beenkept under control by Thai security forces. In the Middle East, nearly all the militant groups engage instruggle in Lebanon - Palestinians, Phalangists, Druze andShiites - reportedly are financed in some part by the drug trade.Lebanon's Bekaa Valley is the site of significant hashishproduction; heroin laboratories are also believed to exist in thearea. Terrorists throughout that area can and do enter the drugtrade, either directly or by protecting drugs transshippedthrough regions they control. Armenian terrorists are also active in Lebanon, especially inBeirut, where Armenian nationals are heavily involved in drugtrafficking. In 1980 Noubar Sofoyan, an Armenian heroin andhashish trafficker connected with the right-wing JusticeCommandos of the Armenian Genocide, was indicted in the U.S. forheroin smuggling. Sofoyan allegedly helped fund the 1976 bombingof a Turkish installation in Zurich. He was arrested in Greece ondrug charges in 1981 and was subsequently extradited to Lebanonand released; he remains a fugitive today. Traffickers as Terrorists While drug traffickers are not by definition terrorists orinsurgents, they rely heavily on terrorist tactics to obtainlimited political objectives. The use of threats, violence,assassination and kidnapping by trafficking organizations toprevent vigorous enforcement of drug laws can only be categorizedas terroristic in nature. The use of terrorist tactics is most evident among traffickersin Colombia, Peru and Mexico. In Colombia much of the violencecenters on the issue of the extradition of reputed Colombian drugtraffickers to the United States for trial. The extradition issuehas become prominent in the past two years under ColombianPresident Belisario Betancur, and has prompted unprecedentedlevels of terrorism by traffickers. Two key members of theColombian government, Minister of Justice Rodrigo Lara-Bonillaand Justice Ministry Assistant Eduardo Gonzalez, both outspokensupporters of the implementation of the United States/Colombiaextradition treaty, were murdered reportedly by traffickers in1984. The Colombian judiciary, the body responsible both for theinvestigation of drug cases and the disposition of extraditionrequests, has been targeted by traffickers. Twenty-four judges,among them the judge investigating the Lara assassination, havebeen murdered in the past two years. Americans have also beensingled out: Colombian traffickers have reportedly offered a$350,000 bounty for the murder of any top DEA official in theUnited States or in Colombia, and have threatened to kill fiveAmericans for every reputed Colombian drug trafficker extraditedto the United States. In Peru drug-related violence has been increasing since 1983,and has specifically targeted anti-drug efforts in the UpperHuallaga Valley. A series of violent attacks by traffickers onpolice units and eradication workers in that area led to theNovember 1984 torture and murder of 19 members of a UnitedStates-financed coca-eradication team, and subsequently to thebrutal murder of 17 United States financed eradicators by about50 traffickers armed with submachine guns less than one yearlater. Dozens of people in Peru, including policemen, mayors andfarmers have been reported killed in the past year in attacksattributed to cocaine traffickers. In Mexico trafficking violence culminated in the Februarykidnapping, torture and murder of DEA Agent Enrique Camerena anda Mexican pilot. Camerena's abduction occurred shortly afterMexican police, alerted by DEA, raided the largest marijuanaplantation ever discovered in that country and seized anestimated 8,500 tons of marijuana. In the course of the searchfor Camerena, five persons, including a police officer, werekilled. Mexican trafficker Rafael Caro Quintero is being held byMexican authorities in connection with the Camerena murder. Thetrafficking-related violence in Mexico escalated further inNovember 1985, when 17 police officers and other members of ananti-drug team working in southern Mexico were lured into anambush, tortured, and killed by a large group of drug traffickersarmed with automatic weapons. Government Complicity A number of hostile foreign governments, motivated either by aneed for hard American currency, or by a more ideological desireto undermine governments in Europe and the United States,actively facilitate drug trafficking activities. Cuban andNicaragua blatantly aid traffickers smuggling drugs from Colombiato the United States; the Bulgarian government assiststraffickers transporting drug shipments from Southwest Asia toWestern Europe. All three countries are geographicallywell-positioned to serve as transshipment points for drugs enroute to Europe or the United States, and all allow traffickingroutes to cross through their sovereign territory, thus providinga way for traffickers to circumvent drug-interdictionauthorities. Cuba Reports of Cuban government involvement in drug traffickingfirst surfaced in the early 1960's, but were in large measureunsubstantiated. A series of reports in the 1970's subsequentlysuggested Cuban Government involvement, but did not provide solidevidence of such activity. In the early 1980's, however, the linkbetween the Cuban government and Colombian drug traffickers wasdocumented. In November 1982, the United States District Courtindicted four major Cuban officials on charges of conspiracy tosmuggle drugs; those indicted included the former CubanAmbassador to Colombia, two officials of the Cuban CommunistParty, and the Vice Admiral of the Cuban Navy. All four officialswere involved in facilitating the trafficking activities ofColombian Jaime Guillot-Lara, reputedly a major marijuana,cocaine and methaqualone trafficker. The Cuban officials,according to the indictment, agreed to allow Cuba to be used as asupply and loading center for Lara's ships transporting drugs tothe United States, and permitted him to navigate drug vesselsthrough Cuban waters to evade United States interdictionauthorities. The Cuban Government reportedly expected largepayments for their role in this traffic; on one occasion, thegovernment was to receive approximately $800,000 from the sale of10 million methaqualone pills and approximately 23,000 pounds ofmarijuana. In addition to facilitating maritime trafficking, recentreports indicate that drug traffickers regularly fly throughotherwise tightly controlled Cuban airspace. Traffickersapparently have an assigned corridor which they can transitwithout challenge from Cuban air defenders. Cuba also reportedlyallows Colombian traffickers to off-load drugs to other carriersfor the final journey to the United States. It is often difficult in drug trafficking cases to make adistinction between corrupt high-ranking government officials andgovernment-sanctioned involvement in the drug trade. Given,however, the tight controls exerted by the Castro government'ssecurity apparatus over foreign travel and communications, thedrug-related activities which have occurred in Cuba in recentyears almost certainly were known and approved by that country'shighest ranking officials. According to the Department of State: . . . the evidence clearly indicates more than a case ofcorruption by local or mid-level security officials in Cuba . . .Narcotics trafficking has apparently been sanctioned by Cuba as ameans to finance subversion in Latin America. Nicaragua Since 1981, the United States has received a steady stream ofintelligence indicating that Nicaragua is used by drugtraffickers as a transshipment point between Colombia and theUnited States, and that officials of the revolutionary governmentthere, the Sandinista Directorate, are involved in the drugtrade. Evidence further suggests that enforcement measuresimplemented by Colombian President Betancur have promptedColombian traffickers, notably Jorge Ochoa and Pablo Escobar, torelocate their cocaine processing facilities to Nicaragua. The best evidence to date of the link between the Nicaraguangovernment and Colombian drug traffickers came to light in 1984.In that year, pilot Adler Barriman Seal, a former Ochoa cocainetrafficking pilot working then with the DEA in an undercovercapacity, reported that Escobar and Ochoa had agreed in April1984 to use Nicaragua as a cocaine smuggling base. At Ochoa'srequest, Seal flew 750 kilos of cocaine in June, 1984 fromColombia to an airfield just northwest of Managua. The airfieldwas used generally as a joint facility by the Nicaraguan armedforces and the Ministry of the Interior. Seal's aircraft wasdamaged in the landing, and according to Seal, Frederico Vaughn,a personal assistant to Interior Minister Thomas Borge, arrangedfor him to return to the United States in another plane. Laterthat June, Seal returned to the airfield in a C-123 aircraft,equipped with a hidden camera, to retrieve the drugs. Both Vaughnand Escobar, escorted by Nicaraguans in uniform and recorded onvideotape, personally helped Seal load the cocaine into theaircraft. Vaughn was paid $1.5 million for providing theColombian traffickers "secure facilities." In July 1984, Seal made another trip to Nicaragua from theUnited States to bring supplies for a new cocaine processingcomplex under construction there. In a subsequent tapedconversation with Seal, Frederico Vaughn stated that theprocessing center was ready for use. Eleven persons, including Vaughn, were indicted by a Federalgrand jury on charges stemming from this trafficking arrangement.All remain at large. It is highly unlikely that these traffickingactivities occurred without the knowledge and consent of theSandinista government. Bulgaria Since the late 1970's, reports that many drug dealers,especially Turkish nationals, operate out of semi-permanent basesin Bulgaria have been in circulation. The allegations againstBulgaria include charges that the Bulgarians, primarily throughan official government trading firm, Kintex, officially sanctionthe sale of illicit drugs to Western Europe and use the proceedsfrom those sales to finance illegal arms transactions and tobankroll terrorist groups. There are consistent reports thattop-ranking members of the Bulgarian Security Service orex-Bulgarian ministers comprise the directorate of Kintex. Certain smugglers are reportedly permitted to conductactivities within Bulgaria. In effect, Bulgarian officials,though Kintex, assign representatives to establish feearrangements with smugglers for bartered contraband. Smugglerstrafficking through Bulgaria are primarily Turkish nationals ofKurdish background, but include Syrian, Jordanian, Lebanese andEuropean nationals. Corruption The Role of the Corrupt Official The corrupt official is the sine qua non of drug trafficking.By the corruption of his office, he protects the interest oftraffickers in all phases of growing, processing and smugglingillicit drugs. Officials "from the lowly constable onup" are bribed and subverted by traffickers. Mexico While United States officials and investigators commonlyacknowledge that corruption among the ranks of both the MexicanFederal Judicial Police and the Directorate of Securityfacilitates drug trafficking in and through that country, theyare hesitant to make open accusations concerning the relationshipbetween corrupt officials and traffickers. Their reasoning ispersuasive: Mexico is a neighbor and an ally, a politically andeconomically unstable one at that. The government of PresidentMiguel de la Madrid appears sincere in its efforts to improve thequality of drug law enforcement throughout the country.Nonetheless, mounting evidence prompted the Department of Stateto assert in its 1985 mid-year report to Congress that: There are strong indications that the Mexican [drug] programhas been less effective over the past two years, and thatcorruption is playing a major role in this decline. Drug-related corruption among members of Mexico's Federalpolice force, which was widespread and well-publicized in the1970's, continues to undermine anti-drug efforts in that country.Allegations of corruption surfaced in March 1985, after DEA agentEnrique Camarena Salazar and his pilot, Alfredo Zavala Avelarwere kidnapped and murdered in Guadalajara. Six Mexican policeofficers were indicted on charges related to the Camarena murder;they were charged with assisting drug traffickers through"protection of personnel and goods, custody of drugs intransit, as well as continuing services of information." Thearrested officers have reportedly confessed that drug traffickersoffered them between $200 to $6,250 a month for officialprotection. In connection with the Camarena case, DEA officials maintainthat Jorge Armando Pavon Reyes, the First Commandante of theMexican Federal Judicial Police, who directed the investigationinto the Camarena murder, accepted a bribe from the traffickersuspect in the killing, Rafael Caro Quintero, and in returnallowed Caro to leave Guadalajara. Later apprehended in CostaRica, Caro claimed in a confession that he paid Pavon Reyes$265,000 to avoid arrest at the Guadalajara airport. Despite hisdenials of the charges, Pavon Reyes was indicted for the crime inMexico in April 1985. United States pressure after the Camerena murder andsubsequent revelations of corruption prompted a number of quickresponses from the Mexican Government. President de la Madridannounced a major reorganization and consolidation of the policeforces under stronger Federal control; the governor of oneMexican state dismissed that state's entire judicial system,including the state attorney general, police and administrativepersonnel; and a reported 100 agents of the Federal SecurityDirectorate, a political police force and counterintelligenceunit run by the Interior Ministry, resigned in the face ofcorruption allegations. Corruption in at least some Mexicaninstitutions, however, appears to be deeply embedded and notlikely to be eliminated quickly or easily. At the end ofSeptember, 1985, six months after the Camerena murder, evidenceof Mexican corruption continued to surface as the members of theUnited States Fraternal Order of Border Patrol Agents chargedthat: Mexican federal agents, using the latest in radio andscanner-equipped cars and armed with automatic weapons, have beenproviding transit security for huge loads of domesticallyproduced marijuana and heroin and in-transit cocaine. Bahamas and Caribbean The Bahamas and a number of Caribbean countries serve as amajor refueling transshipment points for traffickers transportingillicit drugs from Mexico and South America to the United States.Corruption among officials at all levels throughout thesecountries appears to be widespread. Drug-related corruption has reached the highest offices ofgovernment in the British-held Turks and Caicos Islands, where inMarch 1985, that country's Chief Minister, Norman Saunders, wasconvicted of conspiracy to travel in furtherance of a drug plotand on five counts of traveling in furtherance of in illicit drugtransaction. Saunders, the first foreign head of state to beconvicted on drug charges, was found not guilty of more seriouscharges of conspiracy to smuggle marijuana and cocaine. Trialwitnesses testified that Saunders accepted a total of $50,000 toallow drugs to move freely through his island chain. He plannedto use the islands as a "safe-haven" for traffickerssmuggling illicit drugs from Colombia to the United States.Stafford Missick, Minister of Commerce and Development in theSaunders government, was convicted of conspiracy to importcocaine and marijuana in the case; a third indicted Turks andCaicos official, Aulden Smith, has not yet been tried. In the Bahamas, a 1984 Commission of Inquiry investigatingdrug trafficking through the Islands reported that Bahamianofficials "from policemen to cabinet minister" allowedthe Islands to be used as a transshipment point for illicit drugsin return for sizeable bribes. A majority of the three-manCommission concluded that no credible evidence directly tiedBahamian Prime Minister Lynden Pindling to the drug-relatedcorruption, but noted that Pindling's bank accounts reflecteddeposits of $3.5 million in excess of his salary between 1977 and1983. The Commission of Inquiry noted that a number of the FamilyIsland Commissioners, the representatives of the centralgovernment on nearly all the Bahamian Islands: claimed they either had no direct knowledge of drugtrafficking or had never received any complaints regarding suchactivity . . . We find that to be quite remarkable and we do notbelieve that they were being candid with us . . . they could nothelp but know what was going on in relation to drug trafficking.We have concluded that there must have been a degree ofacquiescence on their part . . . The Commission report also charged that Colombian cocainetrafficker Carlos Enrique Lehder Rivas operated an extensivecocaine enterprise in the Bahamian Island of Norman's Cay from1978 until 1982, and the Lehder paid "substantialbribes" to various ranks of policemen and customs officialsto facilitate his illicit drug activities. Former trafficker Luis Carcia, who transshipped marijuana andcocaine through the Bahamas on a regular basis in the late 1970'sand early 1980's testified before the President's Commission onOrganized Crime that he had: . . . never seen corruption such as there is in the Bahamas.The policemen used to plead with me to use airstrips in theirterritory so they could received the pay-off . . . sometimesoff-duty police unloaded the stuff from the plane and into theboats for me . . . we always operated out of the Bahamas becauseof the total corruption there. South America Official corruption has seriously hindered anti-drug effortsthroughout South America, especially in Bolivia and Peru.Throughout Bolivia during the 1980's regime of General GarciaMeza, corruption among high-level officials charged with drugenforcement was so rampant that "the government itselfbecame an international drug trafficker." Despite thesubsequent efforts the current Bolivian government to moreeffectively enforce drug control laws, corruption at all levelsof the Bolivian government remains a major problem. In 1983, forexample, Bolivian authorities arrested two suspected traffickerswith a small amount of cocaine and confiscated a 14,000 acreranch and two airplanes belonging to them. Two weeks later, themen were transferred to the authority of a local prosecutor whosubsequently released them and returned their possessions.According the reports, at least $250,000 in bribes were paid toBolivian police and government officials for the release of thetwo traffickers. In August 1985, officials in Peru began a drug corruptioninvestigation that country's entire Interior Ministry afterauthorities discovered direct telephone lines linking reputedcocaine trafficker Reynaldo Rodriguez Lopes to officials at theMexican Consulate in Peru. Officials also found a government carbelonging to a top aid of former Interior Minister and PrimeMinister Luis Percovich parked in front of Lopes' home. These are a few among many examples. Corruption linked to drugtrafficking is a widespread phenomenon among political andmilitary leaders, police and other authorities in virtually everycountry touched by the drug trade. The easily available andenormous amounts of money generated through drug transactionpresent a temptation too great for many in positions of authorityto resist. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-37IA031-000653-B002-387http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133614 text/html 78391HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:36:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:44 GMTContent-length: 78173 Federal Drug Strategy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Note from Cliff Schaffer: This chapter is a summary of some of the major events inAmerican drug prohibition. What is most interesting about thischapter is what it leaves out. For example, elsewhere in thesepages you will find numerous historical references to the racialmotives behind these laws. In this chapter, there is only apassing reference to an opium law restricting trade by theChinese. In addition, the chapter spends a good deal of time talkingabout President Nixon's administration and the reorganizationwhich took place, but fails to mention that Nixon commissionedthe largest study of drug policy in American history, whichdisagreed with his policy. Chapter IV Part 1: Federal Drug Strategy... Federal Drug Strategy: Origins, Evolution, and Current Status Introduction The Federal response to the national problems of drug abuseand drug trafficking over the years has been both dynamic andcharacterized by frustration. Drug use and its concomitantorganized crime effects continue to challenge the Nation todevelop a more effective and sophisticated response. Typically, aparticular Federal enforcement reaction to drug abuse and drugtrafficking has prompted drug traffickers and drug abusers totake defensive actions, which in turn have required new ordifferent governmental responses. This reactive process has beenparticularly characteristic of the Federal effort over the lasttwo decades. The history of Federal drug policy that follows demonstratesthat approaches to reduce supply have been the preferred anddominant Federal response over the last 75 years. It is onlyrelatively recently that the nature of the drug supply-demanddynamic has become widely understood, leading to an increasedappreciation for and emphasis on programs to reduce demand, andthat there is still no consensus on what the role of the Federalgovernment in the national campaign against drug trafficking anddrug abuse should be. The Early Years Although use of drugs has been viewed by many Americans as amedical problem or a personal moral shortcoming throughout thiscountry's history, laws regulating or proscribing such use are ofrelatively recent vintage. The first significant piece ofprohibitory legislation relating to drugs in the United Stateswas an ordinance enacted in 1875 by the city of San Franciscoprohibiting the operation of opium dens, commercialestablishments in which the smoking of opium occurred. Onewestern state after another followed San Francisco's lead andenacted legislation prohibiting opium smoking. Within eight yearsof the passage of the San Francisco ordinance, Congress raisedthe tariff on smoking opium, which was a relatively mild form ofopium, from $6 to $10 a pound; the tariff on opium had first beenimposed in 1842. In 1887, apparently in response to obligationsimposed upon the United States by a Chinese-American commercialtreaty negotiated in 1880, Congress prohibited the importation ofsmoking opium by Chinese subjects. Despite these firstlegislative efforts, the incidence of drug use and addictionincreased, as did societal concern and illegal drug smuggling. Although estimates concerning the number of drug addictsduring the 50 years prior to the passage of drug legislation in1914 are inherently suspect, the available information suggeststhat drug abuse during that period was a "majormedico-social problem." In fact, by 1909, the United Stateswas confronted with a significant and growing drug problem. Theincreased opiate use and addiction in the United Statessubsequent to the Civil War has been attributed to severalfactors, including the indiscriminate use of morphine to treatbattlefield casualties during the Civil War. The increase inmorphine addiction was such that the phrase "armydisease" was used to describe the drug use amongex-soldiers. The widespread administration of morphine byhypodermic syringe also contributed to the increase in opiateabuse. Other circumstances, which exacerbated the situationduring the period of 1865-1914, included the spread of opiumsmoking from Chinese immigrants to American citizens, the use ofopium and its derivatives by the American patent medicineindustry, and the marketing of heroin beginning in 1898 as asafe, powerful, and non-addictive substitute for the opiumderivatives morphine and codeine. The American Opium Commission, established by an Act ofCongress in early 1908, investigated domestic opium use duringthat year. In response to the results of this investigation,Congress passed "An Act to Prohibit the Importation and Useof Opium for Other Than Medicinal Purposes" in 1909, whichamong other things, permitted the importation of opium formedicinal purposes but only to 12 ports of entry. However, it didnot regulate domestic opium production and manufacture or theinterstate shipment of opium products: Opium products were still available without a physician'sprescription and were being marketed throughout the countrythrough retail outlets and a growing mail order trade. Another motivation for the passage of the 1909 Act was therealization that the United States could not continue to advocatemeasures to ameliorate the opium problem in the Far East withouttaking serious steps to deal with its own "homeproblem." Although considered a necessary first step, the1909 Act was subsequently adjudged to be seriously defective inthat it "contain[ed] no provision against the possibleintrastate manufacture of smoking opium. It [did] no more thanexclude this form of the drug from the United States."Because few States had effective laws against the manufacture ofsmoking opium in addition to the proscriptions on its sale anduse, that gap could frustrate the objectives of Federal and Statelaws. Shortly before the enactment of the Act of 1909 anInternational Opium Commission, consisting of the representativesof 13 nations was convened in Shanghai at the initiative of theUnited States. The Shanghai Commission has been described as the"first international effort at the solution of the opiumproblem." Although originally conceived of as anorganization for investigating Far East opium use andtrafficking, the Shanghai Commission was transformed into a bodyfor examining worldwide opium use and trafficking because opiumaddiction had spread to other parts of the world, especially tothe United States, and because producer countries were notrestricted to the Far East. The Shanghai Convention unanimouslyadopted several resolutions for consideration by the governmentsof the participating nations, including the following three: (1) Consider the desirability of reviewing each country'ssystem of regulation of the use of opium in light of thediscrepancies among countries' regulatory systems; (2) Adopt measures to prevent the exporting of opium and itsderivatives to countries which prohibit the importation of suchitems; and (3) Take measures for the gradual suppression of opium smokingin each country's own territories and possessions. Because of the unanimity achieved by the Shanghai Commission,the United States on September 1, 1909, proposed to the otherparticipating countries that an international conference be heldto "conventionalize the resolutions adopted at Shanghai andtheir necessary consequences." The conference, which washeld at The Hague, began on December 1, 1911, and resulted in thesigning of the International Opium Convention on January 23,1912. The Convention was ratified by the United States Senate onOctober 18, 1913. The International Opium Convention committedits signatories to the enactment of laws designed to suppress the"abuse of opium, morphine, cocaine as well as drugs preparedor derived from these substances . . . In response to thisinternational obligation and to domestic considerations, theUnited States passed the Harrison Act on December 17, 1914 (Ch.1, 38 Stat. 785) , which "became the cornerstone of domesticnarcotics policy" for nearly 65 years. The Harrison Act: 1914-1936, Early Years of Enforcement Section 1 of the Harrison Act provided that any person who wasin the business of dealing in the covered drugs was required toregister annually and to pay a special annual tax of one dollar.Section 2 made it illegal for any person to sell or in any way togive away any of the covered drugs, except pursuant to thewritten order of the person to whom the drug was being sold orgiven; the written order was required to be on a form issued bythe Commissioner of Internal Revenue. Section 4 made it unlawfulfor anyone who had not previously registered and paid the specialtax, required by Section 1 of the Act, to engage in interstatetrafficking in the drugs listed. With the exception of employeesof registrants and patients of physicians and dentists, Section 8prohibited the possession of any of the drugs covered by the Actby any person who had not registered and paid the special taximposed by Section I. Section 9 provided that the punishment forany violation of the Act was to be not more than $2,000 or notmore than 5 years in prison or both. Finally, Section 10 gave theCommissioner of Internal Revenue, subject to the approval of theSecretary of the Treasury, the responsibility for enforcing theAct. The history of enforcement under the Harrison Act wastremendously affected by Congress' chosen source of authority forthe legislation, its constitutional power to lay and collecttaxes. The principle of Federalism and the related concept of theStates' police power were effective constraints on the scope ofthe Federal government's powers at the time of the Harrison Act,hence the use of the constitutional authority to tax to regulatedrug-related activity. Because the Harrison Act was superficially a measure designedto raise revenue, its stated purpose dictated that theenforcement of the Statute be the responsibility of the TreasuryDepartment and, by the statute's own terms, of the Commissionerof Internal Revenue. Despite its revenue-raising veneer, itsregulatory purpose was acknowledged from the beginning: Certain individuals viewed the Harrison Act as a rational wayto limit addiction and drug abuse through taxation andregulation. It was a regulatory device which, according to theAmerican opium Commission, "would bring the whole trafficand use of these drugs into the light of day and, therefore,create a public opinion against the use of them that would bemore important, perhaps, than the Act itself" (Dr. HamiltonWright, American Opium Commission). The Act was heralded as amethod of drug abuse control and as a public awareness tool. The history of early enforcement efforts under the HarrisonAct, and of the nation's drug abuse problem and policy generally,was affected in no small degree by a series of Supreme Courtdecisions that were handed down during the decade immediatelyfollowing passage of the Act. The Supreme Court sustained the constitutionality of theHarrison Act in United States v. Doremus. In deciding the issuesraised by the Government's appeal of the dismissal of theindictment against a physician who had been registered under theAct, the Supreme Court set forth general principles that governedits resolution of the issues: If the legislation enacted has some reasonable relation to theexercise of the taxing authority conferred by the Constitution,it cannot be invalidated because of the supposed motives whichinduced it. * * * The Act may not be declared unconstitutional because itseffect may be to accomplish another purpose as well as theraising of revenue. If the legislation is within the taxingauthority of Congress - that is sufficient to sustain it. The Supreme Court sustained the constitutionality of Section 2of the Act on the ground that it did relate to the raising ofrevenue. On the same day that the Supreme Court decided Doremus, italso answered in Webb v. United States the following question inthe negative: whether an order for morphine, which is issued by aphysician to a habitual user who is not under his professionalcare and which is issued not for the purpose of curing the habitbut for maintenance, is a "prescription." It did sobecause it concluded that "to call such an order . . . aphysician's prescription would be so plain a perversion ofmeaning that no discussion of the subject is required." The Court extended its Webb Ruling in United States v. Behrmanby holding that an order issued by a physician for large doses ofproscribed drugs, which were not prescribed for the purpose oftreating a condition other than the addiction itself and whichwere to be self-administered by the addict, to a person, who wasaddicted and who was under the physician's personal care,constituted a violation of the Harrison Act. In doing so, theCourt implicitly agreed with the district judge that"prescriptions in the regular course of practice did notinclude the indiscriminate doling out of narcotics in suchquantity to addicts as charged in the indictments." The Harrison Act, as construed by the Supreme Court, was thestatutory framework within which Federal drug strategies weredevised and implemented over the next half-century. However,early enforcement efforts and priorities under the Harrison Actdid have somewhat unintended and undesirable consequences. As noted previously, the responsibility for enforcement of theHarrison Act was given initially to the Commissioner of Revenue,subject to review by the Secretary of the Treasury. In 1915, 162collectors and agents in the Miscellaneous Division of theInternal Revenue Service were given the responsibility under theHarrison Act for restricting the sale of proscribed drugs.Meanwhile, the administration and enforcement of the NationalProhibition or the Volstead Act, which was adopted to enforce theEighteenth Amendment, was committed to the Commissioner ofInternal Revenue who created a prohibition unit. Because itseemed logical to place responsibility for enforcement of theHarrison Act within this Prohibition Unit, a Narcotics Divisionwas created in that unit in 1919 with a staff of 170 agents andan appropriation of $270,000. This organizational unit for theenforcement of the Harrison Act existed until April 1, 1927, whenlegislation creating a Bureau of Prohibition and a Bureau ofCustoms, to be headed by Commissioners, within the Department ofTreasury, was enacted. The 1927 legislation also transferred tothe Secretary of the Treasury all powers and duties that had beenconferred by the revenue and prohibition laws upon theCommissioner of Revenue relating to intoxicating liquors andnarcotics. In addition, the Secretary was authorized to delegatesuch powers and duties to the Commissioners of Prohibition andInternal Revenue. The enforcement of the narcotics lawssubsequently was delegated to a narcotics unit under thedirection of the Deputy Commissioner of Prohibition. Enforcement efforts under the Harrison Act from 1914 through1929 were controversial. Following the expansive constructions ofthe Harrison Act by the Supreme Court in Doremus, Webb, andBehrman, thousands of additional prosecutions were undertaken asa result of investigations conducted by agents of the NarcoticsDivision of the Prohibition Unit. It has been estimated that over50,000 individuals, including many physicians and others who wererequired to register under the Act, were charged with violatingthe Act during the period of 1914-1922. After this initial burstof arrest activity directed against registrants, the NarcoticsDivision turned its attention to closing clinics that had beenestablished to conduct research and treat large numbers ofaddicts who could not afford private care. Because of pressure bythe American Medical Association, which had initially welcomedthe Harrison Act but which later came to view the actions of theNarcotics Division as harassment and an improper Federalintrusion into the practice of medicine, the Department of theTreasury encouraged its agents to focus on the "blatantlyillegal importation and sale of narcotics." Despite this change in enforcement direction, the earlierenforcement focus had a damaging, long-term impact. Because ofthe mere threat of prosecution under the Act, the "interestof physicians in these cases [of narcotic addiction]"declined and "they even began to refuse to prescribe."In closing the clinics, which had been established to treat thosewho were unable to afford private care, the Federal governmentmay have impeded - albeit unintentionally - research intonarcotic effects, use and addiction and as a result interferedwith the development of efficacious medical treatment. Finally,the Federal government's early success in decreasing the supplyof narcotic drugs from licit sources, i.e., registrants, to drugusers forced those users to seek out illicit sources of supply. The history of enforcement of the Harrison Act during thefifteen years following its enactment illustrates the operationof a principle that has been validated repeatedly since thattine: drug demand will result in the creation of supply channelsto satisfy the demand. An effective drug abuse policy requires asystematic and long-term demand reduction component;unfortunately, there was no such component of the Federal policyin the more than 50 years following the enactment of the HarrisonAct. Enforcement efforts were burdened, however, by publicdissatisfaction with the activities of the Narcotics Division,which was tainted by its association with the country'santi-liquor laws. The public dissatisfaction intensified becauseof a scandal involving falsification of arrest records andcharges relating to payoffs by, and collusion with, drug dealers.In response, Congress removed the responsibility for enforcingthe Federal drug laws from the Bureau of Prohibition, which wasitself incorporated into the Department of Justice. Drugenforcement was transferred in 1930 to a newly created FederalBureau of Narcotics (FBN) within the Department of the Treasury,which was headed by a Commissioner of Narcotics. Although the FBNwas primarily responsible for the enforcement of the Harrison Actand related drug laws, the task of preventing and interdictingthe illegal importation and smuggling of drugs remained with theBureau of Customs. With one major exception to be discussed atthe beginning of the next section, the Federal statutory andorganizational structure relating to narcotics that existed onJuly 1, 1930, remained in place for the next 35 years. 1937-1969: Intensification of Pressure for Change in FederalDrug Policy Marijuana was not made subject to the Harrison Act or to theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (the Jones-Miller Act)because it was not viewed as a particularly dangerous drug. Inaddition, because of its use in the making of rope, twine,veterinary medicines, and other products, marijuana's commercialvalue was thought to outweigh any deleterious effects from itsabuse. However, as marijuana use became widespread in America,concern about its use also spread. Due to the efforts of a"small but vocal group of crusaders," the States beganto pass legislation to prohibit all marijuana-related activity.By 1931, "all but two states West of the Mississippi andseveral more in the East had enacted prohibitory legislationmaking it a criminal offense to possess or use the drug."The FBN initially minimized the dangers of marijuana use, and inits 1932 annual report, it instead urged the States to adopt aUniform State Narcotics Law. Such a law was drafted in 1932, andit included an optional marijuana provision. By 1937 every state had prohibited marijuana use. However,faced with continuing intensive lobbying efforts, the FBN didbecome an "ardent supporter" of marijuana legislation,which finally was embodied in the Marihuana Tax Act 1937. The Marihuana Tax Act was nominally a revenue measurepatterned after the Harrison Narcotic Act. It required that anyperson whose business related to marijuana to register and pay aspecial tax. In addition, the transference of marijuana had to bepursuant to a written order on a form issued by the Secretary ofthe Treasury and the transferee was required to pay a tax of$1.00/ounce if he had registered and $100.00/ounce if he had not.Finally, the Act made the transferor liable for the transfer taxif a transfer were made without an order form and without paymentof the tax by the transferee. From the late 1930's through the 1950's, the FBN's enforcementefforts were directed almost exclusively at disrupting theillegal importation of drugs into this country and to makingcases against distributors and dealers. Indeed, in 1942 the FBNrecognized that it was necessary to eradicate crops in Mexico ifits interdiction efforts were to achieve greater success. In thatsame year Congress enacted the Opium Poppy Control Act of 1942,which, among other things, prohibited the domestic production ofthe poppy without FBN permission. During a great part of this period the FBN was handicapped tosome degree by a shortage of agents and inadequate budgets. Inthe Spring of 1956, a Congressional Committee found that: [FBN] is one of the few Federal agencies whose personnel andfunds have not been increased to reflect population growth andgreater responsibility. Over a period of 25 years, the Federalnarcotic laws have been enforced with a force of approximately227 agents and an average budget of less than $2 million. Thisrestriction on manpower and operating funds has seriouslycurtailed investigations of the illicit traffic in the UnitedStates and of sources of supply in foreign countries. Because of budget limitations, the present force of 250Federal narcotic agents is 25 short of the number authorized bythe Congress. By way of comparison, New York City hasapproximately 200 police officers assigned specifically tonarcotic enforcement. These statistics suggest that, during this time, drug abuseand trafficking were not the Federal priorities that they aretoday. Despite the handicaps that the FBN operated under during thisperiod, it nevertheless enjoyed a degree of success. According toLCN informer Joseph Valachi, the tactics used by the FBN toinfiltrate and disrupt trafficking organizations caused some LCNchieftains to rethink the advisability of their continuedparticipation in the drug trade. According to Valachi, FrankCostello, then acting boss of the Luciano Family, ordered itsmembers to stop trafficking in drugs in 1948. One of theprincipal reasons for the edict was explained as follows: Much more important . . . was the dogged harassment of theBureau of Narcotics. The Cosa Nostra despised - and feared - [theFBN] . . . . The Narcotics Bureau, unlike the FBI, which tends to look downits nose at it, does not depend on the informant system for muchof its intelligence but regularly engages its agents in dangerousundercover work; they are, as a result, . . . highly motivated,less disciplined, generally more daring and innovational,occasionally corruptible. Above all else, the [FBN] was the firstto recognize the existence of an organization like the CosaNostra, and no other arm of the law has put more of a crimp inits operation. Although continuing to warn of the dangers of drug use, theFBN, especially during the earlier part of the period,"adopted a more moderate approach in its dealings withCongress as well as the American people." The Bureau'sapproach reflected the attitude of the American public, whichappeared to consider the drug problem to be restricted to smallgroups at the periphery of society, with no great societalimpact. In the 1950's the rather complacent attitude toward the drugproblem began to change. The first indication of greater concernwas reflected in the enactment of the Boggs Act on November 2,1951, which generally increased the penalties for violations ofthe narcotic and marijuana laws. The primary motivations for thepassage of the Boggs Act were the inadequacy of penalties underthe existing law as deterrents and an increase in drug addiction.With respect to the former, Congress relied on statistics showingthat the rate of recidivism among drug violators had increasedsubstantially over a 15- year period of time; in 1935, 40 percentof those convicted of narcotics violations had prior drugconvictions, while 63.6 percent of those convicted and sentencedduring the fiscal year ending June 30, 1950 were recidivists.Congress concluded that drug addiction was increasing on thebasis of statistics showing that between 1946 and 1950 there hadbeen a 100 percent increase in the number of narcoticlaws-related arrests and that the average age of personscommitted to a Public Health Service Hospital had declined from37.5 to 26.7 years, over a five year period. Encouraged by the purported success of the Boggs Act, Congresspassed the Narcotic Control Act of 1956, which further increasedthe penalties for drug violations. Among other things, this 1956Act raised the permissive maximum sentences for violations of thenarcotic possession statutes; imposed new mandatory minimumsentences and increased the permissive maximums for traffickingviolations; eliminated probation, suspension of service, orparole for all cases except those involving a first offenderpossessor; authorized FBN and Customs agents to carry firearmsand to execute and serve search and arrest warrants; made thesale of heroin to individuals under 18 years of age a capitaloffense, although the death penalty was not made mandatory butcould be imposed only if the jury specifically so directed; andmade the smuggling of marijuana a violation of the Narcotic DrugsImport and Export Act. The severe penalties imposed by the Narcotic Control Act of1956 were adopted even though Congress found that, as a result ofthe Boggs Act, "narcotic addiction and the illicit narcotictraffic [were] generally on the decline in the UnitedStates." Because the stringent penalties imposed by theBoggs Act were thought to be successful in decreasing drugaddiction, the 84th Congress concluded that the imposition ofeven more severe penalties would "be the strongest and mosteffective deterrent to narcotic addiction and illicit drugtraffic." Finally, Congress was of the view in enacting theNarcotic Control Act of 1956 that "suppression of theillicit drug traffic" would be the most importantcontribution that the Federal Government could make to thesuccessful and permanent rehabilitation of drug addicts. Congressthus sought to reduce the demand for drugs through reducing theirsupply. Public concern over the problem of drug abuse, which had beenrelatively dormant during the 1940's and 1950's, flared duringthe 1960's. The intensification of the national concern resultedin increasing pressure for Federal initiatives in the area. Inresponse to this development, a White House Conference onNarcotics and Drug Abuse was convened in 1962, which resulted inthe establishment of the President's Advisory Commission onNarcotics and Drug Abuse (Prettyman Commission) on January 15,1963. The Prettyman Commission's final report, submitted toPresident Kennedy in November 1963, included 25 recommendations,the substance of several of which were: (1) Transfer the enforcement and investigative functions ofthe FBN relating to illicit transactions in narcotic drugs andmarijuana from the Department of Treasury to the Department ofJustice; (2) Transfer the responsibilities of the FBN relating to theregulation of the legitimate traffic in narcotic drugs andmarijuana from the Department of the Treasury to the Departmentof Health, Education and Welfare; (3) Substantially increase the number of Federal agentsassigned to the investigation of the illicit importation of andtrafficking in narcotic drugs, marijuana, and dangerous drugs; (4) Transfer the responsibility for investigating the illicittraffic in dangerous drugs from the Department of Health,Education and Welfare to the Department of Justice; and (5) Strictly control, by Federal statute, all non-narcoticdrugs capable of producing serious psychotoxic effects whenabused. Within 18 months of the issuance of the Commission's finalreport, Congress adopted the recommendation regarding thediversion of "dangerous drugs" from legal channels. Theresulting Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 mandated, amongother things, record-keeping and inspection requirements fordepressant and stimulant drugs, and specifically for barbituratesand amphetamines, "throughout the chain of distribution,from the basic manufacturer to (but not including) the ultimateconsumer." The Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 werepassed because of perceived serious problems associated with thediversion of depressant and stimulant drugs from licit channels: [T]estimony showed that over 9 billion barbiturate andamphetamine tablets are produced annually in the United States.It is estimated that over 50 percent, or 4 1/2 billion tablets,are distributed through illicit channels. The human toll of drugabuse cannot be measured for it affects not only the abuser buthis family and the community around him. Drug abuse is closelybound up with juvenile delinquency. It also contributes to therising crime rate in the United States. To carry out the new enforcement obligations imposed by theDrug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 another agency was created;a Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (BDAC) was established within theDepartment's Food and Drug Administration. The Bureau of Customs,however, retained responsibility for the enforcement of lawsrelating to the importing and exporting of depressant andstimulants drugs. With the establishment of the BDAC on February1, 1966, the Department of the Treasury's virtual monopoly of theenforcement of Federal drug laws ended. Within 16 months of the enactment of the Drug Abuse ControlAmendments of 1965 Congress passed an enlightened piece oflegislation: The Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966. ThisAct did many things, including: authorizing a district court toorder the civil commitment of an individual, who was an addict,who had been charged with certain offenses against the UnitedStates, and who elected to do so, to the Surgeon General fortreatment of his addiction and rehabilitation, in lieu ofprosecution; requiring a district court to commit an individualwho had been convicted of certain offenses against the UnitedStates and who was an addict to the custody of the AttorneyGeneral for treatment and rehabilitation; permitting any narcoticaddict to file a petition with a United States Attorneyrequesting that he be admitted to a Public Health Servicehospital for treatment and rehabilitation; and authorizing theSurgeon General to establish rehabilitation andpost-hospitalization care programs for narcotic addicts and toprovide financial assistance to the States to establish similarprograms. As the House Committee on Judiciary, one of the Congressionalcommittees which reported on the proposed bill, observed, theNarcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966: . . . mark[e]d a fundamental reorientation toward the problemof narcotics addiction. The Attorney General in his testimonybefore the Committee stated that for too long the law hadstressed punitive solutions and neglected medical andrehabilitative measures. The 1966 Act embodied a proposition that had tended to beoverlooked in the past: successful treatment and permanentrehabilitation of drug users, i.e., reduction of demand fordrugs, must be an essential component of Federal law enforcementefforts. A detailed evaluation of the Federal drug strategy that wasreleased in 1979 accurately summarized what the Federal approachhad been prior to the late 1960's: Early efforts to deal with the problem primarily focused onreducing the supply of drugs, first through taxation, then byprohibition and strict legal control. The basic assumption . . .was that reducing supply and availability of drugs would lead toreduction in their use by encouraging drug-dependent individualsto detoxify, and by keeping drugs out of the hands of users. By the end of the 1950's there was a general agreement on thepart of both the public and legislators that the Federal policyof strict supply reduction by itself was not enough. During the1960's and early 1970's, as drug abuse increased and spread tonew markets, the almost exclusive emphasis on supply reductionand stiff penalties was challenged with growing frequency,leading to increased research and experimentation with treatmentfor drug abusers. Beginning in 1968, in response to rising . . . concern . . .,a variety of changes occurred in an attempt to curtail drugabuse. Despite the work of the Prettyman Commission and the enactmentof the Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965, public agitationconcerning crime in general, and drug abuse in particular,intensified. In response, President Lyndon B. Johnson establishedthe President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administrationof Justice (Katzenbach Commission) in 1966 to undertake a"comprehensive study of the nation's crime problem and toprovid[e] recommendations to coordinate its eradication on allfronts." The Katzenbach Commission issued a report in 1967,which included a chapter on drug abuse. The substance of severalof the Katzenbach Commission's recommendations addressed both thedemand and supply of drugs: (1) Substantially increase the enforcement staffs of FBN andthe Bureau of Customs; (2) Permit courts and correctional authorities to dealflexibly with violators of the drug laws; (3) Undertake research to develop a sound and effectiveframework of regulatory and criminal laws relating to dangerousdrugs; and (4) The National Institute of Mental Health should develop acore of educational and informational materials relating todrugs. Drawing on the recommendations of the Prettyman Commission,President Johnson sent a reorganization plan restructuring theFederal drug law enforcement effort to Congress for itsconsideration on February 7, 1968. In terms that have beenrepeated often since that time, President Johnson explained thereason for the proposed consolidation of drug enforcementresponsibilities: Today, Federal investigation and enforcement of our narcoticslaws are fragmented. * * * Neither [the FBN nor the BADC] is in the agency which isprimarily concerned with Federal law enforcement - the Departmentof Justice. This separation of responsibilities . . . has complicated andhindered our response to a national menace. Among the most significant provisions of the plan, whichbecame effective on April 7, 1968, were the following: theDepartment of Justice was given a major responsibility for theenforcement of the Federal drug laws for the first time inhistory by the creation within it of a Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs (BNDD); the FBN was abolished, and its drugenforcement duties and responsibilities were shifted to BNDD; andBDAC was also abolished, and its drug enforcement duties andresponsibilities were transferred to the Department of Justice. The 1968 reorganization did not significantly affect therevenue collection functions exercised by IRS under the Harrisonand Marijuana Tax Acts or the responsibility of the Bureau ofCustoms for interdicting the smuggling of narcotics andmarijuana. The Plan that was intended to eliminate fragmentationin Federal drug law enforcement thus did not eliminate itentirely. Although neither House of Congress blocked the 1968reorganization plan, criticism of it did develop. While inagreement that merger of the FBN and BDAC would eliminatefriction and duplication of effort, Congressional opponentsexpressed skepticism that law enforcement relating to drugs andorganized crime would be in any way improved by transferring themerged entity to the Department of Justice. BecauseAdministration spokesmen had acknowledged that BDAC and the FBNhad been effective law enforcement agencies, the opponents of theplan recommended that the merged entity should instead be locatedwithin the Department of the Treasury, where coordination withIRS and Customs, both of which had drug law enforcementresponsibilities, could be better assured. That the BNDD wasapparently not to be placed within the FBI was one factor leadingthe dissenters to conclude that "greater overall efficiencyin crime enforcement" would not be achieved by the placementof the merged entity into Justice. Federal Drug Law Enforcement: From Implementation of the 1968Reorganization Plan to October 27, 1970. Two major issues during the 1968 Presidential campaign werecrime and drugs. Shortly after his inauguration, PresidentRichard M. Nixon declared war on both and formed Task Force Onein the spring of 1969 to "design programs that would have animmediate effect on the importation of heroin and other illegaldrugs." Task Force One developed and implemented OperationIntercept, the "first major interagency attempt at borderinterdiction," which involved more than 2,000 Customs, INSBorder Patrol, and BNDD agents. Because the amount of illegaldrugs seized as a result of Operation Intercept wasdisappointingly small and because the venture seriously strainedrelations between Mexico and the United States, JusticeDepartment officials concluded that successful interdictionprograms required the cooperation of source countries. As aresult, in the fall of 1969, Operation Intercept was transformedinto Operation Cooperation, which in part provided U.S. financialaid to the Mexican Government to purchase aircraft and to trainagents to interdict the flow of drugs before they reached theUnited States borders. The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of1970 The year 1970 was an important one in the history of thisNation's war against drug trafficking and drug abuse. In Februaryof that year, President Nixon clarified the responsibilities ofthe various Federal agencies involved in the effort against drugtrafficking by issuing a directive announcing that BNDD"controls all investigations involving violations of thelaws of the United States relating to narcotics, marijuana anddangerous drugs, both within the United States and beyond itsborders. Several months later, the President approved guidelines,developed by the Attorney General and the Secretary of theTreasury, which increased the investigatory responsibility ofCustoms at ports and borders. However, the most significant eventin 1970 was the enactment of the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970 (1970 Comprehensive Act). As of 1970, numerous Federal statutes dealt with variousfacets of the Nation's drug trafficking and abuse problems. Theselaws overlapped, were sometimes inconsistent, and required morethan a dozen Federal agencies to enforce them. In response, the1970 Comprehensive Act was passed to collect and conform"diverse laws in one piece of legislation based upon newscientific information, the restructured Federal law enforcementefforts under Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1968, and greaterinformation concerning the scope of the problem." The 1970 Act comprised four titles: Title I authorized theDepartment of Health, Education, and Welfare to increase itsefforts in drug rehabilitation, drug treatment and the preventionof drug abuse. Specifically, Title I authorized the appropriationof funds for drug abuse prevention and education programs and forspecial project grants to programs designed to treat andrehabilitate narcotic addicts or drug dependent persons. As aresult of these steps, Congress provided for a "greatlyincreased Federal effort in the fields of prevention andrehabilitation" and made the National Institute of MentalHealth the agency primarily responsible for drug education andprevention activities in the Federal government. Title II of the 1970 Act, the "Controlled SubstancesAct," along with Title III, comprehensively addressed thelaw enforcement aspects of the attack on drug abuse. Among otherthings, Title II established five schedules into which controlledsubstances were and could be placed, required the registrationof, and record-keeping by, manufacturers, distributors anddispensers of controlled substances, imposed penalties forviolations of the Act, established a Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse, and authorized BNDD to add 300 agents to its staffduring FY 1971. Finally, Title III, the Controlled Substances Import andExport Act, governed the importation and exportation ofcontrolled substances. The Attorney General was given theresponsibility for maintaining the integrity of the import/exportregistration system that the Act created. Although primarily an effort to consolidate the myriad of lawsdealing with drug trafficking and abuse that had been adoptedover the years, Congress's authority for enacting the 1970 Actwas predicated upon its interstate commerce power and not, aswith previous narcotics laws, on the constitutional power to tax.This shift had enormous implications for the way that the Federalgovernment would and did approach drug enforcement in the future: [The Controlled Substances Act] set the stage for aninnovation in Federal drug enforcement techniques. Thatinnovation was assigning large numbers of Federal narcoticsagents to work in local communities. No longer was it necessaryto demonstrate interstate traffic to justify Federalparticipation in combating illegal drug use. Constitutional challenges to the 1970 Act that were predicatedupon the intrastate nature of the conduct prosecuted wererejected. Federal Drug Abuse Policy: 1970-1980 The decade of the 1970's was an extremely significant one forthe development of Federal drug abuse policy in terms of newlaws, organizational and operational reforms, and a growingrecognition that the reduction of the demand for drugs must begiven a greater emphasis. On the debit side the extent of theNation's drug abuse problem at the end of 1980 was as great as,if not greater than, the problem in 1970. To some extent, thesituation in 1980 was attributable to the continuing andunresolved debate concerning the appropriate Federal role in thenational struggle against drug abuse and trafficking. New legislative initiatives, organizations, and operationalreforms relating to the Nation's drug abuse problem were adoptedand implemented within a relatively short period after theenactment of the 1970 Comprehensive Act. One of the mostimportant and innovative of these reforms was the establishment,by executive order, of the Special Action Office for Drug AbusePrevention (SAODAP) within the Executive Office of the Presidenton June 17, 1971. The President made the Director of SAODAP hisspecial representative with respect to all Federal drug abusetraining, education, rehabilitation, research, treatment, andprevention programs and activities (exclusive of law enforcementactivities and legal proceedings). In this capacity, the SAODAPDirector's duties included prescribing "policies,guidelines, standards, and criteria for the maximum achievementof the goals and objectives" of Federal demand reductionprograms and coordinating and evaluating all Federal drug abuseprograms. President Nixon did not neglect the supply reduction componentof the Federal drug policy. Presidential initiatives in this areain 1971 included the establishment of the Cabinet Committee onInternational Narcotics Control (CCINC) and of the NarcoticsTraffickers Program (NTP) within IRS. The CCINC, chaired by theSecretary of State, was given the responsibility for"developing a strategy to check the illegal flow ofnarcotics to the United States and coordinating the effortsundertaken abroad by involved Federal departments and agencies toimplement that strategy." The NTP was designed to function as a mechanism for disruptingdrug trafficking by having the IRS intensively investigatetop-echelon drug dealers. The IRS effectively ended the NTPsometime in 1975, both because it had a relatively low revenueyield and because IRS officials felt uncomfortable in operating aprogram whose primary objective was not tax-related. On January 28, 1972, President Nixon took another step,designed to improve the Federal government's drug law enforcementefforts by establishing an Office for Drug Abuse Law Enforcement(ODALE) within the Department of Justice. This office was to beheaded by a Director who would be a Special Assistant AttorneyGeneral and who would serve as a Special Consultant to thePresident concerning drug law enforcement. In this role the ODALEDirector was responsible for advising the President on improvingthe effectiveness of Federal drug enforcement and on assistingthe States and local governments in strengthening their own druglaw enforcement. The Director was also required to develop andimplement a "concentrated program" for enforcingFederal laws concerning drug abuse prevention and for cooperatingwith State and local governments in the enforcement of their drugabuse laws. Finally, to ensure that all steps permitted by lawwere taken by Federal, State and local governments and by theprivate sector to prevent drug abuse, the Director of ODALE wasinstructed to consult regularly with the SAODAP Director. Withthe establishment of ODALE and SAODAP, and the presidentialinstruction that their Directors consult, cooperate, andcoordinate, a mechanism was created within the Federal Governmentthat, at least theoretically, could have integrated Federalstrategies to reduce drug supply and demand to achieve maximumresults. That ODALE was created in early 1972, so relatively soon afterthe implementation of the 1968 reorganization plan, bespoke alack of confidence in the structure and operation of the drug lawenforcement system created by that plan. Indeed, ODALE wasestablished because of the "Administration's concern thatBNDD and Customs could not act with the swiftness and precisionthat a single agency vested with authority and power could."In performing its duties and responsibilities ODALE "wasempowered to take the lead in the Administration's 'war onheroin,' with a particular emphasis on street-leveltrafficking." Several months after the creation of ODALE, another unit, theOffice of National Narcotic Intelligence (ONNI), was establishedwithin the Department of Justice to function as a ClearinghouseOf information that would be useful in the Administration'scampaign against drug trafficking. The Director of ONNI wasinstructed to collect and provide narcotics intelligence to anyFederal, State, or local official determined to have a"legitimate official need" for the intelligence. TheONNI Director was also instructed to cooperate with the Directorof ODALE to assist the latter in insuring that all feasible stepswere taken to prevent drug abuse in the Nation. Although itsmandate did not include the independent development of narcoticsintelligence, the establishment of ONNI was the first concreterecognition by officials at the highest levels of the Federalgovernment of the crucial role that intelligence had to play insupply reduction strategies. Congress eventually responded positively to President Nixon'srequest that it enact legislation confirming his creation ofSAODAP by passing the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972(1972 Drug Abuse Office Act). This legislation was an importantevent in the history of Federal drug abuse policy: With the enactment of the [Act] Federal policy clearly calledfor a balanced response to the problem of drug abuse by adding avigorous prevention and treatment component to the existing lawenforcement effort. Although commitments to the "balanced response"enshrined in the 1972 Drug Abuse office Act have been proclaimedrepeatedly ever since, they have not generally been translatedinto action, as measured by budget authorizations andexpenditures. Congress was persuaded to enact the 1972 Drug Abuse Office Actbecause the witnesses who testified before its committees were"unanimously agreed that drug abuse in America had reachedepidemic proportions." Most of the witnesses were"generally agreed that greater emphasis on the so-calleddemand side of the problem is required, that is, on treatment,rehabilitation, research, education and training." Congressalso found that the Federal government's activities with respectto the "demand side of the drug abuse field have beencarried on by at least nine different agencies anddepartments" and that the legislation under considerationwas needed to "provide for and insure a centralcomprehensive coordination of the federal effort." Inpassing the Act, Congress concluded that the "emphasis must,indeed, be changed [to strategies to reduce demand] if there isto be meaningful progress in the effort against drug abuse." The 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act did many things, includingestablishing SAODAP in the Executive Office of the President;making the Director of SAODAP responsible for, among otherthings, providing overall planning and policy, and establishingobjectives and priorities, for all federal drug abuse preventionfunctions, making recommendations to the President concerning anyFederal drug traffic prevention function, making findings andrecommendations to the President concerning the resolution ofconflicts involving drug abuse prevention or drug trafficprevention functions, and coordinating Federal drug abuseprevention functions with those of the State and localgovernments; directing the President to require development of acomprehensive, coordinated long-term Federal strategy for alldrug abuse and drug traffic prevention functions; directing theSecretary of Health, Education, and Welfare to make grants toStates submitting plans for establishing, conducting andcoordinating projects for the development of more effective drugabuse prevention functions and to make special project grants to,and contracts with, public and private entities and individualsto develop drug abuse prevention programs; and establishing aNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) to administer theprograms of the Secretary of HEW relating to drug abuseprevention functions. The 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act was necessary and usefullegislation, but it was based on the mistaken premise that thenation's drug abuse problem could be dealt with in a relativelyshort period of time: [I]t is the policy of the United States and the purpose ofthis Act to focus the comprehensive resources of the FederalGovernment and bring them to bear on drug abuse with theimmediate objective of significantly reducing the incidence ofdrug abuse in the United States within the shortest possibleperiod of time . . . . Consistent with this premise, Congress provided that SAODAPwas to be abolished on June 30, 1975. There appears to have been an expectation at the time that the1972 Drug Abuse office Act became effective that NIDA wouldassume many of the programmatic functions of SAODAP on or beforeJune 30, 1975, after the war against drug abuse had been won andonly "mopping-up" operations remained. This expectationno doubt was encouraged by statements made subsequent to thepassage of the 1972 Act, such as that of President Nixon inSeptember of 1973 that "[w]e have turned the corner on drugaddiction in the United States." As the historical recorddemonstrates, the expectation of quick success was unrealisticbecause of the nature of the drug problem. The 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act reflected the realization thatan exclusive reliance on strategies to reduce supply will fail toachieve the ultimate objective. Such an approach disregards thefundamental economic principle, that where a demand for a serviceor commodity exists, some entrepreneur, for the right price, willattempt to supply it. There is an optimal mix of approaches toreduce demand and supply that will obtain maximum results andthus achieve the goal of that policy, i.e., the elimination ofdrug abuse. The Federal government necessarily has a paramountand continuing role in that policy, in terms of providingleadership, resources, and support to the other participants.Experience immediately following the enactment of the 1972 DrugAbuse Office Act demonstrates that although the Nation's drugabuse problem may never be eliminated, it can be reducedsubstantially if a long-term commitment of sufficient resourcesis made and unreasonable impatience for results is checked. Despite the comprehensive restructuring of the Federalnarcotics laws that had occurred in 1970, related legislativeinitiatives, and the innovations in Federal drug law enforcementrepresented by ODALE and ONNI, the Nixon Administration concludedthat Federal drug law enforcement continued to be hampered byinteragency rivalries and jurisdictional overlaps and disputes.In response, another major restructuring of the Federal drug lawenforcement machinery was announced on March 28, 1973. The NixonAdministration trumpeted the 1973 reorganization plan, which wasimplemented on July 1, 1973, as doing for the supply side of thedrug abuse problem what the 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act had donefor the demand side: create an organization with the necessaryresources, breadth, and leadership capacity to act decisively. The Federal drug law enforcement structure in March of 1973was complex, as reflected in Appendix C, with no singleindividual or agency responsible for supervision of the overalleffort. The 1973 reorganization plan was designed to overcomeperceived deficiencies in existing law enforcement. The 1973 reorganization plan was motivated primarily by thebeliefs of Administration officials that the aggregation ofFederal drug law enforcement activities had "seriousoperational and organizational shortcomings" and that"enforcement work could benefit significantly . . . fromconsolidation of our anti-drug forces under a single unifiedcommand." The most important innovation adopted by the planwas the creation of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)within the Department of Justice as the "single,comprehensive Federal agency within the Department of Justice tolead the war against illicit drug traffic." The DEA, to beheaded by an Administrator who would report directly to theAttorney General, was to be responsible for the anti-drugfunctions, and would absorb the associated manpower and budgetsof BNDD, ODALE, and ONNI and those of the Bureau of Customs withrespect to drug investigations and intelligence. The plan alsoprovided that drug law enforcement research that had beenhitherto funded by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administrationwould be transferred to DEA. While the 1973 reorganization plan reaffirmed the jurisdictionof the Bureau of Customs to conduct investigative, intelligence,and law enforcement functions relating to the suppression of drugtrafficking at ports of entry and borders, it prohibited Customsfrom exercising those functions, as it had been previouslyauthorized to do, at locations away from ports of entry orborders. In addition, drugs, evidence, and persons seized bycustoms agents at ports of entry or borders were to be turnedover to representatives of the Attorney General. The planexplicitly provided that the Department of Justice, in additionto Customs, could perform law enforcement functions, includingthose relating to illicit drug trafficking, at the Nation's portsof entry and borders. Finally, the plan required the AttorneyGeneral to assure the maximum cooperation between and among DEA,the FBI, and other units of the Justice Department to achievecoordination of all of his drug law enforcement functions. Once established, DEA played an "increasingly crucialrole in the coordination of Federal drug law enforcement; andduring the 1970's a number of interagency efforts werelaunched." Among the coordination efforts undertaken by DEAwas the development of mechanisms to provide timely and accuratenarcotics intelligence to drug law enforcement personnel at theFederal, State and local levels. Steps taken by DEA in this areaincluded the establishment of: (1) An Office of Intelligence at DEA headquarters which,organizationally, was at the same level as its Office ofEnforcement; (2) Regional Intelligence Units (RIUs) in each of the DEAregions; (3) The El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) in 1974 as a borderintelligence unit, which soon grew into a"twenty-four-hour-a-day intelligence center, with worldwidecapabilities to collect, process, and disseminate informationconcerning illicit drug trafficking as the smuggling of aliensand weapons; EPIC is staffed by personnel from DFA, INS, Customs,the Coast Guard, BATF, FAA, the U.S. Marshals Service, FBI andIRS; (4) The Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System(NADDIS) and the System to Retrieve Information from DrugEvidence (STRIDE) to provide access to numerous investigativerecords of PEA and other Federal, State and local drugenforcement records; (5) In April of 1978, the National Narcotics IntelligenceConsumers Committee (NNICC), chaired by the DEA Deputy AssistantAdministrator for Intelligence and including representatives fromthe Departments of Defense, Treasury and State, and theircomponent agencies in the field, including Customs, the CoastGuard, FBI, INS, IRS, and NIDA to coordinate the collection,analysis, dissemination and evaluation of drug-relatedintelligence, both foreign and domestic, and to publish annuallya "National Intelligence Estimate on the Supply of Drugs tothe U.S. Illicit Market from Foreign and Domestic Sources." In addition to trying to improve the intelligence gatheringand dissemination functions of Federal drug law enforcement, PEAattempted to improve the task force concept in drug lawenforcement which it had inherited from ODALE. In 1974 DEAadopted the Central Tactical Units (CENTAC) program to focusenforcement resources on conspiracy investigations of high-leveldrug trafficking targets. Unfettered by normal DEA regionaloperations, centrally administered, specially funded, staffed bypersonnel from DEA, IRS, Customs, and State and local agencies,and charged with pursuing conspiracy cases under the ContinuingCriminal Enterprise (CCE) and RICO statutes, the CENTAC programdid produce relatively high arrest and conviction rates of highlevel traffickers, and accounted for 12 percent of DEA arrestsfrom 1976 to 1979 while using less than three percent of DEApersonnel. Although criticizing the CENTAC Program for notexploiting the Federal forfeiture statutes to seize the assets ofconvicted traffickers, the General Accounting office (GAO)nevertheless concluded that: Given the success of the Central Tactical units and the needfor more multi-regional conspiracy investigations, the expansionof the [CENTAC] program is warranted. GAO recommended expansion of the CENTAC program despite anearlier conclusion that the CENTAC efforts had not"achieve[d] the overall objective - complete immobilizationof the targeted trafficking organizations." The 1980 GAOreport also conflicted with: DEA officials who said the current size of the CENTAC programis optimum given existing enforcement resources, requiredcommitments, and their preference for regionally controlledinvestigations . . . . Another effort at interagency operational cooperation duringthe decade of the 1970's was the creation of three FBI-DEA forcesin Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles to "test thefeasibility of joint operations." These task forces weredesigned to combine the FBI's organized crime and conspiracycases expertise with DEA's experience in narcoticsinvestigations. This effort was probably doomed from the startbecause, although each agency was supposed to coordinate with theother, each used its own investigative techniques, personnel, andinformation sources and each maintained jurisdictional autonomy.After two years, the program was in effect disbanded, andevaluations by GAO and others attributed the failure todisagreements over investigative techniques and to restrictionson case selection. The creation of DEA by the 1973 reorganization plan and DEA'ssubsequent development of new supply reduction approaches werenot the only steps undertaken and designed during the 1970's torespond to what many had come to view as the almost intractablenational drug problem. For example, Congress passed the NarcoticAddict Treatment Act of 1974, which amended the 1970 ControlledSubstances Act to require annual registration by practitionersdispensing narcotic drugs, including methadone, for maintenanceor detoxification purposes. This legislation, which imposedstandards for the legal dispensing of drugs, was deemed necessarybecause of the increased diversion of methadone for illegal saleand use. That year also saw the passage of the Alcohol and Drug AbuseEducation Act Amendments of 1974, which extended the grant andcontract authorities of the Drug Abuse Education Act of 1970 forthree years and authorized the expenditure of $90 million overthose three years. The Act placed greater emphasis on the needfor prevention and early intervention programs, recognizing thecrucial role of family, peer group, school, church and othercommunity institutions in influencing young people's behavior. In enacting the 1974 Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education ActAmendments, Congress noted that most of the previously adoptedFederal programs to reduce demand had "inevitably beendirected primarily toward the person who is already in serioustrouble with alcohol and/or drugs," but that the focus ofthe Drug Abuse Education Act of 1970 had been different in thatit was directed to those who had not yet experimented with drugsor to those who had just begun to do so. In passing the 1974amendments Congress applauded the focus on prevention,reaffirming the philosophy that had suffused the 1970 EducationAct: [R]eal progress in the struggle against alcohol and drug abusewill require an intensified effort to reach that far morenumerous group, those millions of young people who may be temptedto experiment with dangerous drugs or who may have already doneso. Although committed to the continuation of Federal support forlocal drug education programs, Congress was nevertheless criticalof those educational programs that were based upon informationthat was incomplete, erroneous, or designed to frighten, andthose based on accurate information that had the tendency toarouse interest in drugs and to lead to experimentation, Beforepassing the 1974 Amendments Congress received assurances from theOffice of Education within the Department of HEW that it wouldmake every effort to support only those programs which would"incorporate factual material about drugs into programswhich focus on the causes of drug use and emphasize thedevelopment of appropriate attitudes and values," ratherthan merely inform and arouse interest. The Nixon Administration opposed passage of the bill thateventually became the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education ActAmendments of 1974 because it believed that "alcohol anddrug abuse education [should] be included among the specialprojects to be funded under other education legislation and thatalcoholism and drug abuse formula grant funds to the states[should] be considered the major source of funds for localalcohol and drug abuse education programs." Congressdisagreed with the Administration's position concerningcategorical legislation relating to prevention and earlyintervention educational programs, stating that: Failure to renew a clear legislative mandate to the Office ofEducation would destroy the identity of the program at both theFederal and the State level and would cast the alcohol and drugeducation programs in the role of supplicants to those agencieswhose primary concern is not education and who are alreadybesieged by the demands of treatment programs. The ultimate result would be either the disappearance ofcommunity drug and alcohol education programs or a reversion tosome of the futile and dangerous efforts of the past. . . As noted earlier, the 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act provided thatSAODAP would be abolished on June 30, 1975, with no assignment ofits policy-making and coordinative functions to any other Federalagency. On March 19, 1976, however, legislation was approved thatin effect continued SAODAP, but under the slightly different nameof "Office of Drug Abuse Policy" (ODAP). Congresscreated ODAP because: [T]here is current evidence that whatever improvement in theproblem occurred in 1973 was temporary and that the presentproblem is at least as great as at the time the original act waspassed. In approving the continuation of an executive level drugadvisor, Congress found that "drug abuse was not a crisiswhich could be rapidly solved but rather a continuing problemcalling for a continued Federal responsibility." Congressalso concluded that Federal expenditures for drug abuseprevention efforts had peaked in 1974 and then declined, despitecontinuing serious problems, due to, among other things, theanticipated end of SAODAP: It would also appear that the existence of a high-level officein the executive branch is to some extent correlated with thefiscal emphasis provided to drug abuse prevention efforts. Congress was also somewhat concerned that "unless someactive direction is taken at some high level it is probable thatin the very near future funding for drug law enforcement willagain overbalance funding for drug abuse prevention." In creating ODAP Congress required its Director to makerecommendations to the President regarding the policies andpriorities for, and objectives of, all Federal "drug abusefunctions," a term which was defined to encompass both drugabuse prevention and drug traffic prevention functions, and tocoordinate the performance of such functions by Federaldepartments and agencies. This was a significant expansion of theauthority of ODAP's predecessor, SAODAP. Despite the Ford Administration's opposition to thecontinuation of an executive-level office relating to drug abuseprevention, President Ford did not veto the 1976 amendmentcreating ODAP. However, President Ford did not staff ODAP, eventhough a specific line-item authorization had been made for it.DAP did not come into being until President Carter issued amemorandum initiating the Office on March 14, 1977. Less than twomonths after the Senate confirmation of the ODAP Director,President Carter submitted a reorganization plan restructuringthe Executive Office of the President to Congress on July 15,1977. The 1977 reorganization plan altered the structure of theExecutive Office of the President, which at the time consisted ofthe immediate White House Office, the Vice President's Office,OMB, and 14 other agencies, including ODAP and the DomesticCouncil. As proposed, the plan, among other things, abolished theDomestic Council and ODAP and redesignated the Domestic CouncilStaff as the Domestic Policy Staff. The functions of ODAP and itsDirector would be transferred to the President who could thendelegate such functions. Several members of Congress, recalling that it was the needfor a high-level policy and coordinating office to oversee theactivities of more than 20 Federal agencies with significant drugabuse responsibilities that had given birth to the SAODAP/ODAPprogram, expressed grave concern about the abolishment of ODAP.President Carter assured them that the ODAP's functions would becarried on within the Executive office of the President and thatthe Domestic Policy Staff, with several of its staff membersassigned exclusively to drug abuse issues, would handle ODAP'spolicy-making and coordinative functions. With Congressionalacquiescence, the 1977 Reorganization became effective on March26, 1978, at which time a core group of ODAP staff wastransferred to the Domestic Policy Staff. Although Congress did not block the provisions of the 1977reorganization plan, members of Congress nevertheless remainedunsure whether drug abuse policy-making and coordinativefunctions could be or would be adequately performed by theDomestic Policy Staff. This uncertainty was reflected in the DrugAbuse Prevention and Treatment Amendments of 1978, which extendedthe authorization for NIDA programs for only one year, instead ofthe previous multi-year reauthorizations, so that it couldevaluate the system created by the 1977 reorganization plan aftera relatively brief but adequate period of time. The Congressional evaluation of the operations of the drugabuse policy and coordinating system in the Executive Office ofthe President was embodied the next year in the Drug AbusePrevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Amendments of 1979.During the consideration of this legislation, President Carterassigned the Associate Director for Drug Policy of the DomesticPolicy Staff the responsibility for assisting the President inperforming the functions of ODAP, which had been transferred tothe President by the 1977 reorganization plan. President Cartertook this step because of Congressional concern that: [T]he continued coordination of drug abuse policy, required bythe 1972 Act and its subsequent amendments, became dependent uponthe continued interest . . . of the President and otherindividuals within the Executive Branch, rather than beingclearly structured by statute as had been the case prior to theimplementation of the Reorganization Plan. Because of the steps taken by the Carter Administrationincluding the revitalization of the Strategy Council, Congressresponded by legislating what the 1977 reorganization plan haddone. In addition to giving its imprimatur to the 1977reorganization plan, the 1979 legislation made authorizations forNIDA's state formula grants and special grant and contractprograms for drug education and prevention through September 30,1981. It did so because it found that the "growing extent ofdrug abuse indicates an urgent need for prevention andintervention programs designed to reach the generalpopulation." In providing for a two-year reauthorization forNIDA programs and activities, Congress rejected the CarterAdministration's proposal that state formula grants for drugabuse be consolidated with those for alcoholism and mental healthbecause: There is considerable history to suggest that earmarkedfunding for categorical programs should remain separate at theState level as well as at the national level. Within thetraditional health care delivery system, the drug and alcoholclient has not fared well. To force these systems to competeagain is to seriously jeopardize the major strides which havebeen made . . . . The Committee insists that a categoricalemphasis on drug abuse must be maintained at all levels ofgovernment. A loss of direct program emphasis would severely harmthe state focus on combatting drug abuse, and could seriouslyendanger the Nation's battle against drug abuse. The decade of the 1970's was an important one in the evolutionof the Federal drug abuse effort. It began with a comprehensiverestructuring of Federal laws relating to drugs and included amajor reorganization of Federal drug law enforcement agencies ina effort to reduce interagency rivalries and to promoteefficiency and leadership in the fight against drug trafficking.Equally important was the recognition that strategies to reducedemand must be an essential component of the overall drug abusepolicy and that the nation's drug abuse problem could not beregarded as a crisis susceptible to quick resolution. Inaddition, new laws were passed to respond to particular aspectsof the drug problem, and new enforcement approaches were tried inan effort to disrupt drug trafficking more effectively. On a less positive note, disagreements over certainfundamental issues remained unresolved at the end of the 1970's.Among these were the role of the Federal Government in drugpolicy and the appropriate balance between strategies to reducedemand and supply. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, despitelegislation, massive reorganizations, new enforcement techniques,and necessary attitudinal changes, the problems of drug abuse andtrafficking continued at high levels at the end of the decade. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-38IA031-000653-B003-4http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc4a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133623 text/html 37600HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:36:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:28 GMTContent-length: 37382 Federal Drug Abuse Policy: 1981-Present Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter IV Part 2: Federal Drug Abuse Policy: 1981-Present Early in his administration President Ronald Reaganacknowledged that drug abuse was "one of the gravestproblems facing us" as a Nation. The Reagan Administrationhas taken many steps designed to improve the effectiveness of theU.S. overall drug abuse policy. Reorganization/Coordination On January 21, 1982, in a major policy shift, the FBI wasgiven concurrent jurisdiction with DEA for drug law enforcementand investigation. In addition, the Administrator of DEA wasrequired to report to the Director of the FBI who was given theresponsibility for supervising generally drug law enforcementefforts and policies. In giving the FBI concurrent jurisdiction for enforcement ofU.S. drug laws, the Attorney General followed the recommendationof a committee that he had established to study the need forincreased coordination of DEA and the FBI in the drug field. Thiscommittee was headed by then Associate Attorney General RudolphW. Giuliani. According to Giuliani, the Attorney General'scommittee recommended concurrent jurisdiction because: [W]e believe we can more effectively deal with the large-scaletrafficking groups by coordinating DEA's street-level, undercoverexpertise with the FBI's ability to combat large criminalenterprises. The FBI's 20-year experience in combatting organizedcrime will also prove critical to drug enforcement. Although FBI expertise in organized crime and financialinvestigations would be available in drug enforcement work as aresult of concurrent jurisdiction, DEA would continue to functionas a "single-mission narcotics enforcement agency" thatwould "give the drug problem the kind of focus itneeds." In another action relating to the coordination of Federal drugabuse efforts, President Reagan issued an executive order on June24, 1982, directing the office of Policy Development to assistthe President in performing his duties under the Drug AbusePrevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Act; designating theDirector of the Drug Abuse Policy Office within the Office ofPolicy Development as primarily responsible for coordinating,overseeing, and policy-making for all Executive international anddomestic drug abuse functions; and making the Director directlyresponsible for the activities of a drug policy staff within theoffice of Policy Development. Despite President Reagan's stated commitment to theperformance of the functions imposed upon him by the Drug AbusePrevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act, Congress becameincreasingly dissatisfied with a perceived lack of coordinationof such functions. This dissatisfaction became embodied in anOmnibus Crime Bill (H.R. 3963) which included a provision toestablish an Office of Director of National and InternationalDrug Operations and Policy, which was described as follows: Similar in concept to SAODAP, the proposed agency would havebeen charged with the overall planning and coordination ofFederal efforts to control the supply of dangerous drugs. Unlike SAODAP, which had been directed by Congress tocoordinate Federal drug abuse prevention efforts, and unlikeODAP, which was enjoined to oversee all Federal drug abuseprograms, the proposed Office of Director of National andInternational Drug Operations and Policy was envisioned as amechanism for coordinating and directing Federal law enforcementoperations. While the President was considering the merits of H.R. 3963,an Administration spokesman criticized that portion of the billcreating the Office of Director of National and InternationalDrug Operations and Policy: If the czar . . . is to have the power to direct the drugenforcement operations of other Cabinet officers, the very natureof our Cabinet system of government would be drastically altered.If he is not to have such power, he could do little more thaninterfere with the existing mechanisms, which have been workingwell. Two days after this statement appeared, President Reaganpocket-vetoed H.R. 3963 and issued a memorandum of disapprovalexplaining his action: The creation of another layer of bureaucracy within theExecutive Branch would produce friction, disrupt effective lawenforcement, and could threaten the integrity of criminalinvestigations and prosecutions . . . . The seriousness of this threat is underscored by theoverwhelming opposition to this provision by the Federal lawenforcement community as well as by such groups as theInternational Association of Chiefs of Police and the NationalAssociation of Attorney's General. * * * The war on crime and drugs does not need more bureaucracy inWashington. It does need more action in the field, and that iswhere my Administration will focus its efforts. Members of Congress were not easily dissuaded from theirefforts to achieve a greater degree of coordination of theFederal drug abuse efforts. On February 7, 1984, the Senatepassed a proposed National Narcotics Act of 1984 (S. 1787),which, among other things, would have established a cabinet-leveloffice of National and International Drug Operation and Policy.Under the bill the Director of the Office was authorized to:develop, review, implement, and enforce U.S. policy concerningillegal drugs; coordinate all U.S. efforts to halt drugtrafficking into and within the United States; develop, inconcert with the Federal entities concerned with drug control,budgetary priorities and allocations; and coordinate thecollection and disseminate of narcotics intelligence. In recommending that S. 1787 be passed, the Senate JudiciaryCommittee acknowledged that the Reagan Administration hadundertaken a number of "promising initiatives" in druglaw enforcement. However, the Committee concluded that an Officeof National and International Drug Operations and Policy wasnecessary because: [T]he Committee believes the Administration's anti-drug effortfalls short in one crucial respect: the lack of centraldirection. At least 15 Federal agencies play a role in the regulation ofcommerce in dangerous drugs or in the enforcement of otherrestrictions . . . . These agencies are located in six differentdepartments. Under such circumstances, it is inevitable thatdivergences as to priorities will arise and that there will beconflicting interpretations of national policy. Indeed, nationalpolicy in such an area as drug law enforcement must becontinually reevaluated and reformulated; a one-time annualreview and the publication of a broadly-worded strategy does notsuffice. The Committee also described in some detail the role itenvisioned for the proposed Office: SOADAP was the same kind of "overlord" agency as theone contemplated by S. 1787. However, it was flawed from thebeginning in that its effective jurisdiction was limited toactivities aimed at the control of drug demand; it was not givenauthority of any substance in the law enforcement field. * * * The Committee bill draws from the SAODAP concept, but focuseson the aspects of drug control that were excluded from the formeragency's purview, i.e., the government's efforts to control thesupply of abused drugs. It is in the area of supply control, beit in foreign or domestic programs, that the Committee perceivesthe greatest current need for central direction. In recommending the establishment of an office to which theReagan Administration appeared to be implacably opposed, theSenate Judiciary Committee took pains to observe that theDirector of the Drug Abuse Policy office was not capable ofperforming the necessary coordinative functions concerningFederal drug law enforcement efforts: [U]nder questioning by several Congressmen [of the HouseSubcommittee on Crime at a February 17, 1983, hearing on thecoordination of drug enforcement efforts] it became clear thatthe director does not have the authority or stature to overseethe implementation of the Federal strategy. Anxious to reassure the Administration about the proposedcabinet-level Office, the Committee made it clear that, inimplementing the legislation, the President would have a greatdeal of flexibility; for example, the Office would not have to beestablished in the Executive office of the President, and theAttorney General could be appointed the Director of the centraldrug agency. However, the Committee was insistent that theDirector have something like a cabinet-level status because suchstatus was deemed "necessary if the office is to have theinfluence needed to impose a truce on interagency feuding, toinsure maximum participation, and to allocate budgetary resourcesfor top efficiency and economy." Despite the Administration's opposition, the Senate passed S.1787. However, Congressional conferees compromised andsubstituted a National Drug Enforcement Policy Board for theOffice of National and International Drug Operations and Policyas the means for achieving greater coordination of Federal druglaw enforcement efforts. Both the House and Senate agreed to theConference Report, and Public Law No. 98-473 was thereafterapproved on October 12, 1984. Title II of this law was entitledthe Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, and Chapter XIII ofthat title was designated the National Narcotics Act of 1984. Congress established the National Drug Enforcement PolicyBoard (Policy Board) because it found that drug trafficking wasestimated to be an $80 billion a year industry; only 5 to 15percent of the drugs imported into the country were interdicted;and controlling the supply of drugs was thought to be a key toreducing the drug-related crime epidemic. The Policy Board,chaired by the Attorney General, was and is charged withfacilitating coordination of U.S. operations and policyconcerning illegal law enforcement. As Chairman of the PolicyBoard, the Attorney General was given many duties, includingadvising the Policy Board concerning drug law enforcement andacting as primary advisor to the President and Congress onBoard-developed programs. The Act, however, declares that nothingtherein authorizes the Board or its Chairman to interfere withroutine law enforcement or intelligence decisions of any agency.Finally, the National Narcotics Act of 1984 amended the DrugAbuse Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act to declarethat one of the duties of the White House Office of Drug AbusePolicy Board was to insure coordination between the Policy Boardand health issues associated with drug abuse. The creation of the Policy Board in January 1985 representsonly the latest compromise between the President and Congress inthe ongoing search for more effective coordination of all facetsof the Federal drug abuse effort. It remains to be seen whetheran entity like the Policy Board can effectively oversee, police,and coordinate all Federal law enforcement efforts and whethersome other mechanism is needed to impose coordination of Federaldemand reduction and supply reduction strategies. Legislative Responses to the Drug Problem In addition to the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984,other important legislative initiatives have been adopted inrecent years. For example, the Department of DefenseAuthorization Act of 1982 contained a provision, "MilitaryCooperation With Civilian Law Enforcement Officials," whichwas intended to codify the practices of cooperation that haddeveloped between military and civilian law enforcementauthorities. The Act was also designed to improve the level ofcooperation by delineating precisely that assistance whichmilitary commanders could provide and by permitting militarypersonnel to operate military equipment that had been lent tocivilian drug enforcement agencies. This legislation was deemednecessary for the following reasons: The rising tide of drugs being smuggled into the United Statesby land, sea, and air presents a grave threat to all Americans. * * * Only through the dedicated work of all of Federal, State, andlocal law enforcement agencies can we begin to stem this tide. Infighting this battle, it is important to maximize the degree ofcooperation between the military and civilian law enforcement. Atthe same time, we must recognize the need to maintain thetraditional balance of authority between civilians and themilitary. The most important and innovative part of the legislation wasSection 374, which permits the Secretary of Defense to assignDepartment personnel to operate and maintain military equipmentthat had been made available to an agency with jurisdiction toenforce the Controlled Substances Act. This relatively simplechange increased geometrically the potential interdictioncapability of Federal drug law enforcement agencies. The year 1984 was a prolific one for legislation dealing withdiscrete areas in drug law enforcement. The Controlled SubstanceRegistrant Protection Act of 1984 made it illegal, among otherthings, to steal any quantity of a controlled substance from aregistrant. Congress also directed the Attorney General,notwithstanding the scheduling provisions of the ControlledSubstances Act, to transfer methaqualone, commonly known by thebrand name Quaalude, from Schedule II to Schedule I, with theeffect of making the prescription of methaqualone unlawfulbecause it no longer had an approved medical use. While remainingcommitted to the proposition that scheduling of controlledsubstances ordinarily should be handled in accordance with theadministrative procedures mandated by the Controlled SubstancesAct, Congress took this legislative action after determining thatcircumstances required it to do so and that the adverse effectsof the diversion of methaqualone outweighed its therapeuticusefulness. Congress also passed the Aviation Drug-Trafficking ControlAct, which amended the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, to, amongother things, require the Administrator of the FAA to revokeairman certificates and aircraft registrations of those convictedof violating any Federal or State law relating to controlledsubstances, except where the violations involved possessionoffenses. The Act also made it illegal for any person to serve asan airman without an airman's certificate in connection with atransportation that constitutes a Federal or State drug felonyoffense. Although the Controlled Substance Registrant Protection Act of1984, the Aviation Drug-Trafficking Control Act, and theCongressional rescheduling of methaqualone were necessary laws,by far the most important drug law enforcement measures passed in1984 were contained in several provisions of the ComprehensiveCrime Control Act of 1984. The Act included: (i) Bail Reform Act of 1984: This Act comprises many sections,but the most important and most controversial was that codifiedin 18 U.S.C. Section 3142. Section 3142 provides that when aperson charged with an offense appears before a judicial officer,the judicial officer must order that, pending trial, the accusedbe released on personal recognizance or upon execution of anunsecured appearance bond; released upon certain listedconditions; temporarily detained to permit exclusion ordeportation if not a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident;temporarily detained to permit revocation of a prior conditionalrelease; or detained. The preventive detention provision statesthat the judicial officer must hold a hearing in any caseinvolving a narcotics offense for which imprisonment for ten ormore years is prescribed to determine whether any conditions willassure the accused's appearance and the safety of any otherperson and of the community. In any such hearing the accused mustprove that there are conditions that will assure his appearanceor the community's safety, if the judicial officer finds thatthere is probable cause to believe that the person committed theoffense. (ii) Comprehensive Forfeiture Act of 1984: This legislationmade extensive revisions to Federal civil and criminal forfeiturelaws and procedures, which had targeted the assets ofracketeering and drug trafficking organizations: Today few in the Congress or the law enforcement communityfail to recognize that the traditional criminal sanctions of fineand imprisonment are inadequate to deter or punish the enormouslyprofitable trade in dangerous drugs . . . . Clearly, if lawenforcement efforts to combat racketeering and drug traffickingare to be successful, they must include an attack on the economicaspects of these crimes. Forfeiture is the mechanism throughwhich such an attack may be made. This 1984 legislation was designed to eliminate limitationsand ambiguities that had "significantly impeded the fullrealization of forfeiture's potential as a powerful lawenforcement weapon." With respect to the Racketeer Influenced and CorruptOrganizations Act, the 1984 Comprehensive Forfeiture Act didseveral things, including confirming the Supreme Court's decisionin Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16(1983) that adefendant's ill-gotten profits from racketeering wereforfeitable; defining the property subject to forfeiture toinclude real property; making the relation back doctrine, i.e.,U.S. interest in forfeitable property arises at the time of thecommission of the act that gives rise to the forfeiture,applicable in criminal forfeiture proceedings; and expandingpost-indictment prior restraining order authority to preserve theavailability of forfeiture assets by making an indictmentsufficient to establish conclusively probable cause that theproperty will be forfeited. The Comprehensive Forfeiture Act also amended the 1970Comprehensive Act. With respect to criminal forfeiture, the 1984Act added a new provision to the 1970 act that is applicable toall felony drug offenses, including the Continuing CriminalEnterprise offense. In virtually all respects, the drug criminalforfeiture provisions are now identical to those of the amendedRICO statute. The new drug criminal forfeiture provision alsocreates a rebuttable presumption that any property of a personconvicted of a drug felony is subject to forfeiture if thegovernment establishes by a preponderance of the evidence thatthe defendant acquired the property during the period ofviolation, or within a reasonably short period thereafter, andthere was no likely source for the property other than theviolation. (iii) Controlled Substances Penalties Amendments Act of 1984.This legislation generally enhanced the penalties for violationsof the Controlled Substances Act. Specifically, it provided a20-year prison term and a $250,000 fine for violations involvingspecified large amounts of Schedule I and II narcotic drugs, PCPand LSD; raised the fine for violations involving all Schedule Ior II substances and enhanced the fines for violations involvingSchedule III, IV, and V substances. With respect to all doublingprovisions for recidivists in the Controlled Substances Act, the1984 legislation removed an ambiguity in the existing law byproviding that a State drug felony conviction would trigger theprovisions; it went further by providing that a Foreign drugfelony conviction would have the same effect. Finally, the 1984legislation provided that anyone who distributed controlledsubstances on or within 1,000 feet of school property could besubjected to a prison term or fine or both up to twice what isotherwise provided. (iv) Dangerous Drug Diversion Control Act of 1984. Thislegislation "represent[ed] the first major updating of theregulatory provisions of the Controlled Substances Act and theControlled Substances Import and Export Act since their enactmentin 1970." In doing so, the 1984 amendments focusedprincipally on diversion of drugs of legitimate origin into theillicit market and the manufacture and abuse of new drugs, suchas controlled substance analogs. With respect to the problem ofdiversion, which Congress had attempted to address in the 1970Comprehensive Act by creating a closed system, the legislativehistory states: Diversion of legally produced drugs into illicit channels is amajor part of the drug abuse problem in the United States. It isestimated that between 60 and 70 percent of all drug-relateddeaths and injuries involve drugs that were originally part ofthe legitimate drug production and distribution chain. Also,diversion of legally produced drugs often evidences the same sortof large-scale trafficking more commonly associated with thetrade in wholly illicit drugs. * * * Unfortunately, experience under the [CSA] over the past decadehas demonstrated that the strong regulatory authority to maintaina "closed" distribution chain does not exist at thepractitioner level. Yet, it is estimated that 80 to 90 percent ofall current diversion occurs at this level. In response to this diversion problem, Congress amended theControlled Substances Act to, among other things, permit theAttorney General to deny registration to practitioners if suchregistration would be inconsistent with the public interest,authorize the Attorney General to suspend or revoke aregistration upon the recommendation of a competent stateauthority or if the public interest requires it; and authorizethe Attorney General to make grants to State and localgovernments in connection with those governments' anti-diversionprograms. With respect to the problem of the manufacture and abuse ofnew drugs, Congress found that: [T]he procedural requirements for controlling a drug under 21U.S.C. 811 have proven sufficiently time consuming that theypreclude a swift response when an as yet uncontrolled drugrapidly enters the illicit market and creates a significanthealth problem. As a result of the Dangerous Drug Diversion Control Act of1984, Congress gave the Attorney General emergency schedulingauthority. Under that authority, the Attorney General ispermitted to schedule a drug in Schedule I on a temporary basis,for up to one year, if he determines that such action is"necessary to avoid an imminent hazard to the publicsafety." In making this determination, the Attorney Generalneed only consider the history and current pattern of abuse, thescope, duration, and significance of abuse, and the nature of therisk, if any, to the public health. The temporary scheduling maybe extended for up to six months while a rule-making proceedingis conducted for the purpose of permanently scheduling the drug.Such a temporary scheduling order is not subject to judicialreview. (v) Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting ActAmendments: "Without the means to launder money, therebymaking cash generated by a criminal enterprise appear to comefrom a legitimate source, organized crime could not flourish asit now does." The 1984 amendments of the Currency andForeign Transactions Reporting Act were designed to "finetune the [then] current currency reporting law." One of thechanges adopted increased the civil penalty for violating therecords and reporting requirements of the Act from $1,000 to$10,000 for each violation and the criminal penalty from $1,000and 1 year in prison to $250,000 and 5 years imprisonment. Thesechanges were deemed necessary because: [I]t is important to recognize that [the requirements] areprimarily directed at persons who make a lucrative career in theillicit drug trade and organized crime. As such, the penaltiesare far too low to deter and punish such activity. Indeed, themodest penalties now applicable may simply be written off as acost of doing business. The Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 was intended to,and did in fact, provide Federal law enforcement agents withbetter tools for combatting drug traffickers. However, it isstill too early to evaluate how these tools have been used. Important legislation in the field of drug abuse since 1981has not been restricted only to matters relating to improvingdrug law enforcement. As noted previously, Congress in 1979rejected President Carter's proposal that NIDA's State formulagrants for drug abuse programs be consolidated with those foralcoholism and mental health. Instead it reauthorized the drugformula grants through September 30, 1981. In passing the OmnibusBudget Reconciliation Act of 1981, Congress reversed itself andfundamentally changed the role that the Federal Government playsin overseeing and funding of drug abuse prevention, treatment andrehabilitation programs by creating an Alcohol and Drug Abuse andMental Health Service Block Grant (ADMS Block Grant). The newprogram was designed to distribute the Federal money that hadpreviously been provided to the States through formula andproject grants and contracts. One of the principal motivations for adopting the block grantapproach was the belief that the States were in the best positionto determine the most efficacious use of Federal funds: The ADMS Block . . . [was] established in 1981 to provideState and local governments greater flexibility anddecision-making authority in focusing Federal, State, and localresources on needs and priorities they know best and in ways theybelieve are best suited to local conditions. Block grants werealso intended to eliminate duplication and overlapping ofservices and allow States to better integrate and coordinateservices funded by several levels of government. In addition to establishing the ADMS Block Grant, the OmnibusBudget Reconciliation Act specified how the States were to spendtheir allotment. Although requiring the States to file reportswith information permitting the Secretary of Health and HumanServices to determine whether the Federal funds provided wereexpended in conformity with the objectives of the block grant,the Act also directed the Secretary not to impose burdensomereporting requirements. The reporting requirements concerning theblock grant imposed by the Secretary were much less extensivethan those existing under the categorical programs that existedprior to the adoption of the block grant approach. The impact of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act has beenestimated: Since the establishment of the ADMS Block Grant, theamount of Federal money going to State drug abuse prevention andtreatment programs has declined by approximately 40 percent. Itis not possible, however, to determine what the impact of thisreduction has been because a portion, perhaps significant, of thereduction represents savings due to the elimination of overheadadministrative costs. Law Enforcement and Executive Responses to the Drug Problem. Recognizing that drug abuse and drug trafficking are seriousnational problems, which also pose a threat to national security,the Reagan Administration has taken steps since 1981 that havebeen designed to improve Federal law enforcement efforts againstdrug traffickers. Narcotics intelligence is essential to any drug lawenforcement program. In that regard, on December 4, 1981,President Reagan issued an executive order, entitled "UnitedStates Intelligence Activities," which was intended to"control and provide direction and guidance to theIntelligence Community." Among the executive order'sprovisions relating to drugs, one authorizes agencies within theU.S. Intelligence Community to participate in law enforcementactivities to investigate or prevent international narcoticsactivities and to render assistance and cooperation to lawenforcement authorities not otherwise precluded by law. Inaddition, agencies within the Intelligence Community areauthorized to collect, retain, or disseminate informationconcerning U.S. persons obtained during the course of a lawfulinternational narcotics investigation or incidentally obtainedinformation indicating involvement in activities that may violatefederal, state, local or foreign laws. Finally, the ExecutiveOrder directs that all departments and agencies involved in theU.S. intelligence effort shall cooperate to provide the Presidentand the National Security Council with information on which tobase decisions concerning the conduct and development of foreign,defense, and economic policy and the protection of U.S. nationalinterests. Whether the U.S. Intelligence Community has played or willplay the important role in the Nation's anti-drug effortenvisioned for it by Executive Order 12333 depends upon thecommitment of its constituent departments and agencies toeliminating this threat to national security. The Executive Orderwas an important event because it represented recognition at thehighest level of the Executive Branch that, without accurate andadequate strategic, operational, and tactical narcoticsintelligence, the Federal drug trafficking prevention effortwould be seriously crippled. During 1981 the deleterious effect of drug trafficking on thequality of life in Florida, and especially in South Florida, hadbecome so great that the State's citizens demanded prompt andeffective responses by government at all levels. At the Federallevel, President Reagan established on January 28, 1982, acabinet-level South Florida Task Force, also known as OperationFlorida, which was chaired by Vice President Bush, to"assist and coordinate Federal efforts with those of Stateand local authorities in order to reduce crime" and whichwas patterned after previous multi-agency efforts, such as theCENTAC program. The South Florida Task Force was intended to be a"broad, multifaceted anti-crime program," but its focuswas on interdiction and the arrest and prosecution of drugsmugglers. Assistance to the South Florida Task Force, whichbecame operational on March 15, 1982, was provided by DEA,Customs, FBI, BATF, the Marshals Service, the Coast Guard, andthe Department of Defense. One of the more significant features of the South Florida TaskForce was the creation of the South Florida Joint Task Group,which consisted of DEA and Customs personnel and which wascharged with conducting follow-up investigations of druginterdictions. In authorizing Customs agents to conduct suchinvestigations under the supervision of DEA on March 20, 1982,the Attorney General modified, albeit slightly, the structure ofFederal drug enforcement that had been established by PresidentNixon's 1973 reorganization plan. That plan had prohibitedCustoms agents from exercising investigative, intelligence, andlaw enforcement functions at locations away from ports of entryor borders. This action was in effect a recognition, longoverdue, that it was necessary, if law enforcement effortsagainst drug trafficking were to be improved, for Customs'intelligence and investigative functions to be expanded. Operations Greenback and Florida were successful in that theyforced traffickers to reduce their activities in Florida.However, the increased law enforcement pressure, as had happenedso many times in the past, resulted in the traffickers divertingdrug smuggling to Gulf and Eastern ports of entry and their moneylaundering activities to New York and the California-Mexico area.The successes achieved by the Florida multiagency operations thusexacerbated an already serious nationwide drug problem, but theyalso provided a model for responding to that problem. In 1982 theAttorney General appointed a committee to develop new approachesto the drug trafficking problem. The Committee concluded that"no single agency could cope with the problem" and that"many previous cooperative ventures, although limited inscope by comparison, provided the promise that agencies cancooperate and . . . only full-scale teamwork could meet thecrisis . . . ." The Committee's conclusions led to PresidentReagan's announcement on October 14, 1982, of the formation of 12regional Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces, which wereauthorized in January 1983 and became operational during thespring of that year. The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program(OCDETF Program) is modeled after the South Florida Task Force,but its objectives are quite different. While the primaryobjective of the South Florida Task Force is the interdiction ofdrugs, the focus of the OCDETF Program is the leaders of largeorganizations, which control drug importation and distributionnetworks, and the disruption of those networks. The participatingFederal agencies are the U.S. Attorney's offices, DEA, FBI,Customs, BATF, IRS, the Coast Guard, and the U.S. MarshalsService. The OCDETF Program differs from previous multi-agencylaw enforcement efforts in several respects: the task forces aredirectly controlled by the Attorney General; the initial fundingwas under the control of the Attorney General; and the taskforces are to focus on only one major segment of organizedcriminal activity, drug trafficking. Because the OCDE Task Forcesare not intended to replace existing Federal enforcement effortsagainst drugs and organized crime, the work of the organizedCrime Strike Forces and the South Florida Task Force continue, asdo the efforts of the FBI, DEA, Customs, and U.S. Attorneysdirected against organized crime groups involved in drugtrafficking. Shortly after the establishment of the OCDETF Program, theReagan Administration adopted another multi-agency approach toone facet of the Nation's supply reduction efforts, interdiction,by creating the National Narcotics Border Interdiction System(NNBIS) which was to be headed by Vice President Bush. NNBIS wasgiven the responsibility for informally coordinating theinterdiction efforts of other organizations; it could recommend,but not require, that the organizations take certain actions, andit itself was not authorized to interdict drugs. When it becameoperational, NNBIS took over the interdiction coordinationresponsibilities of the South Florida Task Force. Despite theestablishment of the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board in1984, NNBIS continues to operate as an interdiction coordinatingbody. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-39IA031-000653-B003-25http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133633 text/html 46267HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:36:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:18 GMTContent-length: 46049 Drug Enforcement, Policy, and Reducing Drug Demand Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter V Drug Enforcement, Policy, and Reducing Drug Demand Introduction The preceding chapter of this report discusses the historicaldevelopment of Federal drug policy and demonstrates that theFederal response to the problems of drug abuse and drugtrafficking has become more complex over time. A good indicatorof the present complexity of the Federal response is the factthat 32 Federal agencies are now involved in the multifacetedeffort to reduce the supply of and demand for drugs. In thischapter, the Commission describes the current anti-drug effortsof the principal Federal agencies and their roles in the nationalstrategy. The agencies are grouped by function, beginning withthose with central policy roles, followed by internationalefforts, interdiction, domestic enforcement, data gathering,intelligence, and United Nations efforts. Overall Policy The National Drug Enforcement Policy Board The National Narcotics Act of 1984 created the National DrugEnforcement Policy Board (the Board). This Cabinet-level Boardconsists of the Attorney General as Chairman and the Secretariesof State, Treasury, Defense, Transportation, and Health and HumanServices, as well as the Directors of Central Intelligence andthe Office of Management and Budget, as members. It is the latestmanifestation in the persistent effort to achieve singularity ofpurpose in the fight against drug abuse, despite the diversity ofFederal agencies involved. This fact is explicitly recognized inthe pertinent statutory language, found at 1302(b) of the Act, inwhich Congress expresses its intent to: (1) Maintain a national and international effort againstillegal drugs; (2) Coordinate fully the activities of the Federal agenciesinvolved; and (3) Charge a single, competent, and responsiblehigh-level Board of the United States Government, chaired by theAttorney General, with responsibility for coordinating UnitedStates policy with respect to national and international drug lawenforcement. This intent is based upon sweeping Congressional findings setforth in Section 1302(a) of the Act: (1) The flow of illegal narcotics into the United States is amajor and growing problem. (2) The problem of illegal drug activity falls across theentire spectrum of Federal activities both nationally andinternationally. (3) Illegal drug trafficking is estimated by the GeneralAccounting office to be an $80 billion per annum industry in theUnited States. (4) The annual consumption of drugs has reached epidemicproportions. (5) Despite the efforts of the United States Government andother nations, the mechanisms for smuggling opium and other harddrugs into the United States remain virtually intact, and UnitedStates agencies estimate that they are able to interdict no morethan 5 to 15 percent of all hard drugs flowing into the country. (6) Such significant indicators of the drug problem asdrug-related deaths, emergency room visits, hospital admissionsdue to drug-related incidents, and addiction rates are soaring. (7) Increased drug trafficking is strongly linked to violentaddiction-related crime, and recent studies have shown that over90 percent of heroin users rely upon criminal activity as a meansof income. (8) Much of the drug trafficking is handled by syndicates, asituation that results in increased violence and criminalactivity because of the competitive struggle for control of thedomestic drug market. (9) Controlling the supply of illicit drugs is a key toreducing the crime epidemic confronting every region of thecountry. (10) The magnitude and scope of the problem requires theestablishment of a National Drug Enforcement Policy Board,chaired by the Attorney General, to facilitate coordination ofall Federal efforts by relevant agencies. (11) Such a Board must have responsibility for coordinatingthe operations of Federal agencies involved in attacking theproblem through the development of policy and resources, so thata unified and efficient effort can be undertaken. To accomplish the statutory purpose, S. 1304 of the Actspecifically empowers the Board to improve policy development andcoordination among Federal agencies by: (1) reviewing, evaluating, and developing U.S. governmentpolicy, strategy, and resources with respect to drug lawenforcement efforts, including the setting of budgetarypriorities and development of a national and international drugenforcement strategy; (2) facilitating coordination of all U.S. government effortsto halt national and international trafficking in illegal drugs; (3) coordinating the collection and evaluation of informationnecessary to implement U.S. policy with respect to drug lawenforcement. In furtherance of these aims S. 1306 of the Act directs theDirector of the Drug Abuse Policy Office to serve as an advisorto the Board on matters related to health issues in the drugabuse field. As a principal figure in the area of interdiction,the Vice President is included as an ex officio member. Under this scheme the Attorney General as Board Chairman, inconsultation with the other members, supervises the preparationof initiatives for consideration by the Board. The Board, underthe direction of the Chairman, then determines which items toinclude on its agenda and what priority each is to receive. Suchitems are then referred to the Coordinating Group, chaired by theDeputy Attorney General and consisting of senior officials fromthe member agencies. The Coordinating Group in turn is to submit to the Boardpractical recommendations, based on consultation with theagencies involved, for resolving drug law enforcement issues anddeveloping appropriate Federal policy. Both the Board and theCoordinating Group are supported in their efforts by a full-timeprofessional staff charged with performing necessary research,analysis, and writing. This staff is composed of individualsdrawn from various principal agencies. The intent of thismulti-agency composition at all levels, Board, CoordinatingGroup, and staff, is a reflection of the Board's intent, asexpressed in its 1985 Interim Act to Congress: This structure reflects the need for interagency participationat every level of Policy Board activity. The underlying principleis that there is a practical advantage to resolving differencesat the lowest level possible. Disagreements on issues willinevitably occur among various agency participants, but if allpoints of view are represented at each level, many differencescan be worked out by the Staff or Coordinating Group rather thanbeing elevated to the Policy Board. Section 1304(a) of the Act specifically directs the Board tofocus its work on two parts of the five-point National Strategyon Drug Abuse: drug law enforcement and internationalcooperation. In the area of drug enforcement, the Board pursuesfour principal strategies: 1) illegal drugs are to be destroyedat their source; 2) drug contraband is to be intercepted andseized en route to or at the borders of the United States; 3)drug trafficking organizations are to be identified, investigatedand prosecuted, and drug related assets seized and forfeited; and4) regulatory means are to be exercised to stem diverted drugabuse. The Board commenced its activities on April 24, 1985, almost ayear after its creation. In its first meeting, it adopted theorganizational structure described above. In the months betweenApril 1985 and the end of that year, the Board met five times andthe Coordinating Group, five times. Issues referred to theCoordinating Group during that time include "designer"drugs, efforts to improve government-wide drug seizurestatistics, and drug crisis management. Its agenda includes areport in January 1986, required by the Narcotics Act of 1984, onthe Board's achievements and the effectiveness of its policies tocombat national and international drug trafficking. It is also topublish a 1986 strategy report. Items under consideration forinclusion in the Boards agenda are: Budget Review. The Government has increased substantially theamount of resources devoted to drug law enforcement. Because ofthe numerous agencies and departments now involved in combattingdrug trafficking, the Policy Board is an ideal forum forconsidering the Government's overall drug law enforcement budget.The Board may undertake budget reviews to determine whetherresources are appropriately allocated. Consideration will also begiven to insuring proper interagency balance and the optimal useof tax dollars and resources in the drug war. Memoranda of Understanding. The Board may review the numerousjurisdictional Memoranda of Understanding between Federalagencies to determine the effectiveness of these mechanisms forinteragency cooperation. Interdiction. The Board may examine all of the interdictionprograms currently in place. Since, in the last few years, theFederal Government has made an increased effort to preventillegal drugs from entering the United States, the Board maypropose to analyze the effectiveness of interdiction as anoverall law enforcement strategy. The Board will also considerthe experience gained from the 1981 exception to the PosseComitatus Act to determine whether additional legislative actionis needed. Eradication. The Board proposes to assess the efficacy of alleradication strategies and the cost-effectiveness of eradicationas a drug law enforcement strategy. In addition, it will addresshow eradication relates to other elements of our enforcementstrategy. Because domestic marijuana reduction involves a numberof agencies, this issue is well suited to a study by the PolicyBoard and its staff. Other Issues. The Board may also refer other issues foradditional staff analysis. These might include: money laundering;financial investigative techniques, including asset forfeiture;the relationship of supply and demand reduction strategies; andthe collection and sharing of drug intelligence. The Board's vision of its role is summed up in its InterimReport: The Board is assuming the task of coordinating all drugrelated programs. To do this, the Board may develop a planningand management process for policy development and evaluation ofthe nation's narcotics law enforcement programs. White House Drug Abuse Policy Office Created within the White House by Executive Order 12368, theDrug Policy Abuse Office was established to ensure that thePresident is provided with a center for coordination andoversight of both national and international drug abuse functionsof all executive branch agencies. The role of this office hasbeen expanded to include drug trafficking issues as well. Theoffice publishes a regular report on both drug abuse and drugtrafficking, the National Strategy, which provides policydirection for all agencies involved in anti-drug efforts. As partof the White House Office of Policy Development, the White HouseDrug Abuse Policy Office provides the President with a directadvisor on drug abuse policy matters. International Efforts Bureau of International Narcotics Matters As the Federal agency responsible for coordinating the UnitedStates' drug control efforts overseas, the Department of State'sBureau of International Narcotics Matters (BINM) is pivotal inimplementing U.S. anti-drug policy on the international level.BINM attempts to encourage foreign coordination for joint illicitdrug control activities; bilateral assistance for crop controland interdiction programs in the form of equipment, training andtechnical advisory services; participation in internationalorganizations to increase drug control efforts in licit andillicit drug production countries; training programs for foreignpersonnel in illicit drug control functions to strengtheninterdiction and enforcement efforts; guidance, coordination andsupport of the work abroad of all U.S. government agenciesinvolved in drug control; and technical assistance forinternational demand reduction. BINM currently provides supportfor drug eradication efforts in 14 countries and is in large partresponsible for much of the world's crop control and eradicationefforts, described elsewhere in this report. Agency for International Development Section 126 of the Foreign Assistance Act instructs the Agencyfor International Development (AID) to "give priorityconsideration to programs which would help reduce illicitnarcotics cultivation by stimulating broader developmentopportunities." Given this mandate, AID issued PolicyDetermination No. 1 on drugs in 1982, encouraging the design ofprojects that provide economic alternatives to farmers in druggrowing areas. Overseas, AID coordinates with the StateDepartment's Bureau of International Narcotics Matters. AID drug control efforts include finding a suitable mix ofsubstitute crops, assuring free market incentives, andencouraging appropriate host country pricing and marketingpolicies. AID attempts to develop and implement developmentprojects that facilitate the host government's enforcement ofexisting bans on drug production. Department of Agriculture The United States Department of Agriculture through theAgricultural Research Service (ARS) assists in the control ofillicit drug plants by providing technical information pertainingto eradication and substitute crops. Scientists in the ARSconduct research on the use of herbicides and other techniquesfor eradication, as well as the use of substitute crops forfarmers presently producing drugs. ARS scientists also provideexpert advice to the State Department and cooperating foreigncountries regarding proposed eradication programs. Potentialadverse environmental impacts are assessed prior to therecommendation of control measures, whether it be chemical,mechanical, fire, biological, or through genetic manipulation ora combination of two or more of these techniques. Scientists fromARS have been involved in drug research since 1972 and haveassisted control authorities in several drug producing countriesin the Americas and the Near and Far East. Interdiction National Narcotics Border Interdiction System The National Narcotics Border Interdiction System (NNBIS)attempts to accomplish comprehensive planning in the limited areaof interdiction at or approaching U.S. borders. NNBIS was createdby the President on March 23, 1983, and is directed by the VicePresident. NNBIS' mission is to improve border interdiction byaccomplishing a threefold goal: to continue to improveinteragency coordination among law enforcement agencies; tomaximize the participation of the military services and Federalagencies involved in drug interdiction; and to increase andprovide interaction for intelligence community involvement ininterdiction efforts. Participating agencies include the U.S.Customs Service, the U.S. Coast Guard, the Drug EnforcementAdministration (of particular importance is the contribution ofDEA's El Paso Intelligence Center - EPIC) the Border Patrol, theDepartment of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, theFederal Aviation Administration, the National oceanic andAtmospheric Administration, the Federal CommunicationsCommission, and the Department of State. NNBIS itself consists ofa headquarters staff in Washington, D.C. and six regionaloffices: Miami, New Orleans, El Paso, New York, Chicago and LongBeach, California. Actual interdiction at or approaching U.S. borders isaccomplished by individual agencies during single agency ormulti-agency special operations. The role of NNBIS is to providenecessary equipment, intelligence, detection and trend analysissupport. Specific NNBIS contributions to drug seizures consist ofdirect support, such as the passing of "real-time"information, general information, or regional analysis. NNBISstaffs, consisting of agency-contributed personnel in bothWashington and the regional centers, coordinate with contributingagency staffs to lay the groundwork for special initiatives,which then can proceed in a timely fashion to enhance drug lawenforcement efforts. Of critical importance in understandingNNBIS' role is the fact that the activity has no funding of itsown. It is entirely dependent upon agency contributions ofmanpower and intelligence and does not have a direct operationalauthority. It can only inform and advise its constituent agenciesconcerning opportunities for coordinated or expanded operations.Thus, criticisms of NNBIS, alleging that many seizures would haveoccurred anyway, even if NNBIS did not exist, miss the point.Individual agencies are intended, indeed mandated, to carry outtheir missions, including contraband seizures. NNBIS is intendedto supplement, not replace, those efforts. It has a steadilyimproving record of doing so, a fact recognized even by somecritics. Operation Hat Trick I In the fall of 1984 Hat Trick I, the first major coordinationeffort attempted under the NNBIS management mechanism, wasundertaken. Hat Trick I was designed to disrupt the transshipmentof the fall harvest of marijuana from Colombia, whilesimultaneously intercepting any cocaine shipped during theoperation. During the 60-day operation, an intercept line of Coast Guardand Navy ships was formed in the Caribbean to halt smugglingvessels. The Department of Defense supplemented the operationwith electronic equipment capable of detecting both aircraftwhich flew over the ships and vessels which slipped through thenet. Additionally, the Customs Service and Border Patrolincreased their efforts at and between the ports of entry to theUnited States, and the intelligence community added previouslyunprecedented support to the effort. This multi-agency approachemphasized the critical need for compatible communicationscapabilities. This lesson is being carried forward in currentoperational planning. The anticipated reaction to this operation was an attempt bythe smugglers in Colombia to stockpile shipments. To counterthis, multi-agency teams, headed by the Department of State,visited Colombia and neighboring countries to brief officialsthere about the operation and to elicit their support. TheColombian government, which had declared a "war withoutquarter" against drugs the previous year, seized theopportunity to step up efforts to destroy the marijuana in thatcountry. Colombian officials were also placed aboard U.S. CoastGuard cutters, operating off the Colombian coast to coordinatewith Colombian enforcement units. Operation Hat Trick I proceeded as expected, with massivemaritime seizures, and a significant reduction of maritime drugshipments. According to NNBIS, over 600,000 pounds of marijuanaand 6,000 pounds of cocaine were seized by U.S. agencies duringthe operation. Simultaneously, the Colombian government, througheradication and destruction of stockpiled contraband, removedover 50 percent of the fall marijuana crop from possible export. Operation Hat Trick II Operation Hat Trick I has come to be viewed as a prototypeeffort in it initiated improvements in planning, communicationssecurity, in-country efforts, air operations, intelligence andresource support. Hat Trick II, a much more ambitious operationbegun in November 1985 and still under way, is the logicalfollow-on, drawing carefully on lessons learned from Hat Trick I. Coordinated by NNBIS and consisting of the combined forces ofU.S. civilian drug enforcement agencies and all branches of themilitary, Hat Trick II involves increased land and air patrols todisrupt drug traffic into the United States. The long-term goalof the operation is to affect the worldwide availability of drugsby increasing international pressure on traffickingorganizations. It is a complex operation that tightenssurveillance along our border with Mexico and along the known airand ocean supply routes from South America and other Caribbeancountries. The United States Navy and the Coast Guard, working together,provide the primary maritime surveillance and interdiction forcesfor Hat Trick II, while the U.S. Customs Service works as thelead agency with the Navy, Air Force, Army and Marines indirecting air operations. The Customs Service and the Immigrationand Naturalization Service Border Patrol are conductingintensified operations all along U.S. land and sea borders.Through Department of State and DEA initiatives, the U.S. isworking to provide the maximum coordination of anti-drug effortsin foreign countries. Hat Trick II employs military surveillance aircraft toidentify and track smugglers and to exploit the known routestraffickers use from their source countries to their ultimatedestination. If the smugglers attempt to hide and wait in asource or transit country, the drug enforcement authorities inthose countries are prepared to seize drugs and make arrests. Animportant key to Hat Trick II lies in the ability of source andtransit countries to take advantage of the disruption the UnitedStates has caused in normal drug trafficking. Colombia, Panama,Venezuela, Jamaica and other countries throughout the region arecooperating in this international effort. Hat Trick II has contributed significantly to institutionalchange among involved agencies. For example, as a result ofplanning initiatives for Hat Trick II, the U.S. Navy has changedits policies, and Navy ships have served as platforms for asignificantly increased number of Coast Guard interdictions.Further, military radars have become a much more significantfactor in aircraft seizures. The diversions in smuggling routesand methods caused by the operation have made drug trafficking amore costly enterprise for smugglers, and secure communicationsenhancements have kept operational information away from them.Major cocaine seizures have resulted from U.S. Bahamiancooperation. The intelligence community has greatly increased itscollection and dissemination of tactical intelligence. Each lawenforcement agency has, in essence, developed specializedintra-agency operations in support of the overall Hat Trick IIeffort. Operation Blue Lightning To test the effectiveness of conducting an operation withFederal, State and local participation, as well as exercising thegrowing U.S.-Bahamian partnership against drug smuggling, a majorspecial operation, entitled "Blue Lightning," wasdevised and coordinated from the NNBIS Regional Center in Miami. Blue Lightning concentrated on two geographical areas, theBahamian Archipelago and the area West of the Bahamas up to andincluding the coast of Florida. In the Bahamas islands weretargeted as "stash sites," or drug holding areas, andunannounced sweep teams were flown in to search for contraband.The sweep teams were composed of Bahamian Police, transported byU.S. military helicopters. Efforts were coordinated by the DEAand U.S. Embassy in Nassau. The effort outside the Bahamasincluded coordinated, augmented air and sea detection capabilityup to the Florida coast. As a primary participant in the NNBIScoordinated operation, the U.S. Customs Service was requested toassume lead agency status for the portion of the operationoutside the Bahamas. Overall Blue Lightning participants included16 State, county and city law enforcement agencies, the CustomsService, Department of Defense, Coast Guard, and National ParkService in addition to the DEA and the Government of the Bahamas.Additionally, Bahamian personnel were assigned to South Floridafor the duration of the operation to fly law enforcement missionswith U.S. Customs. The raids by Bahamian authorities forced smugglers to movetheir drugs to the U.S. immediately, where law enforcement unitswere positioned to intercept them. Over 6,000 pounds of cocaine,33,000 pounds of marijuana, and over $1.5 million worth ofvessels, aircraft, trailers and cash were seized. Additionally,interdiction techniques were tested and refined, heightening theability to conduct coordinated international and interagencyoperations. U.S. Coast Guard Responsible in large part for U.S. drug interdiction efforts,the Coast Guard's strategy has been mainly directed towardintercepting motherships as they transit the major passes of theCaribbean. To effect this "choke point" strategy, theCoast Guard conducts both continuous surface patrols and frequentsurveillance flights over the waters of interest, and boards andinspects suspect vessels at sea. In the past major Coast Guardresources have been concentrated in the "choke points"traditionally transversed by traffickers. Cutters now morefrequently patrol the Bahamas, the eastern passes of theCaribbean, and the Gulf, Atlantic and Pacific coastal areas. During the past several years the Coast Guard has increasedthe number of cutter patrol days and aircraft operating hoursdevoted to drug interdiction, increasing their ability to respondquickly to sightings and other intelligence. In addition, theCoast Guard is deploying leased Sea Based Aerostats (SBAs), whichare small tethered balloons equipped with surface search radar,tethered offshore at sufficient altitude to greatly increase itsrange. As part of a coordinated operation, surface targetinformation is paused to a command and control cutter forevaluation and deployment of other assigned units, both surfaceand air. Better intelligence remains an important factor in increasingthe Coast Guard's overall interdiction effectiveness. The mostcritical need is timely and accurate information on the number,identity, location and destination of vessels and aircraftcarrying contraband which are bound for the United States. Duringthe past two years improvements have been made in the collection,evaluation, and dissemination of intelligence. A new intelligencecoordination center in Washington, D.C. maintains a 24-hourall-source watch to exploit all intelligence systems available tothe Coast Guard, and produces intelligence tailored to the needsof operational commanders. The Coast Guard is also continuingliaison with the law enforcement community's intelligencenetwork. U.S. Customs Service The U.S. Customs Service participates in several multiagencyinvestigative programs, including the Florida Joint Task Groupand the President's Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force.The efforts of these two programs alone resulted in 1,194 arrestsand drug seizures of 35,702 pounds of cocaine, 132 pounds ofheroin, and 3,848,293 pounds of marijuana from FY 1952 to FY1985. Prompted by the increasing sophistication of violators ofcritical technology and trade laws, including individuals indrug-related activities, the Customs Service established anOffice of Intelligence in 1981. Customs-acquired intelligence ofnational security interest is, for the first time, actively beingdisseminated to community agencies, and the intelligencecommunity is currently developing information useful for drugenforcement. The development of secure communications facilitieswithin the Customs Service, currently underway, will furtherenhance this capability. The Customs Aviation and Marine Programs are consistentlychanged and upgraded to reflect new technologies and equipmentand improved tactics and strategy. Drug smugglers have respondedto these programs by adjusting their routes to elude theincreased effectiveness of enforcement officials. The Customs Service has developed teams of inspectors andcanine enforcement officers to more thoroughly examine persons,conveyances, and cargo determined to be high risk. These mobileteams, which use highly trained dogs to detect drugs, allowCustoms to release cargo and passengers deemed to be low riskwithout examination, thus speeding the entry of most people andcargo. The teams comprise 12 percent of the inspectionalworkforce, but have accounted for the greater proportion of thedrug seizures. During the first 9 months of FY 1985, they havebeen responsible for 66 percent (10,269 pounds) of the hashish,87 percent (876 pounds) of the cocaine, and 40 percent (243pounds) of the heroin that has been seized by inspectors. During the past three years, the Customs Service has attemptedto convince the commercial air and sea carriers of theirresponsibilities in the effort to halt drug trafficking. As partof this initiative Customs contacted the major carriers andsigned cooperative agreements with a number of them. These setout specific measures designed to prevent and detect the use ofcommercial vessels and aircraft that smuggle drugs and othercontraband. Customs works closely with carriers, to apprise themof their vulnerabilities through regular meetings; to provide atraining program on cargo, aircraft, and facility security; toperform security surveys; and to compile threat assessments. Thiscooperation between Customs and commercial carriers has led tothe detection of drugs and the transmittal of valuableintelligence to local customs officials. Department of Defense In 1981 Congress passed legislation clarifying statutoryrestrictions on the use of Department of Defense (DOD) resourcesfor law enforcement purposes. As a result, the Department ofDefense now has greater freedom to support Federal lawenforcement agencies. DOD resources play an important role in theFederal drug interdiction program by providing surveillance andsupport services, such as using aircraft to search for smugglersand Navy ships to tow or escort vessels seized by the Coast Guardto the nearest U.S. port. As of the end of September 1985, theDOD has been involved in 38 vessel seizures, and their assistancehas been invaluable during NNBIS-directed joint operations. DOD's increased involvement in drug law enforcement as aresult of amendments to the Posse Comitatus Act, has provedpivotal in many instances. In fact, the Joint Chiefs of Staffrecommended unanimously in early 1985 that the U.S. military beengaged to an unprecedented extent in fighting drug traffickingand production. It called for the implementation of a massive newprogram in which military forces would expand their presentsupportive role by becoming involved in drug interdiction, intraining Central American nation's anti-drug forces, and inproviding needed weapons and equipment. Domestic Enforcement Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program(OCDETF), comprised of 13 Task Forces nationwide, brings allFederal agencies with drug enforcement responsibilities togetherinto a coordinated effort against the largest and most importantnational and international drug trafficking rings. JusticeDepartment agencies involved in the effort include the FBI, theDEA, and the Marshals Service; Treasury Department agenciesinclude the U.S. Customs Service, the Bureau of Tobacco, Alcohol,and Firearms, and the International Revenue Service. The CoastGuard has a major role in the program as well, and the Departmentof Defense offers intelligence and information on sightings ofsuspected drug traffickers heading for the U.S. by sea and air. In slightly more than two and one-half years, the Task Forcehas produced 1,721 indictments against 6,545 defendants. The TaskForce emphasis is on prosecuting and imprisoning drug kingpins,money launderers, and financiers. There is also strong focus onseizing cash and drug-related assets. In fact, the assets seizedmay soon exceed the cost of the Task Force program. The Task force Program relies largely on the ContinuingCriminal Enterprise Statutory provision and the RacketeerInfluenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) statute. Theconviction rate in cases reaching disposition is approximately 95percent. State and local officers participate in nearly one-halfof the Task Force investigations. New international law enforcement cooperation also has beenachieved, since nearly one-half of Task Force cases targetorganizations international in scope. These efforts have receivedsubstantial support from foreign law enforcement agencies, asindicated by the fact that five percent of Task Force cases nowinvolve direct participation by foreign police. This has createda new focal point for international drug investigations. Drug Enforcement Administration As the lead Federal drug agency the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA) is charged with enforcing the controlledsubstance laws and regulations of the United States. DEA alsoparticipates in non-enforcement programs to reduce the demand fordrugs. Part of the Department of Justice, DEA comprises 2,400special agents in 121 domestic field offices and 61 offices inover 40 foreign countries. DEA's primary objectives are: - To bring to bear all the Federal resources on the arrest,prosecution, and immobilization of major drug traffickingorganizations via continued coordination with other Federalagencies and the use of financial and legal tools, emergingtechnology, and sophisticated investigative techniques. - To reduce the supply of illicit drugs from source countries,thereby reducing the availability of illicit drugs in the UnitedStates and abroad via source country initiatives, assistance toforeign government, training for foreign law enforcementauthorities, and public support for successful foreign governmentendeavors. - To significantly reduce the diversion of controlledsubstances from the legitimate channels in which they aremanufactured, distributed, and dispensed through a vigorousprogram of investigations and State, local, and internationalcooperation. - To enlist the active participation of State and localgovernments and law enforcement agencies in the national drugeradication program, clandestine laboratory task forces, Stateand local task forces, and other multi-state coordinativeefforts. - To participate actively and aggressively in the Federal,State, and local effort to mobilize public support for the drugenforcement and abuse prevention program by implementingstrategies and educational programs that stimulate cooperationamong State and local criminal justice agencies, school,businesses, civic, and parent groups. - To improve the effectiveness and efficiency of DEAoperations through the implementation of specific programsdesigned to enhance employee performance. Domestic Eradication Programs The DEA's Domestic Eradication/Suppression Program hasexpanded significantly since the Drug Enforcement Administrationfirst provided eradication assistance to Hawaii in 1979, andcurrently all 50 States participate in this venture. DEAencourages State and local eradication and provides training,equipment, funding and investigative and aircraft resources. In1984, with 48 States participating, approximately 3.8 millionmarijuana plants were eradicated. The Secretary of the Interiorhas also been authorized by a recent Executive Order to conductan extensive eradication program targeting marijuana plants onFederal lands. Spraying commenced on October 6, 1985. El Paso Intelligence Center The El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) is the Drug EnforcementAdministration's national drug information center, withintelligence systems located at DEA headquarters, and in DEA'sforeign and domestic offices. EPIC's strategic intelligenceprogram furnishes geographic assessments, estimates, and warningsof drug availability, production, trafficking trends and routes.It distributes information to foreign, Federal, State and localagencies through numerous publications. Its operationalintelligence program directly supports investigations underwayagainst top-level traffickers and supplies information onspecific organizations and their financial assets to supportinvestigations worldwide. As appropriate, this intelligence isshared with other Federal, State and local agencies to ensure itsmaximum utilization against drug traffickers. EPIC serves as aclearinghouse for drug information collected 24 hours a day. WithDEA as its lead agency, EPIC is staffed by special agents andintelligence analysts working with personnel from the FBI,Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Marshals Service, Federal AviationAdministration, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, CustomsService, Coast Guard, the Immigration and Naturalization Service,the Departments of Defense and State, and members of the Federalintelligence community. Today all States participate in EPICthrough chartered arrangements made between DEA and theindividual States. Federal Bureau of Investigation Although DEA is nominally the lead Drug Enforcement Agency,its Director reports to the Director of the FBI. In granting theFBI concurrent jurisdiction with DEA, the Attorney General hasmandated that the FBI assume a significant drug enforcement role.He has also directed that FBI expertise in such areas asorganized crime financial investigations and white-collar crimeinvestigations be fully used in drug enforcement work. Both DEA and the FBI place strong emphasis on majordistributors and organizations involved in the manufacturing,importing, distributing and financing of illicit controlledsubstances. Conspiracy investigations (particularly theContinuing Criminal Enterprise and Racketeer Influenced andCorrupt Organizations Statutes) are the focal point ofinvestigation efforts. Internal Revenue Service Within the Department of the Treasury, the Internal RevenueService (IRS) plays a critical role in U.S. drug control effortsby targeting drug traffickers' profits. IRS FinancialInvestigative Task Forces rely on the reports of financialtransactions, filed by banks and other institutions, to identifyfinanciers of criminal activities and money launderingspecialists. These reports include Currency Transaction Reportsand Foreign Bank Accounts Reports. Through these Task Forcestrace the transferrals of large sums of cash and identify theproceeds of drug trafficking. Data Gathering National Institute on Drug Abuse The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) is the principalsource for current information about the effects of drug abuse.NIDA was established in 1972 as part of the Department of Health,Education and Welfare, and for its first nine years, operatedunder a broad mandate that included providing direct financialassistance for drug abuse education, training, treatment, andrehabilitation, as well as conducting research programs. With thepassage of The Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Health ServicesBlock Grant in 1981, full responsibility for carrying outtreatment and prevention service functions was transferred fromNIDA to the States. Now a part of the Department of Health and Human Service,NIDA's current role in reducing demand, as set forth both in theNational Strategy and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Amendments of1983, is to develop and disseminate new knowledge about drugabuse, its prevention and treatment, and to exercise nationalleadership in encouraging and assisting the private sector, theStates, and local governments to implement and support drug abuseprevention and treatment programs in their communities. The NIDA research program has several important components.Through its epidemiological research program NIDA assesses thenature and extent of the nation's drug abuse problem and itstrends. NIDA supports two ongoing epidemiological surveys, theNational Household Survey on Drug Abuse and the High SchoolSenior Survey. NIDA's Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) monitorsinformation on the health consequences of drug use throughemergency room visit statistics and through medical examinerreports. In addition to these major efforts, NIDA provides grantsfor a number of special epidemiological studies. National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee The 11-agency National Narcotics Intelligence ConsumersCommittee consists of the U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Customs Service,the Departments of Defense, State and Treasury, Drug EnforcementAdministration, Immigration and Naturalization Service, NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, White House Drug Abuse Policy Office,Federal Bureau of Investigation and Internal Revenue Service.This Committee was created as the primary vehicle at the nationallevel for review and dissemination of strategic intelligence. Itpublishes an annual report, the "Narcotics IntelligenceEstimate," which details the supply of drugs to the U.S.illicit market from foreign and domestic sources, and theirpatterns and rates of use. Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency Since the signing of Executive Order 12333 in December 1981,the Central Intelligence Agency has provided assistance to druglaw enforcement efforts through the collection, analysis, anddissemination of information regarding foreign narcoticsproduction. The CIA plans to upgrade its capabilities to gatherand assess drug-related intelligence over the next five years,and is currently coordinating research to develop technologieswhich can be used to better detect drug trafficking. United Nations United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control As the drug control arm of the United Nations, the UnitedNations for Drug Abuse Control was established in 1979 to assistgovernments by helping finance projects aimed at reducing theillicit supply of and demand for drugs. Projects undertaken bythe United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control include replacingillicit opium cultivation, treating and rehabilitating drugaddicts, strengthening control measures, or organizinginformation and education programs. The Fund relies entirely onvoluntary contributions, mainly from governments but also fromprivate sources. The United States has long been the primarycontributor to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control. Inearly 1983, however, the Fund obtained a $40 million pledge,extending over a five year period, from the government of Italyfor coca control projects in South America. In early 1984 majordonors to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control agreedthat development assistance to narcotics growing regions shouldbe linked to government commitments to control illicit drugproduction. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-40IA031-000653-B003-44http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133644 text/html 35275HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:36:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:07 GMTContent-length: 35057 Drugs --Current Supply Strategies: Analysis andRecommendations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter VI Part 1: Current Supply Strategies: Analysis andRecommendations Introduction Currently, the great bulk of our Federal drug abuse budget isdevoted to strategies aimed at cutting off the supply of drugsavailable to users and prospective users. These strategies, suchas source country eradication, interdiction, and domesticenforcement, are frequently attacked as expensive, too slow inproducing perceptible results, and frequently dangerous for thepublic officials charged with carrying them out. Far too oftensuch criticism seems to be the result of isolated examinationwithout regard to the programs' proper long-term goal orrelationship to strategic approaches to reduce demand. This report attempts to avoid such pitfalls, and in thischapter, examines and analyzes in its proper context, each of ourFederal efforts to reduce supply. It makes recommendations toencourage a coordinated, comprehensive effort at restricting theflow of drugs to the maximum extent possible, while complementarydemand reduction programs take hold. Legalization of Illicit Drugs The debate over strategies to reduce supply has produced awide range of proposals, including at one extreme the suggestionthat currently illicit drugs be legalized. Profits in the drugtrade are enormous, primarily because drugs are in high demandand because traffickers charge prices high enough to justify therisks involved. Proponents of legalization argue that because ofthe clear connection between illegal drug trafficking andorganized crime, making drugs legal would remove the enormousprofits in the illicit drug industry a priority. On the surface, this argument appears to have some merit.However, it omits any consideration of the health costs of drugabuse to the individual and to society, a dimension thisCommission views as fundamental. The drugs discussed in thisreport are inherently destructive to mind and body."Legalized" drugs would still alter behavior, impairproductivity and educational potential, damage vital organs, andkill. Moreover, legalization would almost certainly increasedemand, and therefore spread this destruction. Finally, thisCommission is not persuaded that legalization would result inorganized crime's abandonment of the drug business. While demandfor drugs in the United States represents a significant share ofglobal drug consumption, many other countries have a considerabledemand for drugs that would continue to be met by some or thesame organized crime groups now confronting this country. It is the position of this Commission that legalizingsubstances, which by their very nature destroy rather thanbenefit the individual and society, will not solve the problem ofdrug trafficking and is therefore not a viable option. ThisCommission is emphatic in its position that legalization of druguse is not a viable option. National Drug Enforcement Policy Board The National Drug Enforcement Policy Board ("theBoard"), presents a rare, possibly even unique, opportunityto bring focus and singularity of purpose to the Federalanti-drug effort. That fact is explicitly recognized in thelegislation creating the Board, wherein Congress acknowledgesthat for the first time, a single, competent, and responsiblehigh-level Board of the United States Government, chaired by theAttorney General, will be charged with this responsibility ofcoordinating United States policy with respect to national andinternational drug law enforcement. The sentiment is echoed by the Justice Department's ownhandbook discussing the National Narcotics Act of 1984, whichidentifies the Act as "a substantially revised version ofearlier 'Drug Czar' proposals." This Commission recognizes and has pointed out repeatedly inthis report that drug abuse, a term including all of the medical,social, and legal costs imposed on the American people by illegaldrugs, is a problem of proportions unmatched in any other area oflaw enforcement. A problem of such dimensions demands acoordinated response by the Federal government. The creation ofthe Board is a major step toward a truly unified, coordinatedenforcement effort. The performance of the Board to date has been somewhatambiguous. On the positive side, the Board has begun to meet, hasadopted an effective and comprehensive membership list for itsCoordinating Group, and has assembled a professional staff,composed of experienced and able agency representatives. It is troubling to note, however, that in light of theacknowledged urgency of the drug abuse situation, characterizedby Congress as an "epidemic," marked by"soaring" death rates and a "key to reducing thecrime epidemic confronting every region of the country," theBoard has yet to assert a clear leadership role. Instead, it hasadopted a more relaxed and collegial approach, waiting threemonths after the effective date of the Act to hold its firstmeeting. The Board began its work with a suggestion from theJustice Department that the Board's mandate is ". . . quitebroad and allows a range of possible roles - from an essentiallypassive research and analysis to active implementation of drugpolicies." This Commission notes with alarm that thiscontemplative expression does not even extend to policyformulation, which is the core of the Act's mandate. This concernis heightened by the Board's initial choice of agenda items:"designer drugs," drug seizure statistics, and drugmanagement. These topics are certainly important, but only one,seizure statistics, would have an impact on the formulation of acoordinated drug enforcement policy. Even that connection isremote. Uniform statistics are an important step towardcompilation of the reliable data base necessary to formulatepolicy and measure its effectiveness, but that is all they are.It is also troubling that the Board's first Interim Report toCongress consists almost entirely of a verbatim recitation ofportions of the 1984 National Strategy. An urgent but rational approach to the problem of drug abuseis needed. This must begin with the statement of a goal. What isthe ultimate objective of the policy Board and of our drugenforcement effort generally? This Commission is of the opinionthat the success of a national drug enforcement effort shouldultimately be measured in terms of reduced usage. The poisoningof minds and bodies is the evil we are combatting. All othertargets - manufacture or cultivation, processing, smuggling,distribution, and so on - would be of no consequence were it notfor the terrible destructive force of the use of illegal drugs.Eliminating drug use, then, must be the cornerstone of a nationalpolicy, and our national operational design - our strategy -should flow from it. It is at this fundamental level that theBoard's deliberations should begin, difficult as the dialogue maybe. A key to achieving the Board's essential singularity ofpurpose is the commitment of each Board member, on behalf of hisentire Department, to the goal of reducing drug consumption,accompanied by a resolve that no opportunity for action,particularly coordinated, multi-agency approaches, will beignored on the basis of parochial concerns. However, the use of acommittee in place of a single figure of authority runs theinherent risk of preserving interagency competition. It isencouraging to note that the Board has included as"potential items" for review total budgetary planningand administrative operations. This Commission submits thatvigorous review of the latter is urgently needed, with specialattention to what is not included in such memoranda and thereasons for such omissions. A combined and coordinated effort among the dozens of Federalagencies and offices, measured by a single standard of success,is certain to require program dislocations, reordering ofDepartmental priorities, and subordination of Departmental plansto Board direction. It will mean abandoning the "NotInvented Here" veto, which has far too often blockedinter-Departmental efforts. Cooperation is the heart of a trulycoordinated national attack on drug abuse. It will require notjust review, analysis and coordination, but initiative by theBoard to overcome unnecessary obstacles, outmoded concepts, andself-protective agency narrowness. Success will also depend uponcareful attention to long-term coordination between Federalagency operations and with State and local components, for ifexperience has shown anything in the effort against drugtrafficking, it is the resourcefulness and adaptability of thetraffickers. Successful interdiction or enforcement in one areais virtually certain to result in a relocation to a new area ofoperations. Long range planning is critical if our resources areto be used in a fashion which anticipates such movement, ratherthan reacts to it. It is neither possible nor desirable under our system of lawto invest a Board Chairman or any other "Czar" withdictatorial power to command other Cabinet members to conduct theaffairs of their respective Departments in a particular fashion.This fact is reflected in the tone of the Act, which empowers theChairman only to "advise, recommend, correlate andevaluate" and to direct action only with "theconcurrence of the head of the agency" involved. Such terms,intended to recognize the independence of the variousCabinet-level agencies, also spread among them a commonresponsibility for the success or failure of this vital task. Intelligence Accurate, timely, and complete intelligence is vital to theefficiency of United States anti-drug efforts. Strategies toreduce the supply of drugs, such as eradication, interdiction,investigations, and prosecutions are dependent on effectiveintelligence gathering. Less commonly acknowledged is thatstrategies to reduce demand are similarly dependent on suchintelligence. Adequate data is the foundation upon which focused,purposeful programs to reduce demand must be built. There issubstantial evidence to suggest that such a foundation is oftenlacking in our current approaches. Intelligence concerning both drug abuse and drug traffickingmust be shared between strategists who are working to reducesupply and demand. Evidence indicates that thorough strategicplanning, whether concerned with the reduction of demand or withattacks on supply, must carefully consider the available data onthe other side of the equation. For example, to achieve the mostcarefully reasoned deployment of resources, decisions concerningpriorities for disrupting the supply of a particular drug shouldconsider not only the geographical and political conditions insource and transit locations, but also carefully evaluate thegeographic and demographic data concerning drug consumption. Suchcoordination of data from both sides of the supply-demand dynamicis crucial to long-range planning. An awareness of traffickers'ultimate markets will facilitate anticipatory deployment ofresources. This unified theory of planning is the basis for the"all source" intelligence center discussed below. Domestic Data Collection One principal category of drug-related intelligence isconsumption and law enforcement data formally collected withinthe United States. Such data are essential to describe andmeasure the problems of drug abuse and trafficking. They are alsovital to our efforts to evaluate the effects of various effortsto reduce the supply of and demand for drugs. The reliability ofthese estimates is critical for both policy makers and drug lawenforcement officials. However, because drug trafficking and useare illicit activities, data concerning them are necessarilyestimates. Compounding this problem is the fragmentation of thecurrent system of drug data gathering. Much greater coordinationis imperative. Two primary ongoing studies are used to measure the number ofdrug users and frequency of drug abuse in the United States: thebi-annual Household Survey of Drug Abuse and the annual HighSchool Senior Survey, both sponsored by the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA). The Household survey sample includes 5,000people 12 years of age or older, living in households across thecountry. The High School Senior survey questions approximately17,000 high school seniors. These surveys have been criticizedbecause they do not include information from those populationsthat are frequently involved with drugs, high school dropouts andpeople without residences. To compensate for this deficiency, ithas been proposed that these surveys oversample groups thought tobe heavy users of drugs. While these surveys provide estimates of the extent of drugabuse, they do not gather important data, such as the price andquantity of drugs purchased. Such information is crucial foreffective organized crime and drug enforcement policy planning,because it would provide information concerning the effects ofcertain enforcement actions on drug purchasing/using behavior.NIDA should amend these surveys to include questions about drugpurchases. To the extent possible, they should also be designedto determine the sources of the funds used to finance drugpurchases. Such data may be crucial to effective preventioneducation planning. NIDA provides two additional data bases of drug use in thisarea. The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) collects dataconcerning drug-related emergency room visits and deaths. Thesestatistics are based on reports gathered by NIDA from one-sixthof the country's emergency rooms and two-thirds of the medicalexaminers' offices. NIDA collects information about drug users intreatment through the Client Oriented Data Acquisition Process(CODAP). Formerly, all States were required to provide such dataas a condition of Federal assistance. However, since theinstitution of block grants to partially fund State drug programsin 1982, the Federal government has not been able to compelparticipation in CODAP, and the number of participating Stateshas shrunk to approximately 15. Because of the importance of thistreatment data, the Federal government should again requireparticipation in CODAP. Much data concerning drug trafficking is gathered by the11-member National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer Committee(NNICC) and reported annually in the Narcotics IntelligenceEstimates (NIE). This data includes estimates of the amount ofdrugs produced and entering the United States, traffickingpatterns, and prices and purity of drugs. Although the NIE claimsto be "the most comprehensive assessment prepared for theFederal Government on the worldwide illicit drug situation in1984," the report also states that, "[b]ecause of gapsin some of the data used to derive the estimates, there is a highdegree of uncertainty to the resulting estimates." In 1983 NNICC prepared a report analyzing the methodologiesused in preparing drug estimates. The report concluded that NNICCestimates are not timely, with estimates generally 18-30 monthsout of date; there is insufficient data concerning the price andpotency of drugs, in part because of inadequate input from Stateand local sources; and estimates of the total retail value ofdrugs is an imprecise measure, which should be replaced by abetter measurement of final drug sales. In addition, NNICC'smethodology has been criticized as "analysis bynegotiation," with final estimates resulting from abargaining process among the member agencies. Complaints aboutthe reliability of NIE data also result from the fact that NNICCdoes not publish the background data used to develop theestimates. Another important set of data in the drug field is theestimate of the results of drug law enforcement, including theamount of drugs and property seized, and the numbers of arrestsand convictions and sentences imposed on drug violators. Asignificant problem in generating reliable statistics in thisarea is the lack of a centralized system for collection. Becausemany agencies often are involved in the same case, the amount ofdrugs seized and other information may be reported by eachagency. According to the National Drug enforcement Policy Board, One of the principal problems encountered by the FederalGovernment in its efforts to gauge the effectiveness of itsoverall drug law enforcement program has been the lack ofcentralized statistical information on Federal drug seizures . .. Because of an undetermined amount of double and triplecounting, reliable statistics on total Federal drug seizures arenot available. In apparent response to this problem the 1984 NationalStrategy called on the Drug Enforcement Administration to developand maintain a centralized system for statistics concerningFederal drug seizures. As discussed throughout this report, asset forfeiture programsare an extremely promising source of funding for anti-drugefforts. Unfortunately, the availability and reliability ofinformation about non-drug assets seized by all levels ofgovernment is hampered by the same double counting,decentralization, and inconsistent data gathering methodologiesdescribed above. Although the Department of Justice AssetForfeiture Office was created to maintain centralized informationon forfeited assets, the office is still in the process ofdeveloping statistics for total Federal assets forfeited. A studyof State and local officials found that more than one-half ofthose surveyed could not estimate the value of property and cashobtained through forfeiture. State and local governments whichhave not already done so should establish asset managementsystems for the disposition of forfeited assets to provideaccurate estimates of their value. Drug Supply Intelligence With regard to intelligence concerning drug supplies, thisCommission is encouraged by what appears to be a growingcommitment to effective information-gathering. A number ofagencies have reported confidentially to this Commission thatboth their funding and priority determinations are giving greaterweight to effective intelligence programs. Intelligence efforts in this area take different forms,depending on the topic to which they are directed. All aresubject to the two classic categories of information gathering:human intelligence, referring to data gathered from humaninformants, and technical collection, gathered by such means assurveillance flights and satellites. In the area of croperadication, the lead agency is the State Department's Bureau ofInternational Narcotics Matters, supported by other members ofour country teams. Issues here include crop conditions, hostcountry political and military capabilities, and the role, ifany, of groups, including insurgents, opposing eradicationefforts. Interdiction efforts require tactical intelligence concerningspecific drug movements, such as the identities of thoseinvolved, shipment techniques, vessel and aircraftidentification, routes, and schedules. Also required is"strategic" information, such as shifts in processingand staging locations or in transshipment techniques. The currentexclusion of the Customs Service from foreign intelligencegathering, mandated by the 1973 reorganization plan, particularlyneeds to be re-examined. Strategic and tactical intelligence arecritical for border interdiction. Therefore the Commissionproposes that the Customs Service be integrated into the foreignintelligence process of the Drug Enforcement Administration, tothe maximum extent permitted by the Reorganization Plan currentlyin effect. Because international drug trafficking organizationsfrequently locate components of their operations within U.S.borders, domestic investigations and prosecutions are oftendependent upon effective international intelligence gathering tosupplement such domestic techniques as legal electronicsurveillance and development of informants. Effective international intelligence collection anddissemination is not necessarily a highly sophisticated process.On the contrary, it can consist of information as simple asproviding the names of suspected traffickers known to the DrugEnforcement Administration to the State Department to ensure thatconsular officers do not issue U.S. visas to such persons, orthat issuance be on a controlled basis to assist theinvestigative work of DEA. It is encouraging that the NationalDrug Enforcement Policy Board, pursuant to the Foreign RelationsAuthorization Act for 1986 and 1987, has been directed to compilea list of such traffickers and prepare guidelines forinter-agency sharing of that information. In the area of more sophisticated drug-related intelligencework DEA and the intelligence community are currently playingleading roles. The former has recently expanded its foreigndetail by ten percent, and additional expansion is prevented bylack of funding. This matter deserves careful consideration byboth Congress and the Executive Branch. In addition, thecapabilities of DEA agents presently stationed in foreignlocations are unduly and unnecessarily hampered by the"Mansfield Amendment" to the Foreign Assistance Act of1961, which restricts their activities to a secondary role. Aspart of a new expression of determination to combat internationaldrug trafficking, the amendment should be repealed. The intelligence community is not burdened by any suchill-conceived restriction. On the contrary, with regard tointernational narcotics trafficking, its mandate, found inExecutive Order 12333, is clear, direct, and sweeping: 1.4 The Intelligence Community. The agencies within theIntelligence Community shall, in accordance with applicableUnited States law and with the other provisions of this Order,conduct intelligence activities necessary for the conduct offoreign relations and the protection of the national security ofthe United States, including: (c) Collection of information concerning, and the conduct ofactivities to protect against, intelligence activities directedagainst the United States, international terrorist andinternational narcotics activities, and other hostile activitiesdirected against the United States by foreign powers,organizations, persons, and their agents. Although the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has in the pastbeen criticized for failing to give sufficient priority to drugtrafficking, the Commission is satisfied that the agency iscurrently placing suitable emphasis on the issue. This is due, inpart, to the necessary Executive direction now being given to theintelligence community, and in part to the growing recognitionthroughout the government that drug trafficking in many forms andin many locations has grown to become a national securityconcern, transcending the traditional drug-related health and lawenforcement concerns, as discussed in this report. To complementthis effort, additional options are available and should bepursued. First, consistent with the direction now being provided to theintelligence community, the Department of State should vigorouslypursue a program of educating its own foreign-based personnel tothe importance being given to drug-related intelligence and tothe critical need for State Department support for such efforts.This appears to have been less than entirely adequate in allinstances. Second, the CIA's operational capabilities should befully explored to determine how the infrastructure of drugtrafficking organizations can be disrupted, consistent with theconcerns expressed in Executive Order 12333 and elsewhere.Finally, the CIA's considerable research and developmentcapabilities should be used to develop additional means forfurthering efforts directed at international drug traffickers. In connection with these contributions by the intelligencecommunity, it is encouraging to note the rapid evolution of acooperative relationship between the intelligence and lawenforcement communities. This is evidenced by the pertinentlanguage of Executive Order 12333, which provides that: 1.7 Senior Officials of the Intelligence Community. The headsof departments and agencies with organizations in theIntelligence Community or the heads of such organizations, asappropriate, shall: (g) Participate in the development of procedures approved bythe Attorney General governing production and dissemination ofintelligence resulting from criminal narcotics intelligenceactivities abroad, if their departments, agencies, ororganizations have intelligence responsibilities for foreign ordomestic narcotics production and trafficking. This direction is complemented by the inclusion of arepresentative of the CIA on the Coordinating Group of theNational Drug Enforcement Policy Board. Defense Capabilities The intelligence community is not the only available source ofdrug-related intelligence. The Department of Defense has a widerange of facilities, equipment, and operations, which lendthemselves to effective participation. Although such a role ismost frequently discussed in connection with interdictionoperations near the U.S. border, intelligence-gatheringopportunities for Defense Department components exist muchfarther afield. Like their counterparts in the interdiction area,such efforts may be subject to Defense Department directives andpriorities, which in turn rely on a changeable definition of"national security." Nevertheless, if as a matter ofnational policy, the military view of national security drawscloser to that of the intelligence community, as expressed inExecutive Order 12333, the potential for military drug-relatedintelligence-gathering is profound. Because of the connectionbetween some drug trafficking organizations and terrorist orinsurgent groups, whatever assets are currently in place or inplanning for intelligence-gathering regarding terrorism orinsurgency could just as well function in connection with drugtraffickers. Intelligence-gathering in source and transshipment countrieswould be particularly effective in the interdiction effort, inthe opinion of former SOUTHCOM Commanding General Paul F. Gorman: I can't stress enough that it seems to me that the easy way tooperate on the [drug smuggling] pilots is down at the other end.He is at the other end of his communications tether where theairfields are much more primitive, where he is dependent on thesecartels and it's easier to penetrate. Because they occur outside of U.S. territory, such operationswould not violate the Posse Comitatus Act. In addition, with anexpanded definition of national security, such as that manifestin Executive Order 12333, the Economy Act would not be anobstacle. Such an expanded intelligence-gathering role is adesirable course of action for the Department of Defense. TheCommanding Officers of Unified Commands should be given maximumflexibility in deploying their forces. Another change in our application of military assets todrug-related intelligence is much less sweeping in concept, butnevertheless appears very useful. That is the inclusion of CoastGuard officers in our Defense Attache programs in drug source andtransit countries. This Commission has been advised that such aprogram is in process and encourages the agencies involved topursue this program with all due speed. Allied governments in affected areas could significantlyenhance the intelligence operations of our own military units.Such activities already under way and worthy of note include aregional radio communications network being set up among the drugenforcement authorities of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, andVenezuela. This network is designed to give these countries theopportunity to coordinate drug enforcement strategies and workclosely together in confronting the drug trafficking threatcommon to all. Agreements signed very recently by Brazil,Venezuela, and Colombia allow these countries to initiate jointinvestigations on their common borders, call for periodicmeetings between drug enforcement police, exchange intelligence,and solve common problems. Although such efforts must contendwith the endemic problems of corruption and organizational andnational rivalries, they are a step in the right direction. Tothe extent that United States assistance can contribute to theelimination of corruption and other systemic problems, suchassistance should be provided to promote these programs. All Source Intelligence and Operations Center Data collection is but one phase of a complete intelligenceoperation. To be effective collection should be followed bythorough and timely analysis and dissemination. This Commissiontherefore concludes that this Nation's anti-drug intelligenceefforts should be built upon an all-source intelligence andoperations center. Such a concept is described briefly above inconnection with interdiction efforts. EPIC and NNBIS togetherprovide an existing core upon which such a center could be built.EPIC has demonstrated the feasibility of joint agency operations,and NNBIS has shown that interagency operational coordination,particularly involving military components, is well withincapabilities. As a component of a comprehensive intelligence program, such acenter should be designed to collect drug-related intelligencefrom the broadest base possible, including those sovereignnations that will provide consistent, timely data on acooperative basis. In this regard, it is encouraging to note thatLatin American drug enforcement agencies are reported to beplanning to establish a regional intelligence center in astrategic location, such as Panama, in the near future. Becauseanalysis should be as complete as possible, such a center shouldinclude not only supply and transit-related intelligence, butalso counterpart demand data, including information on suchtopics as drug-related deaths and emergency room admissions. Thiswill allow a complete picture of drug distribution from one endof the chain to the other. This center would assume thefunctions, including issuing annual reports, currently undertakenby the National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer Committee(NNICC). In addition, it should integrate all financial datacurrently available to agencies of the Federal government, toenable analysts to complete their knowledge about the drug-moneycycle whenever possible. To be consistent with the rest of our national effort, such acenter should be under the general direction of the Policy Boardor its delegate, with the Vice President retaining primaryresponsibility for management and coordination of the informationrelated specifically to interdiction. Such a facility would thuscoordinate the collection, analysis, and dissemination ofintelligence, covering every topic from production andcultivation (including related political issues) to domesticenforcement and detailed patterns of domestic consumption. Itwould also provide the necessary centralized data base forthorough inter-agency coordination of operations. Given thesensitivity of many of its sources and the data receivedtherefrom, the functions and output of such a center would, ofcourse, require physical and communications security. Theresources and expertise of the National Security Agency withregard to operational and communications security is an extremelyvaluable national asset, which should be exploited to the fullestextent possible in this connection. As this Commission has soughtto demonstrate repeatedly, drug traffickers have regularly andsuccessfully sought to penetrate law enforcement communications.The equipment available for such purposes is readily available.Communications security thus requires very careful attention inthe planning and design of all anti-drug operations andfacilities. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-41IA031-000653-B003-66http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc6a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133708 text/html 76612HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:36:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:58 GMTContent-length: 76394 Drug Interdiction - marijuana, cocaine, heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter VI Part 2: Interdiction Introduction Our National Strategy consists of five "majorelements," each of which in turn is comprised of numerousprograms and strategies. Interdiction, just one of thesesub-components, presently consumes one-third of the entireFederal drug abuse outlay for the fiscal year. Measured just interms of outlays designated for law enforcement activities,interdiction's portion swells to almost one-half of the Federalfunds being spent to combat drug abuse. By Commissioncalculation, Federal funds devoted to interdiction have increased100 percent over the last five years. Despite this massive dedication of funds, drugs of primarilyforeign origin - cocaine, heroin, and marijuana - continue to bewidely available in this country. Many observers, including someleading drug enforcement officials, readily acknowledge thatinterdiction can only serve a limited role in increasing risks tosmugglers while this government pursues other programs. FrankMonastero, former Assistant Administrator for Operations of theDrug Enforcement Administration, summed up this view in a recentinterview: [Interdiction] is important, but it is the least effectivething you can do . . . it's like the patrolman on the beat . . .It is preventing [some drugs] from getting into the trafficking,and that's something. But we can continue that ad infinitum. Ifwe don't do something at the source or don't do something beforethat or don't do something at the end of the trail in theprevention area, we will never change the situation. It is the view of this Commission that interdiction is notgoing to end drug use or availability in this country. It will,however, continue to discourage some potential smugglers. Thisdeterrent effect is often overlooked or denied by many critics,but not by smugglers themselves. According to Adler B. Seal, anexperienced drug smuggling pilot, in response to a questionconcerning the difficulty of recruiting smuggling pilots: Well, it used to be easy. However, now it has become a littleless attractive for some of the younger pilots. Some of the olderpilots, as myself, have been indicted. We've been cognizant of law enforcement techniques and theimprovements in it; and the younger pilots are seeing thenewspaper reports of the older pilots and the amount of time thatthey are being convicted on and serving, and it's not asattractive a proposition as it used to be. Successful interdiction not only discourages some new membersfrom joining smuggling enterprises, but also encourages somealready in the field to get out of it. This was confirmed by thefirsthand experience of smuggler Seal: I think that the more flights that are interdicted, the wordgets around. For instance, I have absolutely - or had in my capacity - nodesire whatsoever to go into and would do anything to stay out ofthe south Florida area simply due to the fact that that is wherethe concentrated interdiction efforts are being made due to theVice Presidential Task Force, which has been highly publicizedand which has taken its toll on the paranoia of the drugsmuggler. It also appears to this Commission to be consistent with theview of the Commissioner of Customs, William von Raab: We are always asked what is a good measure of success againstsmuggling. It is always quoted in terms of how much we seize. I have always maintained that a good measure of success is toreach a point at which a pilot doesn't want to fly into theUnited States anymore; and I have always suggested that there maybe a percentage. For example, if he has a one-out-of-ten chance of gettingcaught, he might run in; but certainly if he had anine-out-of-ten chance of being caught, he's not going to do it. In summary, this Commission recognizes that interdiction isand should continue to be a vital component of our Nationalstrategy, as a complement to other approaches to reduce drugsupply. Any analysis that defines success in the area ofinterdiction as apprehending all, or nearly all, smuggled drugsis unrealistic and counter-productive. To the extent that is avery costly approach, additional expenditures must be weighedvery carefully, particularly if they have the effect of reducingfunds available for other efforts to reduce supply and demand.There are, however, improvements to our interdiction effortswhich can be made without any significant increase in funding.These steps, which generally involve reordering of priorities orredefinition of interagency responsibilities, are discussedbelow. It is crucial to note that the single most important need inthe interdiction field is leadership. If innovation and increasedcommitment are to be pursued successfully and expeditiously, bothby foreign governments and agencies of our own, a strong leaderorchestrating a single comprehensive plan is the key. That roleto date has been played by the Vice President, and it is one inwhich he should continue. The weight of his office has producedresults when other officials might have been ignored. While theNational Drug Enforcement Policy Board necessarily includesseveral Cabinet-level officers, they serve as peers. Only theVice President brings to the interdiction effort sufficient rankto lead them. His central role should be preserved and promotedwithin the context of the National Drug Enforcement PolicyBoard's leadership in drug enforcement. Recognition by the Boardof the Vice President's leadership in interdiction activitiesholds the promise of singularly promoting success in that keyarea, preserving the momentum and continuity of existinginteragency interdiction efforts, and putting to rest theconfusion that has already begun to surface concerning the VicePresident's relationship to the Board. Air Interdiction The United States Customs Service has the lead responsibilityfor air interdiction. To combat drug smugglers, some of whom havethe most sophisticated and expensive communications andnavigational equipment available today, Customs has increased itsairborne capabilities significantly in the recent past. At thetime of this report, the Service had just received $11 million ina supplemental fiscal year 1985 appropriation for its airoperations, bringing the agency's total fiscal year budget forair operations to $55.4 million. Customs' most significant need,apart from more aircraft and more sophisticated electronics, isthe support of other Federal agencies with related jurisdictions. One example of the need for support is on the diplomaticfront. Customs has for some time found itself frustrated by itsinability to pursue suspected smuggler aircraft into Mexicanairspace after detection on the American side of the border.Although this has been the subject of numerous diplomaticdiscussions, there has been little progress to date. Giving thismatter an extremely high priority in our bilateral negotiationswith Mexico is the type of assistance another agency, in thiscase the state Department, can and should provide to Customs inrecognition of the critical importance of the fight against drugsmuggling. Another Customs' Services critical need is intelligence, bothtactical and strategic. While "cold hits" -apprehension of smugglers in a random, uninformed basis - have animportant role to play in deterring smugglers by their veryrandomness, intelligence is the key to effective interdiction.According to former Drug Enforcement Administrator FrancisMullen, every major seizure of drugs from South America made byhis agency has been made on the basis of prior intelligence, andit is no less critical to the Customs Service. While the topic ofintelligence-gathering is the subject of a separate analysis inthis report, it is important to note in connection with thisdiscussion on inter-agency support that Customs and the DrugEnforcement Administration have made considerable progress in thearea of information sharing. Customs has for some time had ananalyst stationed in DEA's Office of Intelligence, and a programis currently underway to place Customs intelligence analysts incountry teams abroad to analyze data gathered by DEA. Thisprogram should be pursued aggressively. Simultaneously, theCustoms Service should scrutinize its Customs Attache program todetermine to what extent it can play a larger role inintelligence-gathering concerning smugglers. With its closeliaison with host government customs officials, this program maybe of particular significance with regard to smuggling involvingcontainerized and other commercial cargo. As interdictioncapabilities improve in the areas of pleasure craft and generalaviation, it is almost certain that commercial cargo will be usedincreasingly for concealing illicit drug shipments. This hasalready been observed in some cases. Such a Customs effort wouldbe complemented by the private sector initiatives Customs hasbeen able to bring about, such as the agreements now in effectwith the Airline Transport and International Airline TransportAssociations. An active intelligence gathering role for Customs is nowblocked by the 1973 Reorganization Plan. The current recognitionby Customs and DEA of the former's need for time-sensitiveintelligence is of vital importance however, and should beactively cultivated by the two agencies and the Policy Board.That this would require modification or elimination of certainprovisions of the 1973 Reorganization Plan should not be anobstacle. The area of inter-agency support currently in need of the mostattention is the relationship between the Customs Service and theFederal Aviation Administration (FAA). The latter, which hasprimary jurisdiction over entry into United States air space,maintains a number of programs, which lend themselves to supportof Customs operations. While the FAA has to date givensignificant support to Customs in a number of instances, more isneeded. To this end, the Customs Service has recently proposedomnibus legislation, currently entitled the Customs EnforcementAct of 1985, which contains provisions that address suchsensitive topics as restricted entry points and minimum altitudesfor air entry. Among other things, this Act would require allvessels and aircraft entering the United States to reportimmediately for Customs inspection, and would increase the finesfor failure to report entry. Fines would also be substantiallyincreased for smuggling controlled substances, and suchviolations would be punishable by imprisonment. All assets seizedby Customs, including planes, vessels, and cash, would be subjectto forfeiture. The Act would prohibit airdrops to vessels, makeit unlawful to operate an aircraft without lights, and prohibitthe installation of all illegal fuel tanks in planes. Inaddition, commercial carriers would be subject to more stringentregulations under the Act. While this legislation may beunpopular with private aviation, it is a collection of importantanti-smuggling measures which go directly to some of the mostfrequently encountered drug smuggling techniques. It is worthy ofsupport. Similarly, proposals advanced by both Customs and DEA thataircraft identification numbers, now required to be twelve incheshigh and displayed on the fuselage or tail, be displayed on anupper and a lower wing surface as well are entirely consistentwith anti-smuggling requirements. DEA pilots have been fired uponfrom the ground as they tried to fly low enough to read tailnumbers. Although the FAA has stated that an increase in requirednumber size has no "aviation safety basis," it is thisCommission's position that needless exposure of Federal agents tohostile fire should be considered an "aviation safety"concern sufficient to justify remedial action. Again, reportsthat a change in required number size or location would be veryunpopular with the general aviation community seem frivolous inthe context of issues as grave as those under discussion here.There are a number of additional aviation-related proposals beingadvanced by Customs today, concerning such matters as pre-filingof "border flight plans," advanced notice of entry intoU.S. air space, and improvements in pilot identificationcertificates, which appear to this Commission to be worthy ofadoption, absent some compelling opposition. There are other promising areas for Customs/FAA cooperation.Customs reports, for example, that the FAA, in undertaking itslong-term buildup of the approach radar system, is workingclosely with Customs to accommodate the latter's needs. This isto be encouraged, particularly by the Policy Board, which hasboth Customs and the FAA on its Coordinating Group. One legal issue which would benefit from careful analysis bythe Board is the extent to which current asset forfeitureprovisions need revision to enable seizure of aircraft and otherequipment which is rented or leased by traffickers for thepurpose of avoiding forfeiture. Another area worthy of study is the extent to which Customs'air interdiction capabilities could be enhanced by Coast Guardaviation components. Although such a concept might be contrary toexisting understandings, it would be a grave omission ifsubstantial Coast Guard aviation assets were overlooked,particularly at a time when fiscal considerations threaten theCustoms air operations budget. Maritime Operations In the area of maritime interdiction, the Coast Guard servesas lead agency. Its success has been remarkable and is limitedonly by shortages in resources. New tactics and innovative formsof assistance by the Navy have significantly improved the CoastGuard's capabilities. There is no question that not only maritimetraffickers but air smugglers as well are intimidated by theseaborne detection capabilities of Coast Guard vessels. Inasmuchas the most critical limitation on Coast Guard capabilities isthe lack of budgeted resources, the single most pressing concernis the augmentation of the Coast Guard budget to permit moreextensive participation in interdiction operations. A proposal,which has surfaced annually but to no avail as yet, is theimposition of user fees for various Coast Guard services nowprovided to the boating community gratis. As with the aviationcommunity in connection with the FAA discussed above, there isconsiderable opposition to maritime measures that wouldinconvenience the user community or cost it money. However, giventhe inescapable facts of the drug invasion this country isexperiencing, the nominal costs of various user fees would seemto be a small price for boaters to pay as their contribution towhat must be seen as a national effort to defeat a deadly enemy. In-shore operations of the Customs Service bolster Coast Guardmaritime interdiction operations. Having received over $12million for maritime operations in its fiscal year 1985supplemental appropriation, Customs has begun to get fast, stateof the art pursuit boats in the water off the coast of Florida.These have been used to great effect, and more such craft shouldbe deployed. One innovation for which the Customs Service and theleadership of the National Narcotics Border Interdiction System(NNBIS) are to be commended is the highly effective integrationof State and local authorities in the recent operation "BlueLightning." It is clear and has been stressed throughoutthis report that comprehensive, coordinated multi-agencyoperations are absolutely essential to effective anti-drugprograms. On the Federal level, this typically means"horizontal integration," i.e., the careful combinationof equal Federal agencies. Blue Lightning is a fine example ofthe equally important concept of "verticalintegration," the well-planned and complementary cooperationof Federal, State, and local resources aimed at a specifictrafficking activity. The Customs Service and NNBIS arerightfully proud of this accomplishment and are encouraged topursue similar successes in operations to come. Consolidated Efforts The evolution of interdiction in recent years has been in thedirection of consolidation of intelligence and operations. Thisis a trend characteristic of anti-drug efforts generally, and itis a proper response to the breadth of the drug smugglingsituation. In the area of interdiction, the most prominent jointefforts in addition to NNBIS are the National Drug EnforcementPolicy Board (the Board) and the El Paso Intelligence Center(EPIC). All are described in detail elsewhere in this report. The following is a proposed realignment of theseorganizations, based on this Commission's review. First, our proposal recognizes the leadership role of theBoard. That important topic is the subject of a separate analysisin this report. Within the Board and as a part of its coordinatedprogram, we propose the combination of the functions of EPIC andNNBIS into a single, all-source intelligence facility. In thecritical early stages of designing and implementing such anoperation, the Vice President's leadership will be invaluable.The combined intelligence center will incorporate the input ofall intelligence-gathering components at the Federal level,including those sources already feeding into EPIC and NNBIS, aswell as new sources still to be developed, as outlined below. The present duplication between the various functionsperformed by EPIC and NNBIS has been acknowledged by suchauthorities as David Westrate, Assistant Administrator forOperations of the Drug Enforcement Administration, the parentagency of EPIC. Although it is true there are certain functionsbeing performed by each of the two activities, which are notduplicated by the other, this should not prevent effectiveintegration of their functions. Everywhere in the current Federalresponse, we find a movement toward consolidation andcoordination. Intelligence and planning should not be exceptions. A combined all-source intelligence center would require atleast two features not found in either NNBIS or EPIC. One is aphysically secure headquarters facility. EPIC is presentlylocated in a private office building in El Paso. It has neitherthe space nor the necessary physical security to accommodate thecomprehensive input advocated here. NNBIS headquarters is in theOld Executive Office Building in downtown Washington, and itsregional facilities are located in various Federal buildingsaround the country. While such quarters might provide adequatephysical security, they are not equipped to provide for the scopeof the proposed undertaking. A secure facility with sufficientphysical dimensions is crucial, as are secure communications withparticipating agency and military headquarters. Ft. Bliss, Texas,is a potential site, as it provides the necessary physicalsecurity and is located near the present EPIC facility. This andsimilar locations should be considered. The second requirement of the facility proposed here isenhanced intelligence input. Thorough, "real-time"intelligence is absolutely vital to effective interdiction, andit is almost as critically important to other areas ofenforcement operations as well. The importance of intelligence issuch that it is treated as a separate topic below. At this point,it is sufficient to note that the design of a new center mustfrom the very outset include the most thorough provisions for themaximum intelligence contribution permitted by law and physicaland technological capabilities. Military Support for Interdiction Perhaps the single most valuable development in the area ofinterdiction in recent years has been the assistance rendered bycomponents of the Department of Defense. Such activities wereconstrained somewhat by the Posse Comitatus Act until certainexemptions to the Act were passed in December 1981. Since thattime the assistance rendered by the military has growndramatically. In calendar year 1984 the military providedassistance to interdiction efforts worth $100 million by Pentagoncalculations. Such assistance is typically in the form of aerialsurveillance, transport of enforcement personnel, and loans ofequipment and personnel as permitted by law. The role of the Defense Department has become steadily moreactive, more innovative, and more flexible. The quality andquantity of such assistance, however, continue to be limited bythe constraints found in the Posse Comitatus exemptions: militaryassistance to law enforcement cannot include direct participationby military personnel in arrest or seizure activities, and it canbe provided only if it does not affect military preparedness.Furthermore, law enforcement authorities will be required by theEconomy Act to reimburse the Department of Defense for assistanceprovided, unless such assistance is incidental to existingmilitary operations or provides "equivalent training."Reimbursement may also be waived, if such waiver does notadversely impact military preparedness. In this regard, as inother, the Department of Defense has been increasingly flexible.One example of this is the expanded delegation of authority towaive reimbursement, as found in the January 2, 1985,modifications to the applicable Departmental directive. Anotheris the increasingly positive liaison role being played by theDepartment of Defense Task Force on Drug Enforcement. There are grounds for concern that the military's rolecontinues to be too narrowly defined. There appears to be afundamental misconception at the very top of the Departmentconcerning the permissible scope of the military's role. Writingto the Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee in June1985, Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger stated that directmilitary participation in drug seizures outside United Statesterritory would do violence to "the historic separationbetween military and civilian spheres of activity . . . one ofthe most fundamental principles of American democracy. ThisCommission has been unable to find the basis for such a"fundamental principle" of co-equal "spheres ofactivity." The fact is that the military, rather than beinga parallel entity, has traditionally been subject to thedirection of the civilian "sphere." Indeed, themilitary's Commander-in-Chief is a civilian. The Posse ComitatusAct does no more than prohibit use of military forces to enforcecivilian laws on the territory of the United States. TheConstitution was in existence for approximately a century beforesuch a law was passed by Congress. The Act has been amended oncesince then, and it can be amended again if appropriate.Furthermore, there is nothing in the laws of the United Statesforbidding an active enforcement role by the military outsideUnited States territory, except the requirement of reimbursement.This in turn hinges upon the definition of "militarypreparedness." However, nowhere in the debate over themilitary's role in this area has this Commission found adiscussion of this term. The definition of the military's rolehas been left to the military itself, which, through the JointChiefs of Staff, has declared that the military shall be preparedto serve national security by providing: a defense posture capable of successfully resisting hostile ordestructive action from within or without, overt or covert. As described in Chapter 3 of this report, international drugtraffickers have regularly formed alliances with insurgent andterrorist forces in certain countries. In a few instances thesealliances may actually threaten friendly governments. In manymore countries such a combination at least drains resources fromconstructive goals and inhibits efforts to build or maintain astable democracy. Even where the threat is more remote, it isclear that the smuggling techniques in use are the very same onesthat are or could be used to move personnel, weapons, and othersupplies for insurgent groups. For these reasons alone, theactivities of traffickers should bring them squarely within thenational security concerns of the Department of Defense. Thisfact has already been recognized by the Vice President, who hasstated clearly that "success against drug smuggling isintimately tied to the continuation of freedom and democracy inthe hemisphere." Recognition of this fact would permit theDefense Department much greater latitude in conducting militaryoperations aimed at disrupting trafficking organizations.Examples of such programs include a wide range of activities,such as expanded and focused intelligence gathering, securityassistance to receptive host governments, expanded deployment oftethered aerostat radar sites, and joint research and developmentbetween military and law enforcement agencies to provide greateroperation compatibility. Beyond threats to friendly democracies, international drugtraffickers should be considered a threat to our nationalsecurity because they comprise a direct attack on the physicaland social well-being of our country. The costs of this invasion,which comes by air, sea, and land, is thoroughly documented inthis report. Recognition of this attack as a ". . .destructive action from without . . ." which is within themeaning of the Joint Chiefs' definition, would bring theDepartment of Defense squarely into the war in which we presentlyfind ourselves. This may be further than present policy makersare prepared to go, but it is surely time to bring the issue intothe debate so that it can be decided on the basis of what isactually permitted or proscribed by the laws and Constitution ofthe United States. Domestic Investigations and Prosecutions Domestic investigative and prosecutive activity is only onefacet of drug law enforcement. As with all other approachesdesigned to reduce the supply of drugs, proper assessment oftheir effectiveness requires that realistic goals be established.As this report has demonstrated, it is unrealistic to expect thatdomestic law enforcement alone will solve, or even substantiallyreduce, the Nation's drug abuse problem. Rather, its goal must bea more limited one: to increase the arrests and successfulprosecutions of drug traffickers, whether they be importers,wholesalers, or retailers, and those who assist them, includingpilots, bankers, and attorneys, and the forfeiture of theirproperties accumulated from criminal activity. The attainment of this objective would contribute to theultimate national policy goal of eliminating drug use in severalways. First, it would directly reduce the supply of drugs byremoving from the illicit drug market those drugs that are seizedalong with the arrested traffickers. Second, it would reduce thesupply of drugs indirectly by disrupting the networks that makeit possible to distribute drugs efficiently. Finally, thetraffickers would likely raise the price of their product toreflect the increased risks, which theoretically should cause areduction in the overall consumption of drugs. In a recent study prepared by the Rand Corporation the authorsconcluded that prevention programs, not intensified domestic lawenforcement, were the best approach to control adolescent druguse. The Commission agrees with the Rand Corporation'sconclusions concerning adolescent drug use and believes that theyare equally valid with respect to adult drug use. However, suchconclusions should not be interpreted as a call for a reductionin domestic law enforcement efforts against drug trafficking.Without effective domestic law enforcement, the drug abuseproblem, and its concomitant organized crime effects, would beimmeasurably worse. Although domestic law enforcement has a limited, albeitessential, role to play in the national effort against drugabuse, the Commission has concluded, on the basis of itsinvestigations, hearings, and study, that changes in focus andattitudes and a rearrangement of priorities must be undertaken toachieve the maximum effect of domestic law enforcement. Beforediscussing these matters, it is necessary first to address twofundamental issues: (1) Do organized crime policy and drug abusepolicy conflict? and (2) What, if any, should be the level ofinteraction and cooperation between Federal law enforcementagencies on the one hand and State and local agencies on theother? Professor Mark H. Moore, a former Special Assistant to theAdministrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, hasdescribed the objectives of U.S. organized crime policy asfollows: [T]o suppress the provision of illegal goods and services thatconstitute the core of organized crime, to prevent the violenceand corruption that is more characteristic of organized crimegroups than other kinds of criminal activity, and to prevent theemergence of very large, durable organizations with welldeveloped capacities for violence and corruption. This Commission believes that the Nation's drug policy musthave as its goal the elimination of illegal drug use. Domesticlaw enforcement contributes to this goal by reducing the supplyof drug in the illegal market and by increasing the prices ofdrugs that remain available for purchase. It has been suggestedthat the pursuit of the Nation's drug policy, without regard forits impact on organized crime, may exacerbate the country'sorganized crime problem by enriching organized crime groups,eliminating their competitors, and encouraging traffickingorganizations to become organized crime groups if they are notalready. Although agreeing that such a concern is legitimate,this Commission has concluded that drug and organized crimepolicies do not inherently conflict. Indeed, there issubstantial, if not complete, overlap in the goals of the twopolicies because, as the Commission has found, drug traffickingis a principal activity of organized crime groups. In light ofthis, the Commission recommends that targeting high-levelorganized-crime trafficking groups, whether they be foreign,multinational or domestic, should be the top priority of Federaldomestic law enforcement. As Professor Moore has stated: What is not in conflict, however, is the need of both drugabuse policy and organized crime policy to develop and usetactics that are successful in attacking large, entrenchedcriminal organizations. This is useful to drug policy, andessential to organized crime policy. The Commission is aware that some commentators have criticizedthe Federal Government's bias in favor of enforcement againsthigh-level dealers to the virtual exclusion of lower- orstreet-level enforcement. However, the Commission'srecommendation that targeting organized crime trafficking groupsshould be the top priority of Federal domestic law enforcementshould not be construed to mean that lower-level enforcement isnot useful and therefore has no place in the Nation's drugpolicy. On the contrary, such lower-level enforcement isessential to achieve the goal of eliminating drug use for severalreasons. As discussed earlier, the arrest of the customers ofdrug retailers may result in a direct and immediate reduction inthe demand for drugs. In addition, successful enforcement effortsdirected at lower-level dealers will reduce the supply of illegaldrugs and raise the price of drugs available for purchase, thusresulting in lower drug consumption. Finally, lower-levelenforcement operations are useful in providing information thatwill be invaluable to those involved in investigating high-levelorganized crime trafficking groups. The absence of vigorouslower-level domestic law enforcement could encourage organizedcrime groups to remain in drug trafficking, and quite possiblespawn more such groups. High-level enforcement efforts could becrippled, if not completely undermined, by a lack of acomplementary, lower-level effort. A fundamental question remains: Which agencies should beresponsible for the various facets of domestic law enforcement?The investigation of high-level organized crime traffickinggroups, whose activities are generally regional, national orinternational in scope, is expensive, time consuming, andrequires special skills and sophisticated tools. The Federalgovernment, through its agencies, is best equipped to undertakesuch investigations. State and local agencies, because of theirunique knowledge of local conditions and expertise in therequired techniques, are more qualified to conduct lower-leveldomestic law enforcement, including street operations andinvestigations of certain smaller and geographically-restrictedtrafficking organizations. The conclusions and recommendations set forth in the precedingparagraph are not intended to suggest that Federal domestic lawenforcement and that of State and local agencies should becompletely separate and independent. The drug problem facing theUnited States is a national one, and the efforts of all lawenforcement agencies must be coordinated and interrelated to someextent, if we are to deal successfully with the problem. Therequired level of cooperation in some instances may be more thanthe routine exchange of drug intelligence or the suppression ofinteragency rivalries and jurisdictional disputes. In thisregard, the Commission endorses generally the view expressedrecently by a Federal prosecutor concerning drug enforcementefforts in New York City: [O]ne can not compartmentalize the narcotics enforcementeffort, and leave the streets entirely to state and localenforcement and the conspiracy cases entirely to the federalgovernment. While each may have a primary area, each must do someof both. The ideal combination may be some federal prosecution ofstate and local arrests, and a significant state and localparticipation in joint Task Forces, aimed at dismantling of drugnetworks through the conspiracy law. Examples of successful joint ventures involving Federal, Stateand local personnel include the Organized Crime Drug EnforcementTask Force Program, Operation Pressure Point, and the New YorkDrug Enforcement Task Force, which was formed in 1970. Theseprograms can serve as useful models for any future cooperativedomestic law enforcement arrangements that might be needed. Federal Domestic Law Enforcement As a result of its investigation and study, the Commission hasconcluded that the tools and techniques needed to permit Federallaw enforcement agents to prosecute their portion of the waragainst drug traffickers successfully are for the most partcurrently available. The need is not for sweeping new legislativeinitiatives but for further changes in attitudes and a greatercommitment to cooperation and coordination among the Federalagencies involved in drug law enforcement. Balkanization andjurisdictional disputes between agencies are the most seriousobstacles to success in the struggle against drug trafficking.The personnel of each Federal agency involved in domestic lawenforcement, from the chief executive to the newest employee,must understand that their agency alone cannot solve the Nation'sdrug problem. Acceptance of this reality will go a long way ineliminating the destructive competition that in the past hashampered Federal law enforcement. As discussed above, the Commission has concluded that thetargeting of high-level organized crime trafficking groups shouldbe the top priority of Federal drug law enforcement efforts.Because of the sophistication and complexity of suchorganizations and their operations, the Federal response must beequally sophisticated and complex. The Reagan Administration'sestablishment of the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task ForceProgram (OCDETF Program) in late 1982 was an attempt to create amechanism for attacking high-level organized crime traffickinggroups; by their own account, the multiagency Task Forces,drawing on the resources of a broad spectrum of Federal, Stateand local agencies, have achieved an encouraging degree ofsuccess. The success that has been achieved was not the result ofthe development of new techniques but of the efficient use ofexisting ones: The OCDE Task Force Program can lay claim to no new inventionsin the fields of investigative and prosecutorial techniques. Itcan, however, be justifiably proud of its creative utilization ofexisting tools. The Commission applauds the OCDETF Program and those whodesigned and have implemented it. It strongly favors thePrograms's continuation and expansion, to the extent that it isdesirable and feasible to do so, for several reasons: the Programhas resulted in the elimination of interagency disputes to asubstantial extent; the disruption of large and sophisticatedtrafficking groups requires large, efficient and stronglysupported enforcement organizations; and multiagency task forcesare particularly suited to use the Federal conspiracy, RacketeerInfluenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO), Continuing CriminalEnterprise (CCE), and forfeiture statutes to the maximum andoptimum extent possible. In addition, the different investigativetechniques used by the participating agencies increases theprobability of successful infiltration of traffickingorganizations. However, the effectiveness of the OCDETF Programcould be enhanced if the following changes were made. In creating the OCDETF Program, its designers concluded thatto insure the maximum support of the participating agencies, aconsensus-based decision-making process was necessary. In thisregard, no single agency was designated as the lead Task Forceagency. Although participants in the OCDETF Program have beenable to reduce interagency competition and conflict to asubstantial and significant extent, the Commission believe thatfurther improvement is both desirable and feasible. Suchimprovements would flow naturally from a renewed, unambiguouscommitment to the Program and its goals by participatingagencies. Increased cooperation and coordination might alsoresult, if DEA or the FBI were designated as the lead Task Forceagency, or if the United States Attorneys were given greaterauthority with respect to the operations of the Task Force. TheCommission recommends that those in charge of the OCDETF Programshould consider whether a lead agency should be designated or aU.S. Attorney be given greater authority to achieve even greatercoordination of effort. Law enforcement agencies that participate in the OCDETFProgram have other missions in the struggle against drugtrafficking. For this reason, each "agency must balance itscommitment to the Task Force concept with its fundamentalmission. Because the targeting of high-level organized crimetrafficking groups should be the top priority and because theOCDE Task Forces are the best available devices for infiltratingand disrupting such groups, the Commission is concerned that, inallocating manpower and other resources between the program andother missions, the participating agencies should not shortchangethe Task Forces in any way. The top echelon of each participatingagency must be strongly committed to the OCDETF Program and itsgoals and must be actively involved in assuring its success. Therequired commitment and involvement are not satisfied byabdicating responsibility for insuring the success of the programto those heading field offices. Indifference at the headquarterslevel will be reflected eventually in field offices. To signal their commitment to the program and to encouragetheir best agents to participate in it, the top executives ofeach participating agency should adopt an unambiguous policy thatsalary increases and career advancement within the agency for anagent who participates in an OCDE Task Force will not beadversely affected in any way by that participation. Such apolicy would require that the evaluation of an agent assigned toa Task Force be based not on such criteria as the number ofarrests or cases made or the amount of drugs seized. Evaluationsshould assess that agent's qualitative performance in complexfinancial and conspiracy cases, which may last more than twoyears and which may result in the arrest of few, albeithigh-level and important traffickers. The OCDETF Program is only one facet of the Federal effortagainst drug trafficking. The effective functioning of the otherfacets of Federal domestic law enforcement, i.e., Organized CrimeStrike Forces, the South Florida Task Force, the FBI, DEA,Customs, and U.S. Attorneys, is also essential if the Nation'sdrug problem is ever to be contained and eventually eliminated. That the OCDE Task Forces are and should be primarilyresponsible for disrupting high-level organized crime traffickinggroups does not mean that the other Federal efforts should bedevoted to, or focused upon, lower -or street-level traffickersor purely local drug problems. For the reasons discussed above,these enforcement concerns are rightfully and almost exclusivelythose of State and local law enforcement. However, there will becases against organized crime trafficking groups that will bedeemed inappropriate for OCDETF treatment, and these will thenhave to be handled by some other Federal agency; this is alsotrue with respect to large trafficking organizations that are notorganized crime controlled and that may or may not bemulti-jurisdictional. As a result of its investigation and study, the Commission hasconcluded that the non-OCDETF Program segments of Federaldomestic drug law enforcement are for the most part functioningwell and that the variety of investigative techniques that theseagencies bring to the Federal effort to reduce the supply ofdrugs is a great benefit. The use of financial expertise,undercover, sting and reverse sting operations, informants,electronic and other kinds of surveillance, preselected targetand target of opportunity approaches to initiatinginvestigations, and buy-bust transactions are all useful ways ofinfiltrating trafficking organizations. However, the Commissionis concerned that the healthy competition among enforcementagencies that the current organizational structure is supposed toencourage often degenerates into jurisdictional conflicts thatharm the overall Federal effort against traffickers. This willcontinue to occur unless top agency officials instill in theiragents and employees the sense that genuine cooperation andcoordination with other agencies are essential to the ultimatesuccess of the Nation's drug effort. In this regard, the NationalDrug Enforcement Policy Board has an important and unique role toplay insuring that healthy and constructive competition does notbecome destructive and petty conflict. The Board could take one important step to eliminatejurisdictional disputes, as well as to avoid duplication ofinvestigative efforts and to provide maximum safety to drugagents. This would be to require the establishment of a systemwhereby an agency would file a report with a central reportingrepository, once it has opened an investigation of an individualbelieved to be a part of a trafficking operation. If two or moreagencies were investigating the same individual, they would benotified of that fact, and they would be required to decide,after negotiations, the best way for conducting theinvestigation, a single agency or an ad hoc task force. Such asystem would work at its optimal level only if all lawenforcement agencies, including State and local units,participated. The Commission believes that such a reporting andcontrol system is highly desirable and, because of existingtechnology, feasible. The Commission also believes that thissystem could be incorporated easily into the all-sourceintelligence and operations center, recommended elsewhere in thisreport. As result of the 1973 reorganization plan, the Customs Servicewas prohibited from conducting investigative, intelligence, andlaw enforcement functions, relating to the suppression of drugtrafficking, at locations away from ports of entry or borders.This aspect of the plan has been controversial and as elicitedmuch criticism on the ground that is weakened the "Nation'scapability to interdict the flow of narcotics into the UnitedStates." The Commission has no objections to that feature of the 1973reorganization plan that created a lead agency in Federal druglaw enforcement, and indeed believes that it remains a validconcept today. However, the Commission has concluded that it isan appropriate time to study whether the functions of the CustomsService with respect to drug trafficking should be expanded toinclude investigative, intelligence, and law enforcementfunctions within this country, beyond the borders and ports ofentry, where appropriate and subject to the oversight andsupervision of the lead agencies. In this respect, the Commissionnotes that the 1973 reorganization plan was modified somewhatwhen, on January 5, 1984, the Attorney General signed the"Request for Assistance and Authorization Respecting DrugEnforcement Activities of Certain Customs Officers in DomesticDrug Investigations." This action granted authority to theDEA Administrator to endow specific Customs agents, for adesignated period of time, with the power, among others, toconduct investigative, intelligence, and law enforcementfunctions relating to drug trafficking. Because this arrangementappears to have worked well, a broader expansion of Customs'functions may be warranted at this time in an effort to improvedomestic law enforcement. In addition to the attitudinal and organizational mattersdiscussed above, the Commission proposes substantial expansion ofthe use of one particular investigative technique because of themagnitude of illicit drug production in this country. All of thePCP (phencyclidine), almost all of the methamphetamine, and anestimated 80 percent of injectable amphetamine availableillicitly in the United States in 1984 were produced in domesticclandestine laboratories. In addition, an increasing amount ofcocaine in being processed in this country. In fact, the numberof cocaine laboratories seized by law enforcement authorities inthe United States between 1983 and 1984 nearly doubled. To combat both the domestic and foreign production of illicitdrugs, law enforcement officials have, in some instances,targeted the chemicals used to manufacture the drugs. Forexample, through its "Operation Chem-Con," DEA tracksthe movement of chemicals used to process cocaine from theprincipal manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers to their finaldestinations. According to the chief of the DEA's cocainesection, Johnny Phelps: Through cooperation gained by DEA from the world's etherindustry and foreign law enforcement elements, we now havevoluntary restrictions on sales to known trafficking groups andare able to seize shipments of chemicals after purchase causinggreat financial losses to cocaine producing consort[ia]. In addition to the voluntary compliance of chemical companiesin Operation Chem-Con, reporting requirements are sometimes usedto control chemicals used to manufacture illicit drugs.Piperidine, a chemical used to manufacture the hallucinogen PCP,is subject to reporting requirements under the ControlledSubstances Act. The provision requires that any person sellingpiperidine report to the Attorney General information concerningthe sale, including identifying information about the purchaser,and the quantity, form and intended use of the piperidine. Thissystem has worked well and permits DEA to investigate anysuspicious sales of piperidine. Since 1984 DEA has seized fourclandestine PCP laboratories and has located at least ten otheroperations, which obtained chemicals for PCP manufacture byposing as legitimate businesses. Chemicals used to manufacture illicit drugs can be regulatedin the same manner as controlled substances. Under the ControlledSubstances Act, the Attorney General may place an immediateprecursor in the same schedule as the controlled substance forwhich it is a precursor. Although the regulation of chemicals used to manufactureillicit drugs can thwart efforts to produce these drugs and canhelp law enforcement officials to locate clandestinelaboratories, several factors limit the effectiveness of suchapproaches. First, many of these chemicals have widespreadlegitimate uses in industry, and tracking their sales would beimpractical. Even tracking a limited number of these chemicalswould be costly, requiring adequate computer resources andindividuals to review and analyze chemical sales information.Second, controls on chemicals may have only short-term effects.In the case of the reporting of piperidine, both use of PCP andclandestine laboratory activity appeared to decline from 1979 to1981. However, by 1982, trafficking in and abuse of PCP hadincreased. Third, some chemicals can be obtained illicitly. Forexample, a shortage of P2P (phenyl-2-propanone), which is used tomanufacture methamphetamine, resulted from the placement of P2Pin Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act. Traffickersresponded by increasing illicit manufacture of P2P in 1982. Despite these limitations, controlling a limited number ofthese chemicals has merit. The United Nations InternationalNarcotics Control Board has identified the following chemicals assuitable targets for control: ether, used to process cocaine;acetic anhydride, (heroin); P2P, (methamphetamine); ergotamine(LSD); anthranilic acid (methaqualone); and piperidine (PCP).This United Nations Board has called on countries in whichillicit drug manufacture occurs to impose a licensing system andquotas for supplying and importation of these chemicals. For the foregoing reasons, the Commission recommends that DEAshould determine which chemicals currently used to manufactureillicit drugs should be subject to reporting requirements orplaced in a schedule of the Controlled Substances Act. Thisreview should included a consideration of which drugs are mostabused, which have the most serious consequences, and whichprecursor chemicals are essential to the production process. Inaddition, DEA should identify the resources needed for thecomputerization, analysis and follow-up of reports concerningchemicals selected for monitoring. The Commission's final recommendations concerning Federaldomestic law enforcement relate to the Federal agents andemployees who are most involved in the Federal effort againstdrugs. This country owes these agents the greatest possibleamount of protection and assistance against the vicious andruthless participants in organized crime traffickingorganizations. As the testimony of drug pilot Adler Barriman Sealbefore this Commission revealed, because of the massive amountsof money involved, high-level traffickers are able to procure anduse the products of the latest technological advances tofacilitate their trafficking operations. Drug agents must also begiven access to such state of the art equipment and weapons. Inthis regard, the research and development operations of Federaldrug law enforcement agencies should work closely with fieldagents to produce the equipment and tools needed to defeat drugtraffickers. Finally, this Commission has made several recommendationsdesigned to improve Federal domestic law enforcement. However,the men and women involved in the day-to-day effort against drugtrafficking have the most incentive and are the best qualified tooffer suggestions as to how to improve domestic law enforcement.These "experts" should be encouraged to makerecommendations and should be rewarded for the ones that aresuccessful. State and Local Domestic Law Enforcement The role of State and local agencies in the national campaignagainst drugs has been described above: they have the primaryresponsibility for lower- and street-level enforcement because oftheir proximity to the affected areas and because they possess orcan adopt the tools necessary for carrying out their mission. Thesuccessful accomplishment of the mission of State and local lawenforcement agencies is a desirable end, in and of itself,because harassment and disruption of drug retailers and smalleror geographically-restricted distribution networks could lead toa reduction in the supply of drugs, an increase in the price ofthe drugs remaining in the marketplace, and discouragement ofnon-drug users from experimenting with drugs. Successfulcompletion of this mission will also permit State and localauthorities to provide Federal law enforcement agencies withinformation that will be invaluable to the latter in infiltratingand disrupting high-level organized crime and other largetrafficking organizations. The leaders of State and localagencies must constantly reiterate to their agents that theirefforts cannot be viewed in isolation and that they are part ofmuch larger national campaign against drugs. Such indoctrinationwill result in the kind of cooperation and coordination essentialto the success of the overall national effort. Effective State and local domestic drug law enforcement willundoubtedly require increased expenditures, including theexpansion of prison facilities. Although the drug problem isquite correctly denominated a National one, its devastatingeffects are most pronounced at the State and local levels.Therefore, the Commission recommends that State and localgovernments determine what is necessary to permit their lawenforcement agencies to carry out their drug mission successfullyand do all they can to convince their citizens that any requiredincrease in expenditures is absolutely essential. Such a campaignwill be considerably more palatable if it includes a largesegment of funding from seized drug revenues and assets, asdescribed below. The Commission has concluded that if a State is serious aboutresponding to the drug problem within its jurisdiction it mustprovide its law enforcement agencies with certain tools that areavailable to their Federal counterparts. The Commission thereforerecommends that those States, which do not already have suchstatutes, consider enacting legislation patterned after thefollowing Federal statutes: Bail Reform Act of 1984, theRacketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act;statutory use and derivative use immunity for witnesses;statutory criminal and civil forfeiture provisions; theContinuing Criminal Enterprise (CCE) statute; Title III of theOmnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (electronicsurveillance); and the Currency and Foreign TransactionsReporting Act. In addition, the Commission recommends that, whereappropriate, States consider adopting statewide grand juries,with public reporting authority, to improve their investigationsof drug trafficking organizations and eliminating accomplicecorrobation statutes or rules. Although the Commission iscognizant that there may be legitimate State constitutionalobjections to the adoption of some provisions and devices, theCommission nevertheless believes that each has increased theeffectiveness of Federal domestic law enforcement and wouldsimilarly increase the effectiveness of State and local lawenforcement agencies in infiltrating and disrupting traffickinggroups. Foreign Assistance Because the majority of drugs consumed in the United States isproduced abroad, a primary component of our national strategy isinternational cooperation to control drugs. A prerequisite ofthis strategy is the cooperation of drug producing andtrafficking nations. While this has proved difficult or evenimpossible in some situations, due to the political, economic orsocial instability of some drug producing countries,international cooperation can contribute to our national effortto reduce drug consumption. The United States provides various forms of assistance toother countries to help them in their anti-drug efforts,including both economic and military aid. According to the 1984National Strategy For Prevention of Drug Abuse and DrugTrafficking, the objectives of the U.S. international strategyare: . . . strengthening U.S. efforts to assist foreign governmentsin stopping the production and transportation of illicit drugsand improving interdiction efforts in transit nations;encouraging and assisting governments of producer nations toundertake crop control programs as the most effective means ofcurbing production; developing innovative mutual assistancetreaties with foreign governments, directed at facilitatingjudicial actions against the drug trade, seizing assets derivedfrom drug trafficking, eliminating banking procedures which hideillicit drug transactions, and extradition and other legalarrangements; encouraging other nations to support internationalnarcotics control programs, financially and with other resources,including developmental assistance linked with crop control andcooperative law enforcement efforts; encouraging internationalorganizations and development banks to link their assistance withnarcotics control objectives, where appropriate; and curtailingthe diversion of pharmaceuticals and chemicals from legitimateinternational commerce. Indications are increasing that the concern over drug-relatedproblems is becoming universal. This growing concern is duelargely to recognition by governments in both developed andless-developed countries, that the illicit production,trafficking and abuse of drugs pose serious problems to theirnations' development, their societies, and in some cases, totheir national security. The multiple effects of drug traffickingare increasingly felt in Latin America, Southeast Asia, andSouthwest Asia. These effects include crime, corruption, economicdestabilization, political manipulation, and epidemic drug abuse.Much of the increased anti-drug activity in South Americancountries in the past two years correlates directly to theemergence of domestic drug problems in those countries, and theirawareness of their own vulnerability to the myriad problemsrelated to drug abuse. At a time when drug traffickers rule segments of somecountries, and dominate local economies in others, an increasingnumber of nations are realizing that passivity is not the answer.This realization is encouraging efforts for more cooperation withthe United States in its multilateral enforcement and demandreduction programs. Reduction in the demand for drugs in theUnited States and abroad is beginning to be perceived by drugproducing and trafficking nations as a vital component in thefight against drug abuse. It is an objective that has greaterlong term potential for producing action by source nationgovernments than do efforts perceived as benefiting the UnitedStates exclusively. The Commission recognizes the importance of existinginternational drug control efforts. Because drug trafficking andproduction are threats to the stability of existing democracies,a primary goal of the United States and its allies should be toenhance the security of drug producing and transshipment regions.Because some source countries are promoting drug control in theinterests of their own national security and public welfare moreactively than they have in the past, it is an opportune time forthe United States to intensify its international drug controlefforts. The success of these efforts requires the political andfinancial support of a much broader coalition within theinternational community. The United States offers assistance to numerous countriesaround the world with drug abuse and trafficking problems,primarily through the Department of State's Bureau ofInternational Narcotics Matters, the Agency for InternationalDevelopment, and the United States Information Agency. The UnitedStates currently supports crop eradication programs in 14countries and is working to develop such programs in severalothers. These control efforts are vitally enhanced by the publicadareness programs sponsored by the Department of State, theAgency for International Development, and the United StatesInformation Agency. There has been an ongoing debate in this country concerningthe wisdom of making foreign assistance, both general anddrug-related, conditional on the progress of drug controlefforts. Proponents of utilizing existing authority to suspendaid to any nation not taking steps to control drug productionclaim that the United States should employ this leverage as afinal step in forcing nations to stop drug production. Opponentsfeel that sustained aid is necessary to achieve U.S.-supporteddrug control objectives and that an aid cut-off might undermineother U.S. interests in some cases. The National Drug Enforcement Policy Board is now in a centralposition in this area, as in all others in the anti-drug effort.It should carefully evaluate the data used in the President'sannual decision whether to suspend aid to drug producing ortransshipment countries, and make a suitable recommendation tothe President for his ultimate decision. Extradition and mutual assistance treaties can also contributeto international drug control efforts by enhancing diplomaticinitiatives and providing leverage in United States' foreignpolicy decisions. Clauses in several existing treaties areparticularly innovative and worthy of inclusion in futureagreements. The willingness of a country to engage in andactively implement drug-related extradition and mutual assistancetreaties should be a primary consideration in ultimate U.S.policy decisions regarding foreign assistance to a country, andshould be weighed in the deliberations of the President and thepolicy Board described above. The Department of State, in conjunction with the Department ofDefense, should continue its program of expanded economicassistance with emphasis on assisting those foreign governmentsmaking concerted efforts to control their drug problems. At thesame time, a recognition that drug trafficking has become anational security issue should lead to the availability and useof security assistance funds. The effectiveness of suchassistance is, of course, dependent upon the political will ofthe host government. To encourage this, the United States shouldraise the drug issue to the highest level possible in bilateralrelations with producer and trafficker nations. Similarly, theUnited States should raise the drug issue in terns ofinternational security with its industrialized allies. Thisshould occur not only in the United Nations, but also on abilateral and multilateral basis. This would provide incentive inurging those nations to increase their assistance and cooperationwithin the region and in urging those nations to raise the issueas a high priority in their bilateral relations with the producerand trafficking nations. In addition to these efforts to reduce the supply of drugs,international efforts to reduce the demand for drugs are animportant component of U.S. strategy. The United States should,therefore, continue to help producer nations develop preventionand education programs aimed at drug abuse within the producerand trafficker nations. Indications are overwhelming that the world community ingeneral realizes the dangers inherent in drug use. In the past,many nations regarded drug abuse as aberrational social behavior,and relegated governmental reaction, if there was any at all, tolaw enforcement or social/health ministries. As internationalawareness of the actual nature and scope of the threat of drugabuse increases, however, nations are placing the issue where itbelongs: within the realm of national security. Source Country Crop Control Strategies to control drug trafficking and drug abuse in theUnited States have traditionally included measures designed toeliminate illicit drug supplies at their source. These"source country eradication" measures, primarily themanual elimination or uprooting of illicit drug crops and the useof herbicides to kill illicit plants, remain a central focus ofthis country's anti-drug efforts. The 1984 National Strategy forthe Prevention of Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking clearly statesU.S. policy in this regard: Fundamental to the overall supply reduction effort iseliminating illegal drugs as close to their source as possible.The major gains will be realized in the longer term reduction inthe availability of illicit drugs. Since 1978 the Department of State's Bureau of InternationalNarcotics Matters (BINM) has had primary responsibility foroverseeing and implementing foreign drug production controlefforts. BINM provides bilateral assistance for crop control andinterdiction programs in drug source countries in the form ofequipment, training and technical advisory services. BINM'sstated objective is: to control production simultaneously in all key sectors ofillicit drugs exported to the United States so that significantand lasting reductions in availability are achieved . . . .Preventing cultivation and destroying illicit narcotics at theirsource will prove to be the most effective means of reducingavailability. . . . BINM's first priority is on crop control -government bans on cultivation production, enforced by manual orchemical crop eradication. In a successful crop control system drugs would be stopped attheir source, thereby alleviating the "chain reaction"associated with drug trafficking and drug abuse in this country.In fact, crop reduction efforts have at best enjoyed limitedsuccess. Despite the fact that nearly all drug producing andtransit countries are signatories to a 1961 agreement thatrestricts production and distribution of certain drugs to onlymedical and scientific uses, drug production has escalated inmost source countries in the past 20 years. Increased productionhas resulted in decreased prices and wider availability of mostillicit drugs in the United States. Accordingly, domesticconsumption of many drugs has increased. The effectiveness of efforts to control illicit drug crops insource countries is inherently limited. First, many sourcecountry governments are not motivated to reduce crop production,either because the profits obtained from the illicit crops areessential to the economic and/or political stability of thecountry, or because they view drug consumption as an exclusivelyAmerican problem. In addition, many drugs that are illegal in theUnited States are traditionally consumed in milder forms bysource country natives and are viewed as necessities of life oran essential part of their culture. Secondly, in many cases farmers do not have an easilyavailable alternative crop. In any case, an illicit drug crop canprovide a farmer with far more income than any legitimate cropand is therefore likely to be selected above any other crop forcultivation. Third, the governments in many producing areas are weak and donot exert control over growers. The Thai and Burmese governmentshave long been fighting insurgent groups in the NorthwestFrontier Provinces, where most of the Golden Triangle opium isgrown. The Peruvian government has had little effective controlin remote coca producing regions controlled by that country'sShining Path Guerrillas. Even where governments aggressivelypursue crop eradication programs, difficulties are sometimesoverwhelming. Fourth, some major source countries are controlled bygovernments hostile to the United States, who while adoptingpolicies to reduce domestic consumption, have no hesitation aboutimportation of illicit drugs to the United States. Because manysource country governments are politically and economicallyunstable, United States diplomatic relations with even nonhostilesource country governments are often very complex. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the set of sourcecountries is not fixed. When a crop is successfully reduced inone country, production begins or increases in another country.New producers constantly emerge. This shifting has been observedrepeatedly throughout the history of source country controlefforts, even where the United States has claimed major croperadication successsses. This has been the most serious obstacleto total crop reduction efforts. U.S. and Mexican efforts provide an example. The croperadication program conducted in the mid-1970's in Mexico isoften cited as a successful model. Through the program, theUnited States supplied equipment, herbicide and funds for theeradication of opium poppies, primarily in Northern Mexico. WhileMexican heroin production declined after the program'simplementation, heroin production in and export from the GoldenTriangle and the Golden Crescent accelerated, and within fiveyears, total heroin available in the United States reached levelsequal to those attained before the Mexican eradication program.Mexican heroin production has increased every year since 1980,and in 1984 that country provided an estimated 21 percent of thetotal U.S. supply. Despite the limitations of source country control programs,the efforts to reduce international illicit drug crops areessential to the overall U.S. drug strategy. Implementedselectively and judiciously, crop control programs couldeffectively reduce the availability of targeted illicit drugs inthe United States, if only on a temporary basis. As viewed by theSelect Committee on Narcotics, Effective action in relatively few countries, against theproduction and trafficking of opium, heroin, coca, cocaine,marijuana and hashish would have a great impact on the drug abuseproblem in the United States by dramatically curtailing suppliesavailable to users and potential users . . . The United States, through the Department of State, shouldfocus crop control efforts in those countries where political andeconomic climates will make the success of crop eradicationprograms probable. Particular crop control opportunities couldbest be determined if the State Department established a cadre ofprofessional drug officers. Currently, international drugprograms are often managed by contract personnel or by ForeignService Officers not especially interested in drug issues.Narcotics Assistance Unit positions within the Foreign Serviceoften remain unfilled for long periods of time because ForeignService Officers often view them as a detriment to their careers.The absence of a specialized drug group within the ForeignService structure thus impacts negatively on the overallinternational drug effort. The Department of State shouldrecognize Narcotics Assistance Unit positions as priorityassignments, and integrate them into the career advancementstructure. BINM should also examine the possibility of introducing sourcecountry farmers to more imaginative and feasible alternatives toillicit drug cultivation. The available options are currentlylimited to cultivating licit replacement crops but could possiblyinclude the mining of indigenous minerals and the introduction oflight industry to a traditional growing region. Finally, the importance of international crop controls in thecontext of the overall drug reduction strategy should bereevaluated. The limitations inherent in these programs, themajority of which are beyond the control of the United States,make them a less likely success than other strategies discussedelsewhere in this report. In addition, the problems associatedwith international controls, most notably the relentless shiftingof drug crop cultivations to non-targeted countries, underscoresthe ultimate importance of reducing the demand for drugs in thiscountry. History has shown that as long as consumer demand for anillicit drug is strong, some country, somewhere, will become asource country. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-42IA031-000653-B003-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133725 text/html 33305HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:37:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:42 GMTContent-length: 33087 Reducing the Demand for Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter VII Reducing the Demand for Drugs The Limitations of Tactics Affecting Supply Traditionally, efforts to reduce the trafficking and abuse ofillicit drugs in this country have been based on the theory thatsignificant reductions of drug supplies would lead to equalreductions in drug-related problems. While this seems plausible,a review of the 75-year history of these efforts reveals thatthey have not reduced social, economic or crime problems relatedto drugs. Despite continuing expressions of determination,America's war on drugs seems nowhere close to success. Now morethan ever, drugs present problems of vast proportions. This does not suggest that efforts to reduce supply, such ascrop eradication, border interdiction, and prosecution, havefailed. To the contrary, they have achieved a measure of success.In 1983, for example, authorities estimated that approximately 10percent of the drugs destined for illicit markets wereinterdicted. Crop eradication programs were significantlyexpanded in Colombia, where most of the world's cocaine isprocessed and nearly one-half of the marijuana consumed in theUnited States is grown. In addition, indictments and convictionsof some of the world's most notorious traffickers have beenobtained in recent years. Despite these efforts, American consumption of cocaineincreased an estimated 12 percent and dangerous drug useincreased an estimated 15 percent between 1983 and 1984. Cocaine,heroin, amphetamine, and methamphetamine-related deathsincreased, as did cocaine, PCP, and methamphetamine-relatedemergency room visits. In short, strategies to reduce supply are "working"by some standards, but only to a limited degree. Although some inherent factors limit the effectiveness ofthese tactics, the overwhelming and continuing demand for illicitdrugs among Americans is the primary cause of their limitedsuccess. Millions want illicit drugs and are willing to violatethe law, spend billions of dollars, and in many cases risk theirlives to obtain them. Supply Versus Demand Although the supply of and demand for drugs have often beenconsidered separate issues, by both the public and privatesectors, they are in fact inseparable parts of a single problem.The success of supply efforts are related to commitments made toreduce the demand for drugs through drug abuse education,treatment, research, vigorous enforcement of drug abuse laws, andeffective sentencing. Drug supply and demand operate in aninterrelated and dynamic manner. The strategies employed to limiteach should be similarly connected. The national fight against illicit drugs relies on twofundamental strategies: organized crime policy and drug abusepolicy. Organized crime policy targets specific criminal groupsand seeks to destroy those already in existence and prevent theemergence of new ones. In contrast, drug abuse policy attempts toreduce drug use and its associated adverse effects.Theoretically, organized crime policy and drug abuse policy canconflict. Reducing the demand for drugs advances the goals ofboth organized crime policy and drug abuse policy. Asignificantly smaller drug market, which would likely result froma substantially reduced demand for drugs, would attack organizedcrime groups by limiting the huge profits currently available indrug trafficking, while simultaneously reducing the number ofdrug users, the goal of drug abuse policy. A clear example of the relationship of supply and demand isprovided by the case of heroin trafficker Cecily Lermusiaux, whowith several associates, moved heroin into an area of Las Vegaswhere its use among "middle to high-class whites" waspreviously unknown. In a scheme which began with the distributionof free samples of heroin, Lermusiaux's independent heroinbusiness generated a profit of several million dollars inapproximately six years. The demand for drugs is also widely recognized as the fuelthat the illicit drug industry needs to operate. According toColombian President Belisario Bentancur: In the world war against narcotics, we need the commitment ofthe consumer nations to attack the traffic with the same vigor wehave shown. We can make all the sacrifices possible, but if thereis enormous demand, production will never be completelyeradicated. This sentiment has been echoed by the other side of the law.Carlos Lehder, who heads one of Colombia's most notorious cocainecartels, sees the American demand for drugs as the driving forcebehind the "bonanza" of drug trafficking: The demand for drugs in the United States is so great that theproducer countries like Colombia play a really tiny role comparedto the total consumption of the United States. Tactics to Reduce Demand Efforts to reduce demand are not hampered by internationalpolitical complications, or other factors that limit theeffectiveness of tactics to reduce supply. This Commission is ofthe opinion that since reducing demand is the single policyoption pursuable entirely within our own borders, it deservesgreater attention. More successful tactics to reduce demand may in the long-rundecrease the need for current high levels of funding forapproaches to reduce supply. A significant reduction in thedemand for drugs as a complement to aggressive enforcementefforts is likely to make drug trafficking less lucrative fororganized crime and thus prompt many organized crime groups todrop out of the drug business. According to analyst Mark Kleiman: Demand reduction is clearly the strategy of choice withrespect to its effects on organized crime . . . anything thattends to depress demand will reduce both trafficking-relatedancillary crime and the level of drug enforcement resourcesneeded to attain any given level of reduction in drugconsumption. Skeptics have argued that past tactics to reduce demand havenot been successful. However, the history of drug abuseprevention and treatment programs has been relatively short. Itwas not until the upsurge of drug use in the 1960's that theseprograms developed. Some early prevention approaches wereill-conceived. For example, they often presented informationabout drugs without persuasive arguments to deter their use, andother programs used exaggerated information. Such programs havebeen criticized for unintentionally encouraging experimentationwith drugs or squandering the credibility of anti-druginformation. The most recent and effective drug abuse educationand prevention programs focus on the psychological andsociological factors that contribute to the onset of drug use.Drug education programs must be continually evaluated andimproved to keep pace with changing drug abuse patterns. In a model program, the National Institute on Drug Abuse(NIDA) used the strategy of the anti-smoking campaigns of thelate 1970's, which many feel were effective, to develop its"Just Say No" campaign against drug use whichrecognizes the impact of social pressure. NIDA seeks to showadolescents through a music video, television commercials, andother media that they can turn down drugs by simply saying"no" to them. While it is difficult to measure precisely the effectivenessof such anti-drug advertising, it is clear that the media canhelp shape attitudes. Just as beliefs about cigarette smokinghave changed in recent years, so too can attitudes about drugs.Anti-drug advertising has an advantage over the anti-smokingcampaigns: drug dealers cannot openly advertise their product.According to the New York advertising firm of Trout and Ries, Unlike cigarette manufacturers, drug producers and sellerscannot use advertising to promote a fashionable image for theirdrugs. Quite the opposite, the government can use advertising tomake drugs less and less fashionable to use. This, if Americaruns true to form, will dramatically reduce demand. When it's'out' in America, it doesn't sell. Reducing the demand for drugs requires a long-term commitmentbecause it takes time to change attitudes. This commitment mustbe made by Federal, State, and local governments and the privatesector. Each must unequivocally reassert that any and all illicitdrug use is unacceptable in light of the effects of drugs onindividuals, families, communities, and governments. It is onlyin this context that a war against drugs that seeks to limit boththe supply of and demand for drugs can be effective. Federal Government Federal Priorities Three of the five elements of the current National Strategyfor Prevention of Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking are directed toreduction of demand: drug abuse prevention, medicaldetoxification and treatment, and research. The importance of reducing demand has, in addition, been,publicly acknowledged by leading law enforcement officials.According to Attorney General Edwin Meese III, for example: All the enforcement efforts that we can try in this country,all the police agencies in this nation and worldwide will neverbe able to stem the supply of drugs in this nation until we havefirst decreased the number of users and have decreased the demandfor these drugs. John Lawn, administrator of the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA), concurs: Were we [DEAl to increase dramatically in size, the drugproblem would continue to exist until we could do something aboutdemand reduction. While the importance of strategies to reduce demand has beenacknowledged, it is reduction of supply that has consumed thebulk of the Federal drug abuse budget. This may be due, in part,to the fact that certain enforcement operations are inherentlymore expensive, and they are exclusively a Federal function. Inaddition, primary responsibility for developing and maintainingprograms to reduce demand has been shifted to the States and theprivate sector. The concept of our current National Strategy, assigningcomplementary roles to the Federal government, on the one hand,and State and local governments and the private sector, on theother, is commendable for its recognition of the unique roles ofeach component. However, the adoption of this coordinatedapproach carries with it the responsibility for ensuring that thecomponents perform in a truly coordinated and complementaryfashion. There is insufficient evidence today that thisresponsibility is being met. Moreover, in precisely the same waythat approaches to reduce supply recognize a unique Federalcapability, there are certain functions in the area of demandthat, by their nature, can only be performed by the Federalgovernment. The Federal government's exclusive role in reducingthe demand for drugs includes providing national coordination inthe conduct of research, gathering nationwide data, anddeveloping and disseminating standards for drug prevention andtreatment programs across the country. Current budgetary figures reflect the emphasis on drug lawenforcement. while programs to reduce demand at one time receivedthe larger share of the Federal budget, the focus on enforcementhas increased dramatically during the last decade. For example,between fiscal year 82 and 86, Federal funding for drug abuseprevention has decreased by 5 percent, while Federal funding fordrug law enforcement has increase by 70 percent. For fiscal year1986 Federal expenditures on drug law enforcement constitute 84percent of the total Federal drug abuse budget outlay of $1.7billion. Interdiction alone consumes 38 percent of this budget.In the same year Federal funding for drug abuse preventionconstitutes one percent, treatment and rehabilitation 6 percent,and research 4 percent of the total Federal drug abuse budget. In addition to this funding the Federal government providesfunding to the States for drug abuse prevention and treatmentthrough the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Block Grants.For fiscal year 1986 between $65 and $244 million is madeavailable to the States for drug programs. However, prior to 1981under the formula grant program, 40 percent more funds wereavailable to the States for these purposes. A thorough review ofthe current budgetary allotments for anti-drug efforts, nowcontemplated by the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board,should be placed at the top of the agenda of the Boardimmediately. This Commission concludes that such a review willindicate that greater Federal resources should be devoted toprograms to reduce demand, and that the Board should pursueappropriate action without hesitation. Asset Forfeiture Expanded efforts to reduce demand would, of course, requireadditional funding at all levels. A particularly promising sourceof such funding is the considerable amount of money and propertyobtained annually through forfeiture and seized by lawenforcement officials. In 1984 Federal agencies obtained anestimated $400 to 450 million through the forfeiture and seizureof drug traffickers assets. Rudolph Guiliani, U.S. Attorney forthe Southern District of New York, observes: The drug dealers are just about paying for the drug lawenforcement, and hopefully we can get them to pay for drugeducation. Under current policy, the Federal government channels allseized and forfeited assets into Federal, State, and local lawenforcement agencies and the Department of Justice AssetsForfeiture Fund. Presently, no portion of these funds is used forFederal drug demand reduction programs, such as prevention,treatment, and research. However, pending legislation is beingconsidered that would direct use of portions of the AssetsForfeiture Fund for drug abuse prevention and treatment programs.A portion of the Federal government's asset forfeiture fundderived from drug cases should be devoted to programs to reducedemand in whatever proportion is indicated by the Policy Board'sbudgetary review. Funding to reduce demand should include aresponsible contribution to the States for their own programs inthis area. However, any funding directed to the States should bemade contingent upon their vigorous pursuit of such programs, andafter a reasonable grace period, funding should be denied to anyState failing this requirement. Failure to enact State electronicsurveillance measures and asset forfeiture provisions, with theproceeds thereof directed to anti-drug programs, shouldconstitute per se failure. Research Because data concerning drug abuse are in many instancesrelatively incomplete, and in all cases, subject to change basedon new discoveries, continuing research is a fundamentalcomponent of any drug strategy. Recent discoveries concerningcocaine provide an example. The 1967 President's Commission onLaw Enforcement and Administration of Justice reported thatcocaine did not "create tolerance or physicaldependence;" however, research during the 1980's showed thatcocaine does, in fact, create tolerance and some argue, physicaldependence. Despite this increased understanding about cocaine,many experts, such as Dr. Arnold Washton, argue that researchabout the effects of cocaine is still in its "infancy." Continuing research is required not only by the complex natureof drugs and their effects on the human mind and body, but alsoby the constantly shifting patterns of drug abuse. While heroinhas traditionally been the most frequently encountered drug ofabuse among individuals in treatment programs, cocaine nowfollows closely behind and has, in fact, overtaken heroin as theprimary drug of abuse by those in treatment in 18 States. Whilerequests for treatment by cocaine users are estimated to haveincreased by as much as 600 percent in the last three years,research about cocaine and its effects has not kept pace withthis growing problem. The development of new drugs, such ascontrolled substance analogs, presents another compelling needfor continuing research. Data Collection and Dissemination As part of its research responsibilities, NIDA supports twocontinuing epidemiological surveys, the National Household Surveyon Drug Abuse and the High School Senior Survey. While these twosurveys provide valuable information about the extent of druguse, neither NIDA nor any other agency systematically collects ordisseminates information about the thousands of drug abuseprograms. State governments, which disbursed 46 percent ($642.5 million)of the funding for alcohol and drug abuse prevention andtreatment services in fiscal year 1984, do not systematicallyreport to the Federal government about these programs. This lackof data is due primarily to the absence of any statutoryrequirement for such reporting, and is a major obstacle toeffective drug policy planning. The States should be required toreport to the National Institute on Drug Abuse information abouttheir prevention and treatment programs. With this information,and reports obtained from private programs, NIDA will be betterable to identify the best prevention and treatment programs andto develop and disseminate standards and guidelines for suchprograms to the States. The States should, in turn, provide thisinformation to all groups engaged in prevention, treatment, andrelated research. Guidelines Because the Federal government does not systematically collectand evaluate information about drug abuse prevention andtreatment programs, it cannot develop substantive guidelines forsuch efforts. The history of drug abuse prevention hasdemonstrated that certain approaches are considerably moreeffective than others. Some have even unwittingly encouragedexperimentation with drugs. As an increasing number of school andcommunity-based prevention programs are created, the need forguidelines for drug abuse programs is particularly acute.Officials at NIDA acknowledge that many programs use outdatedfactual information and philosophies; however, the Federalgovernment is in a unique position to establish and disseminatesuch guidelines to improve both State and private sector drugabuse programs. Its current failure to do so is a majordeficiency in the campaign against drug abuse. In addition to contributions to reducing the demand for drugsthrough research, data collection and dissemination, and theformation of guidelines, the Federal government should provide anexample of the unacceptability of drug use. The President shoulddirect the heads of all federal agencies to formulate immediatelyclear policy statements, with implementing guidelines, includingsuitable drug testing, expressing the utter unacceptability ofdrug use by Federal employees. Government contracts should not beawarded to companies which fail to implement drug programs,including suitable drug testing. State and Local Governments State and local governments are key components in the nationalcampaign against drug abuse. Their unique capabilities in thearea of reducing demand include State-sponsored media campaignsagainst drug use, prevention and education programs in theschools, drug treatment programs, more vigorous enforcement ofState drug laws, and the inclusion of mandatory treatment or jailsentences, as appropriate, for those individuals convicted ofpossession of drugs. Because the nature of drug use tends to varyamong different geographical areas, State and local governmentsare best positioned to tailor techniques to reduce demand to suittheir particular drug problem. Drug Education The public school systems of State and local governmentsprovide an appropriate forum for drug abuse prevention programs.Consistent with identified measures of success, State governmentsshould establish credentialing standards for prevention andtreatment programs. They should further require that allelementary, junior high, and high schools within the Stateinclude drug abuse prevention programs in their curricula,designed in a manner consistent with such credentialingstandards. State funding should be made available to assure theproper training of educators assigned to such programs. Combining prevention programs, clear school policies about theconsequences of drug use, increased discipline, and higheracademic standards has been demonstrated to be effective. Forexample, Northside High School in Atlanta, Georgia implementedsuch a program in the late 1970's in the face of "pooracademic performance . . . student apathy . . . disciplineproblems . . . class cutting and open drug use on campus."By the early 1980's, performance on standardized tests improvedsignificantly and "the use and possession of drugs on campus[had] all but disappeared." Every employer, public andprivate, and public education institutions at all levels shouldhave clearly-stated policies prohibiting drug use, possession ofdrugs, or being under the influence of drugs on their premises.The consequences of violating these prohibitions should beclearly explained. Law Enforcement A critical part of a national campaign to reduce demand isvigorous enforcement by State and local governments of their lawsregarding the possession of controlled substances. The Departmentof Justice Uniform Crime Report for 1984 states that 552,552arrests were made in 1984 by State and local police agencies forpossession of drugs. Given that in 1984 there were estimated tobe 20 million monthly marijuana users, over four million monthlycocaine users, and approximately 520,000 heroin addicts, it isclear that the statistical probability of arrest for possessionwas and is quite low. This low probability of arrest vitiates inlarge part whatever deterrent value laws against drug possessionand use may have. In addition to increasing the likelihood of arrest for drugpossession, punishment for those convicted of such offenses canbe more effective. Drug users are not "victims" whobear no responsibility for their actions. Imprisonment forrecidivists provides both deterrent value and an opportunity tobreak the cycle of drug use. Uniform and rational sentencing fordrug offenses is essential. Such a system should provide asentence of probation and a fine for a first offense involvingpossession of drugs. The terms of probation should include arequirement to remain drug-free, to be verified through periodicdrug testing. A second offense for possession of drugs shouldresult in a jail sentence or mandatory treatment, if appropriate,or fines or all three. The results of random drug screeningshould be used in considering parole in cases of both drugpossession and trafficking. Society's commitment to the unacceptability of illicit druguse is properly expressed in vigorous enforcement of the lawsregarding possession of drugs and sentencing of recidivist usersto jail terms and mandatory treatment. Such a national commitmentis in conflict with various States' relaxation of criminalpenalties for the possession of marijuana. Because such measureswere based on limited information and popular misinformationabout the effects of marijuana, it is appropriate for thoseStates that reduced these penalties during the 1970's toreconsider these laws. This reconsideration is warranted,especially in light of a Federal campaign against marijuanasmuggling and the considerable evidence that a substantial shareof marijuana trafficking is dominated by organized crime groups,which are both ruthless and involved in smuggling other drugs. Inaddition, the sale of drug paraphernalia undermines this Nation'santi-drug efforts. States that have not already done so shouldenact and enforce laws prohibiting the sale of drugparaphernalia. Reducing demand and increased enforcement of drug possessionlaws will undoubtedly place a greater burden on our courts andwill generate the need for more jail cells and treatmentfacilities. The accompanying increase in expenditures, however,could be met in part with funding extracted from the illicit drugindustry itself. All 50 States currently authorize forfeiture ofassets in connection with drug trafficking and manufacturing,making available millions of dollars in cash and property eachyear to State governments. The Private Sector: Attitudes and Actions The hostess who is certain enough of her own unwillingness totolerate pot smoking in her home doesn't need to call the cops tokeep her guests from lighting up. "Great scent. Lousy name." - Advertising Age, atrade journal commenting on "Opium," a popular perfumemarketed by Charles of the Ritz, a subsidiary of SquibbPharmaceuticals. Drug abuse is fundamentally a social problem, which cannot besolved by the government alone. Federal and State governments cansupport drug abuse prevention and treatment programs, conductresearch, enforce drug laws and provide leadership in the fightagainst drug abuse and drug trafficking. However, not untilpublic and individual attitudes change will illicit drugs and theorganized criminal groups that traffic in them be eliminated.Individuals need not accept drug use in their midst. There is no"right" to use drugs. Government efforts to combat drugtrafficking and drug abuse are a vital effort, but they areultimately only a holding action, while consensus continues tobuild among individuals concerning the utter unacceptability ofdrug use. Despite this growing consensus, a profound disparity existsbetween principle and practice. Popular entertainment aridadvertising, sometimes subtle, sometimes not, regularly reflectsand even promotes the view that the use of illicit drugs isglamorous, exciting, and sophisticated, or at least harmless andamusing. The illusion that drug use is glamorous is regularly, ifsomewhat indirectly, reinforced by revelations that drug use iscommonplace among celebrities in the sports and entertainmentworlds. In August 1985, for example, the New York Times reportedcocaine's alleged use by players on virtually every team in themajor leagues, prompting the Commissioner of Baseball to declaredrug use the "number one" problem facing the game. It is even possible to find purportedly responsible groupsurging not only recognition but acceptance of drug use as afeature of daily life. An article in the January/February 1984issue of Social Work, the journal of the National Association ofSocial Workers, prescribes the following for adolescent marijuanause: Use should be moderate . . no more than four to five jointsper week seem advisable. Such acceptance of drug use may be shared by many who resignthemselves to the fact that drug abuse is inevitable. Such a viewreflects a failure of will on the part of the American public.American society may view drug use in the abstract as wrong, andmany People agree that heroin addicts who commit additionalcrimes to support their drug habits should be jailed. However,many people react with ambivalence to the drug use in theirmidst. Even while the United States government spends almost abillion and one-half dollars on drug law enforcement, threatensto cut off foreign aid to drug producing countries, andextradites and imprisons foreign nationals on traffickingcharges, we appear to lack the same degree of resolve to holdthis country's drug users, as well as those who directly orindirectly promote drug use, accountable for their actions andthe consequences thereof. While attitudes are ultimately an individual matter, actionsneed not be. It is in combination with others that privatecitizens have been most effective in combatting drug abuse. Asdiscussed earlier, athletes, entertainers, manufactures,advertisers and media can promote drug use by their individualexamples or by favorable portrayals of drug use. However, theseelements of society also have the power to shape different publicattitudes about drug use by presenting the truth about drugs. Themedia and entertainment industries should carefully review theirportrayals of drug use and its consequences and ensure theiraccuracy. Efforts to combat drug abuse can also be successful in theworkplace. Many businesses across the country have EmployeeAssistance Programs (EAPs), which seek to prevent drug abuse atthe worksite and which offer treatment and referrals. Inaddition, many businesses now test employees or prospectiveemployees for drug use. According to a survey of 100 Fortune 500companies, two-thirds refuse to hire job applicants who fail suchtests, 25 percent fire employees and 41 percent require treatmentfor employees who fail. Drug testing protects businesses, whichlose billions of dollars each year in reduced productivity as aresult of drug use, employees, and the public. Drug testing incertain "critical positions," such as in thetransportation industry, law enforcement, and education isparticularly important. In addition to efforts in the workplace to combat drug abuse,health professionals, such as physicians, nurses, psychologists,and social workers can help identify and treat drug users.However, currently formal training in the diagnosis and treatmentof drug abuse is limited. Health professionals should bethoroughly trained to identify and counsel drug abusers. Decisions to use or not to use drugs are ultimately derivedfrom values that are best inculcated and reinforced in families,churches, civic organizations, schools and local communities. Theefforts of organizations, which seek to help families preventdrug use, such as the National Federation of Parents forDrug-Free Youth, are essential to the fight against drug use anddrug trafficking. First Lady Nancy Reagan has made an importantcontribution to this effort to reduce the demand for drugs.Relying on the task force approach which law enforcementofficials have used successfully, parents, churches, schools,civic organizations, and business associations should formcommunity task forces in every community across the country toprovide a unified front against drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-43IA031-000653-B003-111http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133737 text/html 35213HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:37:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:33 GMTContent-length: 34995 Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Chapter VIII Summary of Recommendations Based on its findings and the extended analysis, foundelsewhere in the report, (primarily in Chapters VI and VII), theCommission makes the following recommendations: General Recommendations 1. The ultimate goal of the Nation's drug policy is theeffective suppression of drug abuse in the United States. Whileefforts to reduce the supply of drugs in this country, such asinterdiction and source country crop controls, indirectly advancethis goal, efforts to reduce the demand for drugs can make a moredirect contribution. For this reason, the Nation's drug policymust emphasize more strongly efforts to reduce the demand fordrugs. 2. Because drug trafficking and abuse are the most seriousorganized crime problems in America today, they must be addressedat the highest levels of government. Therefore, the National DrugEnforcement Policy Board (Board), under the direction of theAttorney General, is and should continue to be responsible forthis country's drug policy. The mandate of the Board should beinterpreted, or expanded if necessary, to require the Board tocoordinate carefully efforts to reduce both drug demand andsupply to achieve this ultimate goal. The Board should evaluateall programs undertaken pursuant to the national drug strategy interms of their contribution to this goal. In recognition of thescope of the problem of international drug trafficking and theextended national effort needed to combat it, the AttorneyGeneral, as Chairman of the National Drug Enforcement PolicyBoard, should depart from the current formulation of a NationalStrategy on an annual basis, directing instead the formulation ofa long range national offensive against drug supply and demand,including long term funding proposals. Such a program shouldinclude an appropriate role for State and local agencies as acomplement to Federal efforts. State and local police agenciesshould be trained and equipped to perform such a role. 3. The rigorous pursuit of the Nation's drug policy, asproposed in this report, will not undermine its organized crimepolicy. Indeed, the goals of the two policies substantiallyoverlap and therefore both can and must be implementedsimultaneously and aggressively. 4. The cost of this Nation's anti-drug efforts can besubsidized to a great extent by the seizure and forfeiture ofdrug traffickers' assets. That portion of the Federalgovernment's asset forfeiture fund derived from drug cases shouldbe devoted exclusively to anti-drug programs. Such a fundingmechanism should be made permanent through law, and the currentceiling of $10 million should be eliminated. In the annualCongressional appropriations process, these funds should beallocated to participating agencies according to Congressionalfindings, just as if the funds were appropriated. 5. Because of the international dimensions of drugtrafficking, the United Nations, in performance of its leadershiprole in the international community, should sponsor the draftingand promotion of a model International Controlled Substances Act,identifying each and every drug which is trafficked to thedetriment of any single member nation. This model act should beaccompanied by a Model Mutual Legal Assistance and ExtraditionTreaty, embodying the recognition that international drugtrafficking is a matter of profound international concern. In thespirit of international cooperation, the Attorney General, asChairman of the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board, shoulddirect the creation of bilateral working groups, modeled on thepresent Italian-American Working Group. Interdiction 1. Within the overall structure of the National DrugEnforcement Policy Board (the Board), the Vice President's roleas leader and coordinator of interdiction efforts should berecognized, maintained, and strengthened. 2. A proper and realistic goal of our interdiction effortsshould be the maintenance of persistent pressure on drugtraffickers, both as a deterrent and as a symbol of nationaldetermination. Operational and policy decisions should reflectthat measure of su cess and specifically reject any lessrealistic or effective goal. 3. Both Congress and the Board should carefully evaluate thetechnical capabilities and equipment of drug smugglers. To theextent that law enforcement agencies' capabilities and equipmentare inferior to those of drug traffickers, immediate steps shouldbe taken to rectify the situation. 4. All Federal agencies having any responsibility for theregulation of air, sea, or land travel into or out of the UnitedStates should review their policies and practices and ensure thatno purpose other than the promotion of public safety is givenpriority over the effort to combat drug trafficking. To this end,the proposed "Customs Enforcement Act of 1985" shouldbe enacted promptly. 5. The Policy Board should carefully examine the regulatorypractices of the Federal Aviation Administration, particularly inthe field of aircraft modification, to determine whetherpossibilities exist for more aggressive anti-smuggling efforts.In addition, the Policy Board should carefully monitor the designof the Federal Aviation Administration's approach radar system toensure that interdiction capabilities and opportunities aremaximized. 6. Diplomatic initiatives should be pursued immediately tofacilitate Customs pursuit of suspected airborne drug traffickersinto Mexican air space. Such efforts should be given the highestpriority in our bilateral relations with Mexico, including theWestern Hemisphere discussions agreed upon between the Presidentsof the United States and Mexico on January 3, 1986. 7. The Policy Board should thoroughly evaluate expanded use ofCoast Guard aviation capabilities in drug interdiction. 8. Congress should give careful consideration to user fees asa means of supplementing the Coast Guard's budget. Fees should godirectly to the Coast Guard's budget rather than the generalTreasury. 9. Both the Policy Board and the Department of Defense shouldcontinue to examine Navy assistance to Coast Guard interdictionoperations, with a view to expanding such assistance whenever andwherever possible. Such expansion should be facilitated byadoption of the broader military view of national securityadvocated in this report. 10. Monies from the proposed permanent asset forfeiture fundshould be made available to the Customs Service for theacquisition of necessary equipment, including but not limited tothe type of fast patrol boats recently deployed in Operation BlueLightning. 11. Joint Federal-State-local interdiction operations, such asOperation Blue Lightning, should be refined and used whereverfeasible and desirable. Intelligence 1. The Policy Board should take all necessary steps to ensurethat data concerning all aspects of both drug supply and demandare adequately collected, analyzed, correlated and disseminated. 2. The Federal electronic surveillance statute should beexamined and amended to reflect existing technology. ExistingState laws should be similarly studied and changed wherenecessary. Those States still without a statute permittingcourt-ordered electronic surveillance should immediately enactone, consistent with current technology. 3. The "Mansfield Amendment" to the ForeignAssistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2291 (c)(l)) should be repealedin its entirety. The concerns addressed by that legislationshould be incorporated in agency guidelines which providenecessary flexibility while embodying the limits of permissibleU.S. agency conduct. 4. Data relating to assets forfeited to Federal, State andlocal jurisdictions should be collected, analyzed, anddisseminated by the all source intelligence center discussedelsewhere in this report. 5. Because of the importance of information about individualsin drug treatment programs, the Federal government should againrequire the States to participate in the Client Oriented DataAcquisition Process. 6. Both the Household Survey on Drug Abuse and the High SchoolSenior Survey should over sample populations thought to be heavydrug users. In addition, because questions about the nature ofdrug transactions, e.g., the price paid and purity and quantityof the drug purchased, could provide important information forpolicy makers and enforcement officials, such questions should beadded to the Household and High School Senior Surveys. Combined Intelligence and Interdiction 1. The Policy Board should take immediate steps to ensure thatthe law enforcement and intelligence communities are thoroughlyfamiliar with each other's needs and capabilities. 2. Every agency involved in the interdict ion of drugshipments or the apprehension of drug traffickers should haveready access to all necessary intelligence gathered in source andtransshipment countries. To the extent that this requiresexpansion or modification of existing practices, the Policy Boardshould ensure that such change is pursued immediately. Inparticular, the critical nature of real-time intelligence toeffective Customs operations at the border must be recognized,and the Policy Board should take all necessary steps to ensurethat, under current Federal organization, such information fromall sources is being provided. 3. To the extent that the intelligence community under thecurrent Federal structure needs direction from the highest levelsof government concerning aggressive anti-drug actions, includingoperations against the infrastructure of foreign drug-traffickingorganizations, such direction should be provided immediately. 4. The "all-source intelligence and operationscenter," now being considered by the National DrugEnforcement Policy Board, should be pursued aggressively andexpeditiously. It should combine in a physically secure facilitythe functions now being performed by EPIC and NNBIS, retainingthe current Vice Presidential direction and regional structure ofthe latter for interdiction functions. Ft. Bliss, Texas, andsimilar locations should be considered as possible sites for thecenter. Its design, giving due consideration to the protection ofcivil liberties, should provide specific roles for all pertinentDepartment of Defense components and for all members of theintelligence community, to the fullest extent Permitted byExecutive Order 12333, The design should also incorporatespecific foreign intelligence-gathering functions for other U.S.Agencies, in order to maximize the acquisition of both strategicand tactical data. Each Participating agency should be requiredto present to the Policy Board its specific operationalguidelines for providing time-sensitive data to the center. Thecenter should also Include a uniform national system forgathering and analyzing drug related data on various categoriesof information, including arrests, seizures, convictions,sentences, forfeitures, emergency room admissions, and deaths. Asimilar system of compiling and analyzing financial data gatheredby all members of the intelligence community, as well as thatcontained in all financial records now required by law to be keptby any Federal agency, should also be included as an Integralcomponent of the center. Both data bases should be compiled andmaintained in a fashion that provides reliable, constant, anduniform tracking, retrieval, and compilation for the purpose ofcharting trends and profiles, as well as support for specificoperations whenever Possible. Access to all data compiled shouldbe available to appropriate State and local agencies, in additionto Federal components, subject to Procedures necessary to ensurethe integrity of the information-sharing process. 5. Joint enforcement and intelligence operations by source andtransshipment countries should be encouraged, and careful,resourceful analysis should be given to identify means of U.S.funding of such operations. Consistent with other recommendationsin this report, participation in such operations by Americancomponents should be promoted. 6. The Department of State should stress to Chiefs of Missionat principal reporting posts and to all other cognizantDepartmental personnel the high priority attached to acoordinated narcotics intelligence and interdiction strategy. 7. All necessary steps should be taken to ensure that Consularofficers can and do deny U.S. entry visas to individualssuspected of drug trafficking. Subject to the informing agency'ssafeguards of reliability, information provided by any agency ofthe United States, without further corroboration, should besufficient to require such denial under the pertinent statute, 8U.S.C. Section 1182 (a)(23). The Policy Board should promptlyestablish guidelines for similar information-sharing on agovernment-wide basis. 8. Both Congress and the Executive Branch should closelyexamine the operations and cost effectiveness of drug-relatedintelligence-gathering abroad. When and where justified by suchan examination, resources available for such operations should beexpanded. Particular attention should be paid to the criticalneed for adequate foreign intelligence by the Customs Service inperforming its border interdiction function. 9. Coast Guard officers should be thoroughly integrated intothe Defense Attache system. 10. The definition of "national security" nowemployed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff as their starting point inmission determination is: A collective term encompassing both national defense andforeign relations of the United States. Specifically, thecondition provided by: a. a military or defense advantage over any foreign nationalor group of nations, or b. a favorable foreign relations position, or c. a defense posture capable of successfully resisting hostileor destructive action from within or without, overt or covert. The Joint Chiefs should be instructed by the highest levels ofgovernment, through a National Security Decision Directive or byother appropriate means, that "hostile or destructive actionfrom within or without, overt or covert," as used in thisdefinition, shall include the airborne, amphibious, and overlandinvasion of this country by drug smugglers. This policy isalready followed by the intelligence community, pursuant toExecutive Order 12333. All Department of Defense and componentoperational decisions concerning interdiction of drug smugglersshould be made accordingly. 11. For the purposes of intelligence-gathering missionplanning, the Joint Chiefs of Staff should be given directionfrom the highest levels of government that the DefenseDepartment's definition of "foreign hostile action" isto be brought into accord with the view expressed in ExecutiveOrder 12333, as described in the preceding recommendation. 12. Consistent with the foregoing definitions of"national security" and "foreign hostileaction," Department of Defense policies and practices, suchas existing interpretations of the Economy Act, 31 U.S.C. Section1535, and exemptions to the Posse Comitatus Act, 10 U.S.C.Section 371 et al., should be thoroughly re-examined. Unitplanning and deployment should be adjusted accordingly. 13. The Posse Comitatus Act, IS U.S.C. Section 1385, and its1981 exemptions, now found at 10 U.S.C. Section 371 et seq,should be consolidated in Title 18. The consolidated statuteshould include a statement of purpose reflecting the view ofnational security advocated here and promoting an accordinglyexpansive interpretation of the statutory language, subject tosuch limitations as are necessary to protect civil liberties. 14. The Policy Board, in accordance with Executive Orders12333 and 12472, and with applicable National Security DecisionDirectives, if any, should coordinate with appropriate agenciesand departments to ensure that a secure and interoperable,interagency communications capability is available fordrug-related intelligence collection and dissemination in supportof interdiction and other anti-drug activities. The resources andexpertise of the National Security Agency should be fullyexploited to this end, and operational and communicationssecurity should be given a high priority in the training andoperating procedures of all pertinent agencies. Domestic Investigations and Prosecutions 1. Domestic drug law enforcement efforts directed athigh-level trafficking groups should be supplemented by andintegrated with enforcement efforts directed at lower-leveltrafficking groups and street-level drug activity. Unless thenecessary supplementation and integration occur, the enforcementeffort at all levels will be undermined. 2. Although the enforcement efforts of Federal and State andlocal law enforcement agencies cannot and should not becompletely independent, these agencies nevertheless have primaryareas of responsibility. The Federal law enforcement agenciesshould concentrate their efforts on infiltrating and disruptinghigh-level organized crime and other large traffickingorganizations. State and local law enforcement agencies on theother hand should focus their resources on street-level drugactivity and on smaller and geographically-restricted traffickingorganizations. 3. Although Federal, State and local agencies have primaryareas of responsibility, the drug problem is a national one thatrequires extensive and genuine coordination and cooperation amongall agencies. Those in charge of the agencies involved indomestic drug law enforcement must constantly instill In theiragents the need for such coordination and cooperation, especiallywith respect to the exchange of drug intelligence. Jointoperations, such as Operation Pressure Point, the New York DrugEnforcement Task Force, and the Organized Crime Drug EnforcementTask Force Program, have fostered this required spirit ofcooperation and coordination, and they should be undertakenwhenever appropriate, provided that they do not interfere with anagency's primary mission. 4. The sophistication of high-level trafficking groupsrequires an equivalent Federal response. Because of the varietyof investigative techniques used by participating Federalagencies and their unique ability to exploit such tools aselectronic surveillance, the Racketeer Influenced and CorruptOrganizations Act (RICO), the Continuing Criminal Enterprisestatutory provision (CCE), forfeiture, and currency transactionsreports, the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF)Program is the Federal mechanism that is best equipped to respondto and disrupt high-level organized crime trafficking groups. Itsoperation should be supported strongly and its scope should beexpanded wherever feasible and desirable. 5. Because the OCDETF Program has been operational for morethan two years, the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board shouldconsider whether a lead Task Force agency should be designated.As an alternative, the U.S. attorneys Involved should be givengreater policy authority with respect to the participatingagencies In order to improve still further the coordination thathas been achieved by the consensus-based decision-makingapproach. If the latter approach is taken, the Board must takesteps to ensure uniform policies and priorities are recognized byall United States Attorneys involved. 6. The heads of the agencies participating in the OCDETFProgram must continually and unambiguously reiterate their totalcommitment to the success of the program. One simple way they cando so is to ensure that their agents involved in the Program arenot affected adversely in any way with respect to careeradvancement by their participation therein. 7. The components of Federal domestic law enforcement otherthan the OCDE Task Forces should focus their resources onorganized crime trafficking groups that do not qualify for OCDETFprogram treatment and on other large trafficking organizations,which may or may not be multi-jurisdictional. 8. To eliminate jurisdictional disputes between the Federalagencies involved in domestic law enforcement, to avoidduplication of investigative efforts, and to increase the safetyof drug agents, the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board shouldestablish a system whereby agencies would be required to filereports on whom they are investigating. If more than one agencyis investigating the same individual, the agencies involved wouldbe required to negotiate and to determine the best way forproceeding with the investigation, subject to uniform PolicyBoard guidelines. Such a reporting and control system should beincorporated into the "all source intelligence andoperations center" recommended elsewhere in this report. 9. It is an appropriate time to consider whether the missionof the Customs Service with respect to drug trafficking should beexpanded to include intelligence and law enforcement functionsbeyond the borders and ports of entry within this country, whereappropriate, subject to the lead responsibility of the DrugEnforcement Administration (DEA). 10. DEA should determine which chemicals currently used tomanufacture illicit drugs should be subject to reportingrequirements or placed in a Schedule established by theControlled Substances Act. This review should include aconsideration of which drugs are most abused, which have the mostserious consequences, which precursor chemicals are essential tothe production process, and which chemicals could feasibly beregulated. In addition, DEA should identify the resources neededfor the computerization, analysis, and follow-up of reportsconcerning chemicals selected for monitoring. 11. The research and development operations of Federal druglaw enforcement agencies should work closely with their fieldagents to produce the equipment and tools necessary to defeattraffickers. The expertise of the Central Intelligence andNational Security Agencies should be called upon to the fullestextent possible and proper in this regard. 12. Although the drug problem is a national one, its immediateeffects are felt most at State and local levels. To respondeffectively to the drug problem, State and local jurisdictionswill have to increase expenditures for such critical resources asprison facilities, increased manpower, and sophisticatedequipment. 13. States must provide their law enforcement agencies withcertain tools available to their Federal counterparts. ThoseStates, which do not already have such statutes, should considerenacting legislation patterned after the following Federalstatutes: Bail Reform Act of 1984; the Racketeer Influenced andCorrupt Organizations (RICO) Act; statutory use and derivativeuse immunity for witnesses; statutory criminal and civilforfeiture provisions; the Continuing Criminal Enterprise (CCE)statute; Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe StreetsAct of 1968 (electronic surveillance); and the Currency andForeign Transactions Reporting Act. States should consideradopting statewide grand juries in order to improve theirinvestigations of drug trafficking organizations, as well aseliminating accomplice corroboration statutes or rules. Foreign Assistance 1. Because drug trafficking and production are threats of suchmagnitude to the stability of existing democracies, a primarygoal of the United States and its allies should be to enhance thesecurity of drug producing and transshipment regions. 2. As a part of its international responsibilities, theNational Drug Enforcement Policy Board should participate in thePresident's annual decision whether to suspend aid to drugproducing or transshipment countries. The Board should examinethe drug control efforts made by each foreign nation and make asuitable recommendation to the President for his ultimatedecision. 3. The willingness of a country to engage in and activelyimplement drug-related extradition and mutual assistance treatiesshould be a primary consideration in the ultimate U.S. policydecision regarding foreign assistance to that country. 4. The Departments of State and Defense should continue theirprograms of economic and security assistance with emphasis onassisting those foreign governments making concerted efforts tocontrol their drug problems. 5. The United States should continue to help producer andtrafficking nations develop prevention and education programsaimed at drug abuse within these countries. Source Country Crop Control 1. In light of restrictions inherent in international cropcontrol efforts, the Board should initiate a thoroughcost/benefit analysis of the entire history of those efforts bythe United States. If justified by such an analysis, theDepartment of State, through its Bureau of InternationalNarcotics Matters (BINM), should initiate or intensify cropcontrol and plant eradication programs selectively andjudiciously in those countries where the political and economicclimates make it probable that crop eradication programs willsucceed. 2. The Department of State should establish and present to thePolicy Board a specific formula for triggering the cut-off offoreign aid provided for in the "Diplomacy AgainstDrugs" amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act. 3. Narcotics Assistance Unit positions must be recognized bythe State Department as priority Foreign Service assignments. TheState Department should establish a select group of professionalNarcotics Officers to fill those positions, and should ensurethat those positions are fully integrated into the careeradvancement structure within the Foreign Service. 4. BINM should expand the range of possibilities underconsideration as alternatives to illicit drug cultivation forsource country farmers and include such options as mining,petroleum production, and light industry, where feasible. Reducing Demand for Drugs 1. A thorough review of the current budgetary allotments foranti-drug efforts, now contemplated by the National DrugEnforcement Policy Board, should be placed at the top of theagenda of the Board immediately. If that review indicates thatgreater Federal resources should be devoted to programs to reducedemand, the Board should pursue appropriate action withouthesitation. 2. A portion of the Federal government's asset forfeiturefund, derived from drug cases, should be devoted to programs toreduce demand in whatever proportion is indicated by the reviewrecommended above. Funding to reduce demand should include aresponsible contribution to the States for their own programs inthis area. However, any funding directed to the States should bemade contingent upon their vigorous pursuit of such programs, andafter a reasonable grace period, as determined by the Board or byCongress, funding should be denied to any State failing thisrequirement. Failure to enact State electronic surveillancemeasures and asset forfeiture provisions, with the proceedsthereof directed to anti-drug programs, should constitute per sefailure. 3. The President should direct the heads of all Federalagencies to formulate immediately clear policy statements, withimplementing guidelines, including suitable drug testingprograms, expressing the utter unacceptability of drug abuse byFederal employees. State and local governments and leaders in theprivate sector should support unequivocally a similar policy thatany and all use of drugs is unacceptable. Government contractsshould not be awarded to companies that fail to implement drugprograms, Including suitable drug testing. No Federal, State, orlocal government funds should go directly or indirectly toprograms that counsel "responsible" drug use or condoneillicit drug use in any way. Laws in certain States which"decriminalized" the possession of marijuana constitutea form of such condonation, and should be reconsidered. 4. States that have not already done so should enact andenforce laws prohibiting the sale of drug paraphernalia. 5. The States should be required to report information abouttheir prevention and treatment programs to the National Instituteon Drug Abuse. With this information, and reports obtained fromprivate programs, NIDA will be better able to identify the bestprevention and treatment programs and to develop and disseminatestandards and guidelines for such programs to the States. TheStates should, in turn, provide this information to all groupsengaged in prevention, treatment, and related research. 6. Consistent with identified measures of success, Stategovernments should establish credentialing standards forprevention and treatment programs. They should further requirethat all elementary, junior high, and high schools within theState Include drug abuse prevention programs in their curricula,designed in a manner consistent with such credentialingstandards. State funding should be made available to assure theproper training of educators assigned to such programs. 7. Every employer, public and private, and public educationinstitutions at all levels should have clearly-stated policiesprohibiting drug use, possession of drugs, or being under theinfluence of drugs on their premises. The consequences ofviolating these prohibitions should be clearly explained. 8. Government and private sector employers who do not alreadyrequire drug testing of job applicants and current employeesshould consider the appropriateness of such a testing program. 9. State and local law enforcement authorities should enforcemore vigorously the laws prohibiting possession of drugs, andState legislatures should ensure that enforcement agencies havethe necessary resources to do so. Such resources can be funded inlarge part, if not entirely, through effective asset forfeitureprograms. 10. Uniform and rational sentencing for drug offenses isessential. Such a system should provide a sentence of probationand a fine for a first offense involving mere possession ofdrugs. The terms of probation should include a requirement toremain drug-free to be verified, if necessary, through periodicdrug testing. A second offense for possession of drugs shouldresult in a jail sentence or mandatory treatment or fines or allthree. 11. The media and entertainment industries should carefullyreview their portrayals of drug use and its consequences andensure their accuracy. 12. Health professionals should be thoroughly trained toidentify and counsel drug abusers. 13. Relying on the task force approach which law enforcementofficials have used successfully, parents, churches, schools,civic organizations and business associations should formcommunity task forces to provide a unified front against drugs. Conclusion The recommendations made here have not been reachedcarelessly. They are the result of months of concerted researchand analysis, documented in the body of the report. Although somerecommendations reach to the most fundamental levels ofgovernment agency operation and community life, they have beenpresented only after consideration of every identifiable option. The depth of concern expressed in this report is not theresult of any preordained strategy. Rather, it reflects thisCommission's recognition, based on objective evidence, that weare confronted with a national crisis. Every course of action,including a failure to act at all, has a natural consequence. Therecommendations made here are those actions deemed most effectivein promoting a national campaign against drugs at all levels ofsociety. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-44IA031-000653-B003-140http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133806 text/html 75714HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:37:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:24 GMTContent-length: 75496 Requirements for Policy Toward Drug Enforcement andOrganized Cr Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Data and Analysis Requirements for PolicyToward Drug Enforcement and Organized Crime By Mark Kleiman. Submitted: November 1985. Mark Kleiman is aResearch Fellow in the Program in Criminal Justice Policy andManagement at the John F. Kennedy School of Government of HarvardUniversity, Senior Lecturer in Political Science at theUniversity of Rochester, and President of BOTEC AnalysisCorporation. Executive Summary Organized crime control and drug enforcement need to beconsidered together insofar as drug trafficking contributes tothe organized crime problem or organized crime contributes to thedrug problem. In making policy it would be useful to know about(1) the role of drug trafficking in supporting organized crimegroups; (2) the role of organized crime groups in supplyingdrugs; and (3) the effects on each problem of changingenforcement practices in the other. Drug trafficking is almost certainly the largest source ofillegally-earned income in the United States. Both "traditionally" organized crime groups (Mafiafamilies) and "emerging" organized crime groupsparticipate in some aspects of the illicit drug traffickingindustry. In addition, some drug trafficking organizations havesome of the characteristics of organized crime groups, such asthe capacity and reputation for the use of violence andcorruption to frustrate enforcement. Organized crime can participate in drug markets either"productively," using its lawbreaking skills tocontribute to the supply of illicit drugs, or"parasitically," using violence and the threat ofviolence to extort drug merchants or organize cartels. Only theproductive activity of organized crime contributes to the drugsupply problem, which is the main target of drug enforcement.Parasitic organized crime activity, in illicit markets as inlegitimate markets, tends to raise prices and reduce consumption. Controlling organized crime and controlling drug abuse (anddrug-abuse-related crime) are two distinct objectives. Someagencies of government - the Drug Enforcement Administration(DEA) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), forexample - have primary responsibility for drug abuse control.Others, like the Organized Crime Strike Forces, are concernedprimarily with organized crime control. The two sets of agenciesmay or may not promote each other's objectives. Drug enforcement actions may affect the drug markets inseveral ways. They may: (1) help or hurt the efforts of organizedcrime to participate in and profit from drug dealing; (2)encourage or retard the development of organized-crime-likecharacteristics among drug trafficking groups; and (3) lead tomore or fewer convictions of organized criminals. Unless it isdeliberately focused on organized crime groups, high-level drugenforcement may tend to foster organized crime by keeping priceshigh and driving out less well-organized competitors. Organized crime enforcement actions may make the task of drugenforcement harder or easier, depending on whether the roles ofthose groups in the drug markets are primarily parasitic orprimarily productive. Aside from heroin importation into NewYork, traditional organized crime is largely a parasite on thedrug markets; thus, as long as the organized crime effortconcentrates on the Mafia, it has little to contribute to drugsupply reduction. Data about drug trafficking and drug enforcement, and aboutthe relationships between the drug trade and organized crime, canserve three purposes: describing the current dimensions of theproblem, reasoning about how changes in enforcement activitymight make matters better or worse, and measuring the actualeffects of such changes after they are made. From the perspective of organized crime policy, essentialfacts about the drug markets are prices and quantities, and, mostimportant, the relationship between changes in retail price andchanges in the quantity purchased: the price-elasticity ofdemand. Driving up the price of an inelastically-demanded drugwill increase the total revenues of traffickers of that drug, andthus tend to promote organized crime. Data about the drug markets and drug enforcement come fromthree sources: (1) survey research; (2) observations of theconsequences of drug abuse (deaths, injuries, and demand fortreatment); and (3) enforcement statistics and reports. Current large survey efforts, among households and high-schoolseniors, do not gather much price and quantity data. We need aseparate national survey with a sample designed to overrepresentheavy drug-users, that ask very detailed questions about price,quantity, and conditions of drug purchase. In addition, local andregional surveys should be conducted to evaluate the effect ofenforcement initiatives on market conditions and drugconsumption. Two techniques not now in use - "panel" surveys ofdrug users and surveys of convicted dealers - should beundertaken, if the difficult operational and ethical issues canbe resolved. Neither abuse-consequence data now gathered (medical examinerand emergency-room reports through the Drug Abuse Warning Network(DAWN), drug abuse treatment data through the remnants of theClient-Oriented Data Acquisition Process (CODAP), opinions oftreatment professionals through the Community Epidemiology WorkGroup (CEWG)) nor alternative ways of reaching the same facts arevery useful in making organized crime/drug enforcement policychoices. These programs serve other purposes and should not bedisturbed, except for adding bioassay capability to some DAWNsites. Pilot programs to test jail admittees for heroin use areworth pursuing. More could be done with enforcement agency data, which couldtell us about the enforcement effort itself (agency activities,targets, measured results) and on its effects (prices atdifferent levels of the drug trade). The new management of theDrug Enforcement Administration has put less effort intoestimating prices and quantities in the drug markets. That changeshould be reversed, and DEA should again publish price-chainestimates. Enforcement agencies can also make and analyze retail-leveldrug purchases, unrelated to specific cases, to measure the stateof the drug markets. Such "monitor" programs should beincreased in frequency, systematized, and applied to marijuanaand cocaine as well as heroin. Recent revisions in the methods used by the National NarcoticsIntelligence Consumers Committee (NNICC) in preparing the annualNarcotics Intelligence Estimate (NIE) appear to have somewhatreduced that document's inconsistencies with observable fact.However, the NNICC still seems to practice analysis bynegotiation rather than basing its estimates on evidence. The NIEwould be more useful if its assumptions, data, and computationswere explicit. There might be value in allowing a group ofexperts outside the government access to NNICC documents andsources, from which they could develop an independent set ofestimates. Questions to be Answered: Drug trafficking and organized crime are linked problems.Policy making and evaluation for each is complicated by thepresence of the other. My objective is to outline a set of datacollection and analysis activities that would answer questionsunder four headings: 1. What effects do organized crime have on drug traffickingand enforcement? 2. What effects do drug trafficking and enforcement have onorganized crime? 3. How should federal agencies engaged in organized crimeenforcement adjust their policies to contribute to the objectivesof drug policy? 4. How should federal agencies engaged in drug enforcementadjust their policies to contribute to the objective of organizedcrime control? Data collection and analysis are never free; in the drug area,they are likely to be quite expensive. It is therefore importantto identify in advance what is relatively certain on the basis ofinformation and analysis now in hand; it doesn't take aspectroscopic analysis to discover that the sky is blue. Thefollowing section will therefore attempt to describe what we nowknow and to identify the key analytic points. Introduction: Drug Enforcement and Organized Crime Control How Two Objectives and Two Sets of Institutions Intersect The objective of drug enforcement is to keep drugs away fromconsumers. The objective of organized crime enforcement is tocontrol the wealth and power of major criminal organizations andto frustrate their goal of being able to defy the law. These objectives interact where the illicit drug business is amajor source of power or revenue to organized crime groups (or amajor source of their vulnerability to enforcement), and wherethe capabilities of organized crime groups make drugs moreavailable than they would otherwise be: in other words, where thedrug trade contributes to the organized crime problem or whereorganized crime contributes to the drug problem. Defining Organized Crime The term organized crime can be used in one of two ways. Itmay be merely an ethnically neutral euphemism for "theMafia" or "La Cosa Nostra" (LCN); or it maydescribe a class of criminal organizations whose characteristicsmake them particularly worthy of law enforcement attention. Size,wealth, political power, participation in a variety of criminalactivities, and continuity over time have all been suggested assuch characteristics. One way to bridge the gap between the two definitionalapproaches is to refer to the Mafia as "traditional"organized crime, while acknowledging the existence of other,"emerging," organized crime groups. Defining organized crime in terms of its characteristics,rather than ostensibly, complicates the analysis. Not only doesthis approach treat the set of "organized crime" groupsas variable rather than fixed; it also implies a many-valuedrather than two-valued classification. Criminal groups, ratherthan simply being organized crime or non-organized crime (i.e.,Mafia families or other), will fall along a spectrum of beingmore or less "organized-crime-like." This suggests thepossibility that drug enforcement activity can increase ordecrease the number of drug-dealing organizations with manyorganized crime characteristics. It also suggests that it canmake existing organized-crime-like drug dealers more or lessorganized-crime-like and give such groups a greater or lessershare of the drug market. This paper will attempt to distinguish between traditional andemerging organized crime groups, but will think of organizedcrime as primarily a set of organizational characteristics ratherthan a predefined set of organizations. The relevantcharacteristics are organizational continuity and organizationalinvestment in the capability and reputation for violent orcorrupt interference with law enforcement activity. Organized Crime as a Drug Supply Problem "Traditional" organized crime - La Cosa Nostra -does not now contribute substantially to the drug problem, withthe exception of the major roles of two of the five New York LCN"families" in heroin importation. This is not to saythat LCN members and associates do not participate in drugdealing on many levels, but only that they make no distinctivecontribution to the supply of illicit drugs. Indeed, as ThomasSchelling has pointed out, the activity of organized crime incartel formation and extortion from illicit entrepreneurs may onbalance reduce the supply and increase the price of illicitgoods, as is true in licit markets. As a consequence, organized crime enforcement institutions -the Strike Forces and the investigators who work with them - haverelatively little to contribute to solving the problem of illicitdrug supply, as long as they continue their concentration on"traditional" organized crime groups. Thisconcentration has been so successful, both in terms of successfulcases and in terms of creating and maintaining productive,high-morale enforcement and prosecution institutions, that itseems both unlikely (as a matter of prediction) to be changed andunwise (as a matter of policy analysis) to consider changing. It may be the case that some "emerging" organizedcrime groups make distinctive contributions to various parts ofdrug supply, so that their disruption would contribute to drugsupply control (over and above the general effect of enforcementin raising prices by raising the costs and risks of drugtrafficking). Outlaw motorcycle gangs - the Hell's Angels in theWest, the Outlaws in the Mid-Atlantic region - may be"least-cost suppliers" in the distribution of cocaine,amphetamines, and phencyclidine (PCP). Similarly, someethnic-based organizations among Asian-Americans may besignificant contributors to the heroin supply, as the Herreraorganization certainly was at least until the recent arrests. Bycontrast, neither the importation nor the distribution ofmarijuana appears to offer the economies of organization thatwould make breaking up particular trafficking groups a majormarijuana enforcement objective. The marijuana trade may be atits most efficient as a decentralized set of independent buyersand sellers. To develop a set of institutions to appropriately address therole of emerging organized crime groups in the drug markets willrequire devising organizational incentives and career patternsthat support extremely long-term investigations and investmentsin intelligence (broadly defined), while maintaining asupply-control orientation among agents and prosecutors. Thiswill not be an easy task. There may be lessons to be learned fromthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics in its approach to LCN heroindealing. The Drug Markets as an Organized Crime Problem The illicit drug traffic contributes to the organized crimeproblem because of the enormous amounts of money at stake. Thesepotential revenues will both attract (and help to sustain)existing organized crime groups and call into existence newgroups with organized crime characteristics. LCN families, other ethnically-based organizations long inexistence, and outlaw motorcycle gangs may engage in drug dealingas a way to support themselves financially and to take advantageof their organizational abilities in illicit transactions. Theopportunities in the drug trade may also allow the development oforganizations whose origin is in drug dealing, and which mayremain specialized in drug dealing, while taking on organizedcrime characteristics, in particular, organizational continuityand organizational investments in the abilities to use violenceand corruption to resist enforcement efforts while remainingprominent in illicit markets. Drug trafficking is almost certainly the largest source ofillegally-earned income in the United States, far outstrippingthe market for illegal gambling or prostitution. Estimates oftotal revenues from drug sales vary widely and are highlyunreliable. It seems unlikely that total annual revenues are muchless than $25-30 billion. Virtually all of this represents rewards for lawbreaking; thepayments forlicit goods and services (rental or purchase ofvehicles and buildings; lawyers' fees) are negligible. On theother hand, relatively little represents revenue to largecriminal organizations, because so much of the final retail priceof illegal drugs consists of the markups of retail dealers andlow-level wholesalers. For heroin and cocaine less than one-tenthof the final retail price is collected by the dealer who sellskilogram units. Marijuana, by contrast, with much less vigorousenforcement at lower levels, undergoes only about a four-to-oneprice markup between first domestic distribution and final retailsale. Therefore, while all three markets have total values on theorder of $10 billion per year, more than $2 billion of themarijuana market represents the revenues of high-levelorganizations, while the heroin and cocaine markets at that levelrepresent about $1 billion each. On the other hand, the tighterdistribution channels for heroin and cocaine make it possible forlarge and highly disciplined organizations to exist at thewholesale-retail level, so that organizations with many of thecharacteristics of organized crime may exist at lower levels ofthose trades (e.g., the Barnes organization in the Harlem heroinmarket). Making Strategy Drug enforcement actions change the drug markets in ways thatmay: (1) help or hurt the efforts of existing organized crimeenterprises, whether traditional or emerging, to participate inand profit from them; (2) encourage or retard the development oforganized crime characteristics in existing or new enterpriseswithin the drug markets; (3) be more or less helpful in securingconvictions against members of already-identified organized crimegroups and the identification of new groups meeting thosecriteria. The more effectively drug enforcement is directed towardorganized crime control, the less hospitable organized crimegroups will find the drug markets. On the other hand, an increasein the overall level of drug enforcement not aimed specificallyat organized crime groups may tend to frustrate organized crimecontrol by helping existing organized crime groups profit fromthe drug trade and by encouraging existing drug enterprises totake on more organized crime characteristics. The ability of organized crime groups to profit from the drugtrade - and the tendency of the drug trade to spawn new organizedcrime groups - depends both on the amount of money to be made inthat trade and on whether the environment rewards or punishestight control and a reputation for violence. Under someconditions, tightened enforcement can both boost the total moneyavailable to be made and confer competitive advantage on moreviolent groups at the expense of less violent ones. Tighter enforcement can increase the money to be made in anyblack market, if it succeeds in raising the price of thecommodity involved and if consumption decreases less, inpercentage terms, than prices rise. (A 50 percent price increasethat causes only a 20 percent decrease in volume will create anew market with total revenues 1.5 x 0.8 = 1.2 times as large asthe revenues in the old market, and thus increase the money to bemade by 0.2 or 20 percent.) Thus the sensitivity of consumerdemand to retail price - what economists call theprice-elasticity of demand - becomes an essential number to know. If the price-elasticity of demand is (in absolute value)greater than one - if a given percentage increase in price willcause a larger percentage decrease in volume - then priceincreases will decrease total revenues. (Such goods are said tobe "relatively elastically demanded.") On the otherhand, if the price-elasticity of demand is (in absolute value)less than one - if a given percentage change in price will causea smaller percentage change in volume, as in the example above -then price increases will increase total revenues. (Such goodsare said to be "relatively inelastically demanded.") In markets where demand is relatively elastic - whereconsumers will respond to price increases by cutting backconsumption sharply - increased enforcement will reduce the moneyat stake and thus tend to make the markets less lucrative fororganized crime. Where demand is inelastic, increasingenforcement will increase the money at stake and thus make themarkets more able to support organized crime. Much of theempirical work recommended below centers on measuring theprice-elasticity of demand for various drugs. Unfortunately, it appears that the demand for marijuana andcocaine is relatively inelastic. (The argument with respect tomarijuana is on much firmer ground than the argument with respectto cocaine.) In any case, tightened general drug enforcement - asopposed to drug enforcement targeted at organized crime - willtend to give organized crime groups and organized crime-likegroups relative competitive advantage, because their capacity forviolence and corruption helps protect then against ordinaryenforcement actions. This is the central tension in organizedcrime/drug enforcement policy: good drug enforcement may be badorganized crime control. Observations to be Made The observations to be made fall into three broad classes:retail purchasing and consumption, lower-level dealing, andenforcement activity. (Of course, observations on high-leveldealing are also of great importance, but they are almostimpossible to distinguish from enforcement intelligence. Datacollection here means talking to agents, enforcement-agencyanalysts, and prosecutors, and the information to be collected israrely in quantitative form.) Three Objectives of Data Collection and Analysis Data collection and analysis about drug markets can servethree distinct functions: - Descriptive: measuring the current dimensions of the problemand identifying trends. Sample questions: How much cocaine wassold to end users last year? What prices do they pay? How werethose revenues distributed among individuals and groups in theillicit cocaine industry? What were the relationships betweenidentified organized crime groups and cocaine trafficking? Howhave the volumes and prices in the cocaine market changed overtime? What organized crime groups are active in the cocainemarket? What role does it play in their other activities? Whatroles do they play - productive or parasitic - in the market? - Theoretical: generating and testing hypotheses aboutrelationships among variables, and in particular about the likelyeffects of changes in enforcement. Sample questions: Are there"barriers to entry" at some levels of the cocaine tradethat allow traffickers to collect "pure" profits("economic rents")? How would the average size andlongevity of cocaine-trafficking organizations change ifenforcement were substantially tightened? - Evaluative: measuring the actual effects of enforcementinitiatives. Sample question: How did the South Florida TaskForce change prices and volumes in the cocaine market? Three Sources of Data Illicit activities are by their nature hard to observe andmeasure, because participants attempt to conceal them fromauthorities. Excise tax data, which provide the most convenientmeasures of alcohol and tobacco consumption, are unavailable forillicit drug markets. The same is true of the reports routinelyprepared by licit enterprises reports to state and federal taxcollectors, to trade associations and government statisticalcollectors, to trade associations and government statisticalagencies, and to stockholders - from which estimates of licitmarkets are derived. The remaining potential sources of information about illicitdrug markets are: (1) Surveys of drug users and potential drug users; (2) Observations of the consequences of drug - abuse healtheffects, intoxicated behavior, and demand for treatment - and theopinions of professionals who deal with those consequences; and (3) Enforcement data and the opinions of agents andprosecutors. Note that while surveys and observations of consequences tellus almost exclusively about the behavior of drug consumers anddrug dealers, enforcement data and the opinions of enforcementprofessionals can also tell us about the other half of theequation: the governmental response. Several current programs now attempt to tap these threesources of information. None is without major flaws from theperspective of organized crime policy. A major problem common tomany is that they are more concerned with numbers of users andfrequency of use consumed than with quantities consumed and flowsof revenues. Survey Research Survey research is potentially the most powerful toolavailable for studying the markets for illicit drugs. Unlike datafrom enforcement activity or abuse consequences, survey researchcan attempt to measure prices and quantities directly rather thanthrough complicated chains of inference. Performing surveys aboutconsumption activities - market research supports a ratherprosperous industry, including both for-profit enterprises andprestigious universities and nonprofit research centers. Theseinstitutions have developed a repertoire of establishedtechniques. The fact that consumer-goods firms continue to use itheavily testifies to the ability of market research to measureand predict consumer behavior. The National Institute on Drug Abuse funds two series ofsurvey research projects on illicit drug consumption. The SocialResearch Group of George Washington University does a surveyevery two years of more than 5,000 persons 12 years or olderliving in households [Miller et al. 1983]. This series isreferred to among students of drug abuse as "the householdsurvey." Every year, the Institute of Social Research of the Universityof Michigan questions about 17,000 seniors in high school. TheMichigan reports are referred to as "the high-school seniorsurvey." These two surveys are believed to cost NIDAsomething less than one-half a million dollars for each two-yearcycle. The concept of survey research is simple. Draw a sample sodesigned that every member of the population under study has anequal probability of being chosen. (This is what statisticiansmean by the term "random sample." A variant on simplerandomization is to divide the population under study intosubgroups, called "strata," and to draw the sample sothat each stratum is represented in proportion to itsrepresentation in the population, and each member of a givenstratum has the same chance of being drawn as any other member.This procedure, called "stratified random sampling," isthe most commonly used.) Having drawn the sample, ask questionsand record the answers. Then use the percentage answers from thesample as estimates of the behavior of the population from whichthe sample was drawn: that is, make population projections basedon sample results. Surveys can be inaccurate for three reasons: random error,sample bias, and response bias. Random error (or "sampling error") occurs becausethe law of averages only works on average. If 30 percent of thepopulation uses Crest Toothpaste, then in a sample of 100 personsdrawn at random about 30 will say they use Crest. But theoperative word is "about:" one time it will be 28,another 33. The larger the sample, the smaller the randomsampling error, in accord with well-known statistical formulas.This does not depend on the size of the population to bemeasured: a sample of 1,000 is subject to the same sampling errorin estimating a population of 100,000 as in estimating apopulation of 10 million. The rule of thumb is that the samplingerror is inversely proportional to the square root of the samplesize: a sample four times as big gives estimates one half asuncertain. For many purposes - predicting the outcome of aPresidential election, for example - a sample size of a fewhundred is ample. The smaller the percentage of a population that has sometrait, the larger the sample needed to measure that traitaccurately, because a sampling error of 2 percent looms larger ifthe underlying figure is 5 percent than if it is 50 percent.Thus, attempts to measure rare phenomena - heroin use, forexample - take bigger samples than attempts to measure commonphenomena such as alcohol use. The other factor that drives upneeded sample sizes is the desire to study how subgroups of apopulation differ. In a study of the effect of income on cocaineuse, the relevant sample size is the number of respondents withineach income class. To study whether recent increases in marijuanaenforcement by the Boston DEA office succeeded in reducingmarijuana consumption, one would need a sample including at leasta few hundred marijuana consumers from New England, and a similarsample from another area to serve as a control. Other than the expensive expedient of using very large samplesizes - such as the 50,000 households interviewed each month bythe Bureau of Labor Statistics - the only way to reducesampling-error problems in estimating rare traits is to deviatefrom stratified random sampling. Areas under special study orsubpopulations among which the trait in question is less rare canbe deliberately overrepresented. For example, if cocaine use isconcentrated among upper-income urban males in the 20-45 agebracket, a study of cocaine use might deliberately seek out asample including more such people; this is called oversampling.The results of a survey using oversampling need to be adjusted toproject them back on the population. Those adjustments introducegreat complexity into the statistical analysis of survey data.Subtle errors can easily creep in. In consequence, surveyresearchers try to avoid using oversamples. Random error, just because it is random, does not tend to biasresults. The luck of the draw produces overestimates andunderestimates impartially. It does, however, introduceuncertainty. This is more of a problem when trying to measuretrends (where small changes from one survey to the next mattergreatly) than in measuring absolute levels. By contrast, bothsample bias and response bias can create systematic divergencesbetween survey results and actual phenomena. Sample bias comes from a failure to draw a representativesample. If the sampling technique makes persons with a giventrait under study more or less likely than average to beselected, the sample results will consistently overestimate orunderestimate the trait in question. For example, the householdsurvey omits persons with no fixed address and those living indormitories, barracks, and prisons. If very heavy drug users aremore likely than the general population to be drifting, away atschool, in the service, or in prison, then the household surveywill underestimate the number of very heavy drug users.Similarly, the high-school senior survey may underrepresent drugabuse among persons in that age range for two reasons. Bychoosing to study high-school seniors, it omits dropouts, who maybe more likely than average to be heavy drug users. In addition,the actual sampling technique may tend to underrepresent frequentabsentees, and frequent absenteeism seems to be associated withheavy drug use. If the only statistics of interest are population proportions(e.g., the proportion of the voters who think the President isdoing a good job), sample bias is a controllable problem. Whenfrequency or quantity is at issue (e.g., how frequently theaverage high-school senior smokes marijuana, how much cocaine wasconsumed last year, the total amount paid for heroin) sample biascan be a major worry. A small proportion of any population caneasily account for a very large fraction of any activity, frombaseball games attended to books purchased. In the case ofalcohol, for example, 5 percent of the population accounts for 50percent of the consumption. By one estimate, 10 percent of themarijuana-using population smokes two-thirds of the marijuana.Cocaine consumption may be even more skewed, with the additionalproblem that the total number of cocaine users is itself muchsmaller than the totals for marijuana and alcohol; two-thirds ormore of the cocaine consumption may be accounted for by one-halfa million users. Sampling procedures to guard against underrepresenting suchvery small populations are hard to devise, particularly when thebehavior under study tends to make them furtive or to reducetheir participation in various normal activities. Oversamplingcan help; so can what are called "snowball" techniques,where respondents who fit some profile are asked for the names ofother respondents. The illicit nature of drug abuse can make"snowball" sampling very difficult, however. Response bias comes from the systematic failure of respondentsto answer accurately. Any survey will gather some inaccurateresponses, due to misunderstanding the questions, lapses ofmemory, or deliberate deception by respondents resulting fromfear of breach of confidentiality, embarrassment, or a simpledesire to tell the interviewer what the respondent thinks he orshe wants to be told. As long as those errors cancel out, theypose no problem. The problem comes if the inaccuracies are tiltedto one side or the other. A survey that asks questions aboutactivities that are both illegal and socially disapproved runs agreater-than-normal risk of encountering response bias. A clue to how serious response bias can be, even with legalbehavior, comes from surveys where people are asked how muchalcohol they drink. Only two-thirds of the alcohol on whichexcise tax is paid (which may be an undercount of alcohol sold ifdistillers cheat the Treasury) is accounted for by surveyresponses; the survey data thus underestimate consumption by atleast 50 percent. It has been suggested that psychological"denial" by a small population of extremely heavydrinkers may account for most of the difference. Here again, aswith sample bias, problems with a very small portion of thesample can cause the results to be seriously wrong. On the otherhand, a compilation of studies in which survey responses toquestions about illegal drug use were compared with urine-testresults showed no tendency to underreport. A special kind of response-bias problem comes when survey dataare used to estimate trends. If the level or social disapprovalas perceived by recipients changes, then response bias may changetoo. For example, increasingly negative attitudes about marijuanause might lead adolescent respondents to the high-school seniorssurvey to be less likely to tell adult interviewers that theysmoked marijuana every day, even if their actual behavior did notchange. The result would be an apparent, but spurious, decline inheavy marijuana use among adolescents. (This is not to say thatchanging attitudes might not also change behavior, only that thesurvey evidence is subject to error from this source). There are no easy answers to the problem of response bias.Sometimes, as in the studies cited by K. H. Marquis, it ispossible to collect independent data as a check on a sample ofresponses, and then adjust the sample results for the measuredbias. Another strategy is to vary the circumstances of response,for example, by using "secret ballot" answer sheetsinstead of face-to-face questioning or by changing thecharacteristics of the interviewers. Just as pollsters long agodiscovered that black respondents answered many questionsdifferently when the interviewers were black, it may be the casethat some adolescents would respond differently to questionsabout drug use put by another adolescent - particularly onedressed and groomed in ways consistent with drug use - than tothe same questions put by an adult. Changes and Supplements to Current Surveys Both the household survey and the high-school seniors survey,conducted by experienced researchers at institutions withreputations for producing high-quality survey research, arewell-designed for their intended purposes: primarily themeasurement of the number of drug users, secondarily themeasurement of frequency of drug use. But from the perspective ofmaking drug enforcement policy, and particularly policy tocontrol organized crime, they do not gather the right data, orgather it from the right people, or gather it frequently enough.The most important things surveys can tell us are the quantity ofeach drug purchased and consumed; the prices at which thosepurchases are made; the identities and relationships of buyersand sellers; the effects of enforcement on market conditions; andthe effects of market conditions on consumption. In order tolearn these things, surveys would have to: 1. Find More of the Heavy Drug-Users. So much of total drugconsumption is concentrated among a relatively few very heavyusers that no practical increase in sample size for a stratifiedrandom sample among the general population will yield an adequatesample. For example, the 5,000-person household survey couldexpect to get by chance about a dozen of the one half-millionheaviest cocaine users. There are two ways to get a meaningfulsample of heavy users: either use oversampling in drawingrespondents for the household and high-school senior surveys, orrun separate studies of heavy use. The "Young Men andDrugs" studies show both the feasibility of finding samplesrich in serious drug abusers and the value of the results thatfinding such samples can yield. 2. Ask about Prices and Quantities purchased. We would like toknow when the user's last purchase of a given drug took place;what quantity was involved, plus whatever the purchaser knows orwas told about purity/potency/ quality; and how much moneychanged hands; this information is essential to making anyserious estimate of the dollar volume of the market. 3. Ask about the Conditions of the Transaction. Where did thepurchase take place? (The purchaser's residence, the seller's, aschool building, an office building, an apartment corridor, apark, a street corner?) Were there other people present? Had thetransaction been prenegotiated? Was the pricetake-it-or-leave-it, or was there negotiation? Was thepurchaser's previous transaction with the same seller or adifferent seller? Is the seller a relative, a close friend, andacquaintance, or a stranger? These questions can help answerquestions about the possible effectiveness of retail-levelenforcement as a way to cut down on the volume of drugs consumed. 4. Ask about Price Increases, Shortages, Sharing, and ConsumerInventories. Was the price of the most recent transaction higheror lower than the respondent's previous transaction? Than therespondent expected? If the price of the drug were to increase by25 percent, what would the respondent do? (Use about the sameamount, use less, quit altogether, switch to another drug?) Hasthe respondent ever been unable to find a supply of the drug inquestion at any price? Does the respondent now have a supply ofthe drug? If so, how long would it last at his normal consumptionrate? How frequently has the respondent used drugs purchased byanother? Given drugs to another? These questions will helpdetermine the effect of price increases and temporary shortageson consumption behavior. Unfortunately, experience from marketresearch on legitimate products suggests that the answers to thewhat-if questions are likely to be unreliable. 5. Give Information about Local Markets. Federal and localenforcement efforts vary widely across the country in theirintensity and success, but there are almost no studies of whatthe effects are on retail purchases and consumption. Nationwidesamples need to be supplemented with local ones. 6. Provide a Steady Stream of Data in Addition to Annual orOnce-Every-Two-Years Snapshots. This is particularly valuable incombination with local data as a way of measuring the differenceenforcement makes (or fails to make). Is the availability ofdrugs fairly constant, or does it vary? How do consumers respond?Estimating the price-elasticity of demand requires frequentmeasurements of both price and quantity, both to generate anadequate number of data points and to avoid confounding priceeffects with long-term trends or cohort effects on the demandside. One alternative to random sampling often used in marketresearch is a panel survey, where questions are asked repeatedlyof the same group of respondents. Panel data would be enormouslyuseful in understanding the effects of market conditions on druguse, and the individual patterns of drug consumption. Forexample, when drug supplies are short, how are consumptiondecreases distributed among new users and existing users, poorusers and affluent users, heavy users and light users? What drugsare used as substitutes when marijuana is scarce or expensive?How many users, who cease use when supplies are tight, neverstart up again, or start up at lower levels of use? An obviousproblem is assuring respondent confidentiality, and convincingrespondents that it is assured. Perhaps more worrisome, beingmembers of such a panel might make respondents moredrug-conscious, which raises serious ethical questions, as wellas threatening the validity of such studies. Obstacles Naturally, proposing such studies for someone else to fund andcarry out is much easier than doing the work. Aside from theproblems of expense and the mass of legal, ethical, andoperational issues raised by asking detailed questions aboutillegal transactions, such studies would face several obstacles: First, they would have to be cleared by the Office ofManagement and Budget, which views any expansion of surveyresearch by the government with a jaundiced eye. The complexityof the questions to be asked strongly argues for the value ofpaying respondents a small fee to encourage them to complete theinterview, but this makes OMB reviewers even more nervous. (The1981 household survey didn't get into the field until 1982because of a dispute with OMB about forms and payments torespondents.) Second, modifying the existing surveys in terms of content orsample selection will interfere with the ability of researchersto compare results from one survey to the next to determinetrends. The preference of survey researchers for asking the samequestions in the same words to the same samples is not mindlessconservatism, but a well-founded belief in the virtues ofrepeating measurements exactly, rather than changing surveyseries represents a big investment of money and talent. Finally, it is worth noting that neither the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, which funds the current surveys, nor theresearches who conduct them, share the policy and researchperspective urged here. NIDA is far more interested in thepatterns of drug abuse than in the size and functioning of thedrug markets. Nor is there any demand for this sort of researchfrom the enforcement and prosecution agencies. Surveys of Dealers The discussion above concerns only surveys of drug users. Itis also possible to survey drug dealers, asking both about theirown dealings - transactions, strategies for dealing withcustomers, suppliers, and enforcement agencies, incomes,expenses, encounters, if any, with organized crime, opinions ofenforcement risk, pricing policy, recruitment into the trade,career patterns and goals - and about their knowledge of how thedrug markets work. There is probably no better way to start onserious estimates of, for example, bow many marijuana or cocaineto deliver drugs to the market - is more plausible the fewer theparticipants, and the more stable the organizational structure,of any given market. Finding and interviewing a sample of dealers poses bothproblems and risks for the researcher. However, we do have accessto a sample of drug dealers with nothing better to do than answerquestions: they are in federal and state prisons. Of course, theymay be unrepresentative of the overall dealer population,particularly in terms of their success in avoiding enforcement,and may also be unwilling to be interviewed, or to speakcandidly. Still, if systematic interviews could be conducted with asample of convicted drug dealers, the results could not fail tobe informative. The Rand Corporation is now conducting a pilotstudy along those lines funded by the National Institute ofJustice. Consequence Data One alternative to asking people about their consumption ofillicit substances is to observe the consequences of drug abuse.These consequences include coming into contact with both thepolice (arrests, automobile accidents) and the health caresystem: hospital emergency rooms, medical examiners' offices, anddrug treatment facilities. There is now no systematic attempt torecord drug intoxication at arrest or at accident scenes of drugusers, but the National Institute of Drug Abuse maintains threecollection activities to gather medical data: the Drug AbuseWarning Network (DAWN), the Client-Oriented Data AcquisitionProcess (CODAP) and the Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG). The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) The National Institute on Drug Abuse collects and publishes[National Institute on Drug Abuse Statistical Series I)information from about one-sixth of the nation's emergency rooms,with a heavy concentration on 26 metropolitan areas (SMSA's), andfrom about two-thirds of the medical examiners in those 26 SMSA'sonly. The emergency rooms report on patients who come in as aresult of acute ill experiences with the non-medical use ofdrugs; the medical examiners report on persons who, in theirjudgment, died as the direct result of drug use. In 1981, themost recent year for which the data have been published, the DAWNsystem recorded 121,268 emergency room visits and 2,825 deaths,as a result of drugs. (The deaths exclude New York City, whichdid not report to DAWN in 1981; in previous years, New York hadaccounted for about one-quarter of DAWN medical examinerreports.) DAWN records all drugs used incidents of multiple drug abuse:thus 121,268 emergency room "episodes" yielded 199,400"mentions," and 2,825 deaths involved 5,640 mentions.Heroin is the third most frequently-mentioned drug in emergencyrooms, after alcohol-in-combination (alcohol alone is now countedin DAWN) and diazepam (Valium). Cocaine is sixth, marijuanaseventh. Others in the top ten are aspirin, methaqualone,acetaminophen (Tylenol), flurezapam (another tranquilizer) andPCP. Heroin, marijuana, and cocaine, the three largest drugmarkets in dollar terms, account for fewer than 20,000 totalmentions among them. This is such a tiny proportion of the usersof these drugs (about 1 in 50 heroin users, about 1 in 1,000cocaine users, about 1 in 5,000 marijuana users) as to make anyinferences from the DAWN sample to the general populationextremely questionable. In any case, other than personaldemographic data, no questions are asked of DAWN subjects otherthan "what did you take?" For some drugs, even theanswer to this question may be open to doubt, since illicit drugsellers frequently misrepresent their wares, and DAWN sites arenot equipped to assay blood or urine to determine the chemicalcomposition of the "speed" or "ludes" thatsubjects report they have taken. Attempts to base estimates of patterns and trends in drugavailability on DAWN data, but they have not been convincing.DAWN is valuable as an early warning network about both streetdrugs and pharmaceuticals causing injury and death; but it doesnot, and almost certainly cannot, contribute much to ourunderstanding of the kind of drug trafficking that contributes toorganized crime. The Client Oriented Data Acquisition Process (CODAP) Through 1981 NIDA gathered data from all federally-funded drugtreatment clinics and programs and published them as NIDAStatistical Series E. Incentive to participate was provided bymaking participation a condition of funding under the NIDAcategorical grant program that paid for drug treatment. Theabolition of that categorical grant program and the inclusion ofdrug treatment in the Community Development Block Grant programof direct fiscal assistance to the states both reduced the totalnumber of drug treatment facilities and eliminated any directrelationship between the clinics and NIDA. As a result, NIDA canmo longer compel participation in CODAP. Approximately 15 stateshave voluntarily continued to submit CODAP data, and NIDAcollects the information and prepares am unofficial series ofannual reports. In 1981 there were 249,206 admissions to CODAPfacilities, more than three-fourths for outpatient treatment.(Persons admitted more than once during the year weredouble-counted, so the number of individuals admitted wassomewhat smaller). At any one time there were an average of126,000 persons under treatment, almost 85 percent asoutpatients. While CODAP collected demographic data and information aboutthe drugs for which its clients sought or were assigned totreatment, it did not collect data about individual purchase andconsumption patterns. Variations in CODAP counts over time mightindicate either increases in abuser populations brought about byincreased availability, growing numbers of addicts withoutconnections brought about by decreased availability, or merelyincreased availability of treatment. CODAP data were of greatinterest to treatment professionals and produced interestingtime-series data on such indicators as age at first use (whichallowed some inferences about "cohort effects").However, CODAP had even less direct relevance to enforcementplanning than did DAWN. While local studies of enforcementeffectiveness may wish to gather data on treatment demand, thiscan probably be done as effectively on an ad hoc basis as througha process like CODAP. Reviving that process would not seem to bea high priority from the viewpoint of organized-crimepolicymaking. The Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG) The Community Epidemiology Work Group, also supported by NIDA,collects reports from drug abuse prevention and treatment expertsand officials around the country about patterns and trends asthey perceive them in their own areas, and summarizes andpublishes those reports in volumes of "Proceedings".The local reports are not in standard format, and CEWG does notgenerate statistical series. Prices are occasionally mentioned;quantities rarely, if ever. It is conceivable that CEWGparticipants night be encouraged and funded to develop informal"panel studies" among drug users in their own areas.But this would represent a substantial move away from CEWG'scurrent informality. Changes and Other Studies As suggested above, drug abuse consequence data have littlepromise of contributing much to making or evaluating strategyagainst organized crime. The one source not now tapped is arrestdata. Arrests of users - particularly heroin users - for propertycrimes and prostitution may be quite sensitive indicators ofshort-run changes in availability. To develop such data, it wouldbe necessary to test arrestees' urine for the presence of opiatemetabolites and quinine. The National Institute of Justice isfunding a few pilot programs along these lines. Assuming theyturn out to be operationally feasible, they probably represent awise investment of funds. Enforcement Data From the agencies that arrest, prosecute, try, and imprisondrug traffickers and seize their drugs and other assets, we cangather valuable data both about the enforcement activity andabout the underlying illegitimate market. Some of thisinformation exists, or can readily be obtained, in statisticalform; the rest is buried in case reports, informant interviews,and intelligence analyses. The one governmentally-publishedseries estimating the revenues in the drug markets, the annualNarcotics Intelligence Estimate, is prepared primarily byenforcement agencies (particularly DEA) and apparently in largepart from enforcement sources. Information About Enforcement Activity Three things about enforcement activity are of interest: (1) Inputs. What resources - measured in dollars, agent-hours,prosecutor-hours, cell-years, ship-days, wiretap orders underTitle III - are spent on drug enforcement, and how are thoseresources divided among agencies, geographically, by target drug,by enforcement technique, and by the trafficking activity underinvestigation (high-seas smuggling, port smuggling, firstdomestic distribution, wholesaling and middleman activity, retaildealing, money laundering)? Even at the Federal level alone, something as relativelysimple as a comprehensive dollar budget broken down by agency andby drug is not available. An attempt has been made to estimatethe share of marijuana in total Federal enforcement; itillustrates both what is and what is not available. Assemblingsuch data is best done within the government, by an agency withthe authority to demand the relevant documents, than byoutsiders; the Drug policy Board, the Office of Management andBudget, the White House Drug Abuse policy Office, any one of thecognizant Congressional subcommittees, the General AccountingOffice, or the President's Commission on Organized Crime could,by collating budget submissions from the agencies involved,assemble crude but adequate estimates of dollars spent by agencyand drug rather easily. Assembling meaningful information about inputs in non-monetaryforms (e.g., work-hours) would be a tedious process, requiringboth access to internal agency reporting systems and anunderstanding of how those systems represent or misrepresentreality. However, assuming that something resembling the DEA'sannual statistical report is available from the Coast Guard,Customs Service, IRS, and FBI, it might be possible to assemble afair picture of Federal enforcement activity. Federal prosecutionagencies do not now have the ability to generate statisticalprofiles of their work that would be useful here. Thecase-management software system (PROMIS) being installed in theU.S. Attorneys' offices may be able to produce estimates ofprosecutive work-hours by case type, although the system may notcode enough of the case data (e.g., G-DEP rank of case anddefendants) to allow useful analysis. The Administrative Office of U.S. Courts can producecases-pending counts by offense, although this overestimates drugcases as a proportion of total cases to the extent that drugdefendants are more likely than others to default on bail andthus remain as active cases for long periods of time; noestimates are made of the use of judge-days or grand jury daysfor various kinds of cases. Moreover, since the statute names andnumbers attached to a given drug charge (manufacture,distribution, conspiracy, continuing criminal enterprise, etc.)do not vary with drug involved, it is almost impossible toseparate the conviction data by drug. It is possible to make verycrude estimates of Federal prison-cell utilization by convicteddrug dealers from the court data. The attempt to work directlyfrom DEA data is frustrated by the fact that the DEA statisticalreport lists total convictions, rather than convictions inFederal courts. The lack of a unified set of file numbers for thefederal criminal-justice agencies, or a set of links from onefile system to the next (what is called an "Offender-BasedTracking system," or OBTS) makes it nearly impossible totrace a sample of DEA defendants through prosecution andincarceration. The primary problem with assembling such data is nottechnical, but organizational: its collection and disseminationare not in the perceived interests of the agencies involved orthe key individuals within them. While that remains, littleprogress is to be expected. Below the Federal level, thesituation is much worse; there are simply no published figures ondrug enforcement spending or activities by state and local policeagencies, most of which do not have separate drug enforcementunits. The current paucity of data on enforcement activities wouldfrustrate any attempt to study the effects of changes inenforcement resources on the drug markets, even if adequate priceand quantity data were in hand. This problem is not easy to fix;unless the agencies involved have their own reasons forcollecting the data, it will be difficult either for"outsiders" - even from within the government - to dothe job or to persuade the agencies to do it instead. Thesituation is similar for state and local enforcement; in theabsence of any convenient ways of getting nationwide data, a fewstudies of individual cities and states might be useful. (2) Outputs. How do those inputs translate into enforcementactions felt by traffickers: arrests, convictions, sentences,time actually served in prison, drug seizures, asset seizures?How are those outputs distributed geographically, by drug, bylevel of the traffic? These figures are less nebulous than resource and workloaddata; a man-hour is "the stuff that dreams are madeon," but an arrest actually happens. Nonetheless, althoughDEA reports its arrests broken down by almost every possiblevariable, there is no government-wide collation of all arrestreports. Convictions and prison time, as noted above, are simplynot available in useful formats. Even drug seizure data are complicated by the multiplicity ofagencies involved; simply adding together agency totals runs therisk of double-counting. The first annual report of the OrganizedCrime Drug Trafficking Task Force program gives government-widenumbers that may be reliable. Data on asset seizures are complicated both by interagency(and Federal/ State/local) cooperation and by the complexity ofseizure cases: appraised value is one thing, realized value lesslienholders' equity something very different. The lags inforfeiture actions against seized items, plus the growth in theoverall level of seizures, make it difficult to computeseizure-to-forfeiture ratios, because 1984 forfeitures do notcorrespond to 1984 seizures. Some central responsibility for thisarea was assigned to the U.S. Marshal Service and the AssetForfeiture Office of the Criminal Division of the JusticeDepartment; those agencies may now be in a position to provideunified statistics. Arrests, convictions, seizures, and prison time are basicmeasures of risk imposed on the illicit drug industry, and it isvery hard to plan or evaluate policy in their absence. Unlikemost of the input numbers, good output measures can be assembledwith only minimal cooperation from the agencies themselves, ifsomeone with authority insists on it. Below the Federal level the situation is more dismal. Otherthan the uninformative counts of total drug arrests in theUniform Crime Reports, no national data are available. It hasbeen almost ten years since the last national study of stateprisoners by offense category, and even that study combined alldrug offenses into one category. Here again, the best that can behoped for is a few well-done local studies. (3) Effects. Enforcement actions impose costs and risks onillicit entrepreneurs and thus tend to increase prices andperhaps to make supplies less reliable. To some extent thecost-imposition value of a given enforcement action - theimprisonment of a major marijuana importer for an effective termof six years, the seizure of one kilogram of 90 percent pureheroin from a New York City wholesaler - can be calculated, andthose costs can be added together to estimate the effects ofenforcement on the market. Such calculations could contributesubstantially to policy analysis and evaluation. They could formthe basis for comparisons of alternative enforcement techniquesin terms of the costs imposed on a given drug market pergovernment dollar spent. However, to make then accurately oneneeds the right kind of tabulation of enforcement outputs. The value of any illicit drug grows enormously as it movesdown the distribution chain toward the final consumer. A kilogramof heroin that sells for $200,000 is the raw material for streetbags of heroin worth more than $2 million. Adding togetherphysical volumes seized at different stages of the traffic isadding apples and oranges. Each seizure should be evaluated atthe point where it is seized, and then the values added together.The "street value" calculations, so beloved byreporters, resemble calculations of the value of stolen cattlebased on the price of a steak dinner in a restaurant. Givenestimates of the "price chains" (of which more below),simple rules of thumb, based on quantity and location, will givereasonable estimates of the coast imposed on the illicit marketby drug seizures. Imprisonment data also need to bequality-weighted. The higher in the trade a trafficker is, themore dollars he would spend to avoid a year in prison, bothbecause he has more dollars and because any given period inprison costs him more in lost earnings. That willingness-to-payper prison-year-willingness-to-pay of traffickers at differentlevels. But unless the data on imprisonment are collected by drugand G-DEP violator class, there are no figures to use incalculation. Information about Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime Enforcement activity yields two kinds of information aboutdrug trafficking: (1) that which can be inferred from theenforcement statistics, and (2) that known to (and sometimespublished by) agents, prosecutors, and enforcement-agencyintelligence analysts. (1) Inferences from Enforcement Statistics. Lost in theorganizational history of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics is theunsung hero who first proposed the rule of thumb that enforcementagencies capture about 10 percent of the drug supply on its wayto market. That rule of thumb allows (once the problems with theseizure data are straightened away) a simple calculation of thephysical size of the drug markets: take seizures and add a zero.More of the official drug market estimation than anyone wouldlike to admit is still based on some variant of that methodology. There are two problems with this calculation. First, there wasnever a period when we had a good measure of the total markettraffickers will tend to lower it. In fact, if the change inenforcement is great enough to cause shifts in basic smugglingpatterns, the result may be a lower overall seizure rate despitea higher level of enforcement. This seems to have been the casefor the South Florida Task Force, which succeeded both in drivingdrug smugglers away from its territory and in causing many ofthem to switch from large vessels to smaller, faster vessels;total seizures actually fell. The same is true of using other enforcement measures asestimates of market size. The enforcement success count dependson the size of the market, the vigor and tactics of enforcement,and the countermeasures of traffickers. Without an independentbasis for estimating the effect of countermeasures, the successcount tells us little even about trends in the size of themarket. (2) Facts and Analysis From Agents and Agencies. Drugenforcement agencies are not in business to collect data or doanalysis; they are in business to put drug dealers in jail andseize their drugs. Like other agencies, they tend to collect andpublish data that will help them do their job better, willpersuade someone else to help them do their job better, or willmake them look good. Traditionally, the Drug Enforcement Agency and itspredecessors defined their mission as controlling the supply ofdrugs. Thus, for example, the estimates of the price and purityof heroin at retail were published as part of the"Performance Measurement System," implying that drugavailability was an important measure of agency effectiveness.This mission definition encouraged the development within DEA ofan extensive "strategic intelligence" capability,devoted to understanding the drug markets. By contrast, theFederal Bureau of Investigation has always defined its mission assecuring the conviction of lawbreakers. It regarded the number ofbank robbers it caught, rather than the number of bank robberies,as its central performance measure. Since the 1981 reorganizationthat placed DEA under the administrative authority of theDirector of the FBI, DEA's mission definition has moved closer tothe FBI's. At least in part, this reflected a belief thatenforcement outputs were more subject to organizational control,and thus more likely to consistently reflect organizationalsuccess, than drug market outcomes. This new mission definitionmay have advantages from the perspective of organized crimecontrol. The supply-control approach tended to stress quantitiesof drugs rather than trafficking organizations as targets.However, the new mission definition is much less hospitable tostrategic, as opposed to operational, intelligence. (a) Price Chains. In the past DEA devoted considerable energyto estimating "price chains" for drugs, based onundercover buys and data from informants. That information,insofar as it was accurate, told a great deal about the structureof the markets, and in particular about where the money was beingmade. It was never formally published, but it was estimated on aquarterly basis and available to the rest of the government. Itappears that such "price chain" estimates are no longermade, or no longer made available. If true, that should berectified. There is no other source for that information, and itis essential. There is an enormous amount of relevant informationin DEA case files. Undercover transactions, interceptedcommunications, and conversations with informants all containprice data. The problem is maintaining a staff to collate andanalyze what is there. One improvement that could easily be madein publishing all statistics on drug prices is to adjust pastprices for the effects of inflation, using the Consumer PriceIndex or GNP deflator. Otherwise, anyone trying to determineprice trends has to keep looking up the rate of inflation since1976, or whatever appropriate date. (b) "Monitor" Programs. DEA has never had asubstantial number of retail-level cases, but the PerformanceMeasurement System required data about retail price and puritiesfor heroin across the country. These were accordingly collectedby the simple expedient of sending agents out to make undercoverretail purchases and collecting retail samples from local policeto seek good quality at low prices? More seriously,"retail" included samples as large as 2 grams and up to14 percent pure, while the typical actual retail transaction isfor 100 milligrams (one-tenth of a gram) less than 5 percentpure. Now that price-purity data are no longer publicly released,there seems to be somewhat less monitoring activity than in thepast. It may well be true that a program run by local policeunits (perhaps with funding from DEA or NIJ) would be moreeffective than DEA-run monitoring efforts. (Unofficialresearchers might develop even more accurate results, but thelegal and ethical problems seem insurmountable). But whether runby DEA or outside, there is no substitute for actual street buysas an index of market conditions, and not only for heroin. Enforcement-based Analysis: NNICC The National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee(NNICC, pronounced "nick") is the official custodian ofestimates regarding the drug markets. It was originallyestablished to help control the embarrassing flow of mutuallycontradictory estimates that used to emerge from various Federalagencies. Although staffed primarily from DEA, it includes abroad variety of agencies as members, and its reports arenegotiated products. At one time, the NNICC annual report, called the NarcoticsIntelligence Estimate, provided sources, physical volumes, anddollar revenues for each of the four major drug categories:opiates, cannabis, cocaine, and the "dangerous drugs."Subsequently, criticism of the dollar-volume estimates, both fromoutsiders and from within the NNICC staff, led to a decision tocease publication of dollar-volume estimates. At the same timethe marijuana estimates for previous years were restated downwardby approximately one-third. As the NNICC methodology review makesclear, the NIE figures are largely derived from estimates offarm-level production in foreign source countries, because thedata sources on the consumption side are so inadequate. However,that same report shows how weakly grounded the production-basedestimates are. The crop figures themselves are hard todistinguish from guesswork, and the fraction of each country'scrop reaching the U.S. market is fundamentally unknown. Still more serious is a problem not considered in themethodology review: that a large fraction of the total crop inthe average year may go unsold. But a peasant marijuana-grower,for example, deciding how many plants to grow under uncertaintyboth about crop yields and about demand from exporters, will, ifhe is rational, overplant on average. Marijuana is so lucrative,compared with other crops, that it makes sense to grow an extraplant, even if there is only one chance in five of selling it forexport. Of course, if there were a smoothly functioningcompetitive market over wide geographic areas, the result wouldbe lower prices rather than unsold crops, but the market inmarijuana for export may be highly localized, with exportersbuying from nearby farmers even if prices elsewhere are muchlower. In general, then, it is hard to place much confidence in theNIE numbers, particularly because they are presented as a justset of conclusions, without any detailed presentation of theunderlying data or the calculations performed on that data. Oneway to improve this situation would be to gather better data,particularly about consumption, as discussed above. On the purely analytic side, two things might be done: (1)NNICC might publish more of its underlying data and some of thedetails about the calculations performed on them, or (2) a teamof outside scholars might be allowed full access to NNICCmaterials and asked to prepare an independent estimate. But whether one considers improving the data with which NNICChas to work or changing the analytic approach, the fundamentalproblem remains one of organizational incentives. The currentlack of adequate data or convincing analysis is not a problemfrom the perspective of DEA or other enforcement agencies. If theinformation were available, there is no reason to expect that itwould be used to reshape what agents and prosecutors do. In fact,by providing outsiders with a basis on which to criticize, dataand analysis might seem to threaten agency autonomy. Nor have theWhite House or Congressional staffs concerned with these problemsdisplayed any anxiety over the absence of information. The firststep in solving a problem is getting it identified as a problemby someone with the resources to bring about a solution. In thisarea, that step remains to be taken. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-45IA031-000653-B003-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133821 text/html 28237HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:08 GMTContent-length: 28019 Recommendations for the Regulation of Selected Chemicalsand Con Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Recommendations for the Regulation ofSelected Chemicals and Controlled Substance Analogs By Frank Monastero. Submitted: September 1985. Frank Monasteroretired in 1985, having served as the Chief of Operations of theDrug Enforcement Administration. As we can see from media reports, cocaine has fast become thenation's number one drug abuse problem. The supply of cocainecoming from South America has reached overwhelming proportions.In 1985 alone the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) estimatesseizures will reach 50,000 pounds, and this, of course, does notaccount for that part of the supply that ultimately reaches themore than 20 million regular users. Another facet of the drug abuse problem, which could grow asrapidly if not addressed promptly, is that of controlledsubstance analogs, known as "designer drugs." These areclandestinely produced substances not covered by the ControlledSubstances Act because of their chemical structure. Most drugs, including those manufactured illicitly, areproduced at least in part from commercially available chemicals.The purpose of this paper is to examine the feasibility anddesirability of regulating certain of these chemicals. It willalso analyze how to curtail illicit production and examine whatlegal mechanism would be effective to control the manufacture ofsynthetic analogs (designer drugs), produced for illicitpurposes. Cocaine abused in the United States has its origin from thecoca bush, a very hardy plant, grown in certain areas of Southand Central America. As in the case with almost all drugs,whether produced from plants or totally synthetic, one or moreprecursors, reagents or solvents is used in the process. Thesechemicals are defined as follows: a precursor is a raw materialused in the production of a controlled substance that becomespart of the finished product; a reagent reacts chemically withone or more precursors but does not become part of the finishedproduct; a solvent, which does not react chemically with aprecursor or reagent and does not become part of the finishedproduct, is used to dissolve solid precursors or reagents, todilute reaction mixtures, and to separate and purify otherchemicals. For example, a precursor for cocaine is coca leaves, areagent is sulfuric acid, and a solvent used in the manufacturingprocess is acetone. With respect to methamphetamine, a precursoris phenyl-2-propanone, a reagent is sulfuric acid, and a solventis methanol. It is important to understand that, in the case ofthese and other controlled substances, there are many otherprecursors, reagents and solvents, which can easily besubstituted to produce the same final product. With some exceptions only the final product drug itself, is acontrolled substance. Many of the chemicals used to produce orrefine illicit drugs are needed in industry to produce a myriadof items and are produced in tremendous quantities. Controllingtheir distribution would, in most cases, be impossible andprobably undesirable because of the cost alone. Acetone, forinstance, which is used as a solvent in processing opium and cocaleaves, is used to make paints, lubricants, pharmaceuticals,cosmetics and agricultural products. Although controlling all precursors, reagents and solventsused to manufacture illicit drugs is neither desirable norfeasible, the idea of controlling certain chemicals has merit. Infact, some chemicals are now subject to regulation. Piperidine isa precursor to the controlled substance phencyclidine, commonlyknown as PCP, which can have serious physical and psychologicalconsequences when abused. Piperidine is subject to reportingrequirements under the Controlled Substances Act, although itspossession and distribution are not subject to penalties, as isthe case with the possession and distribution of PCP. Formsrecording the sale of piperidine and the purchaser's name must bemaintained for two years. Anyone who sells piperidine must reportthe sale. This reporting procedure allows DEA to monitor sales ofpiperidine and to investigate those sales recognized assuspicious by either DEA or the seller. As a result of concertedefforts begun in late 1984, DEA has seized four clandestine PCPlaboratories and has located at least ten operations thatreceived chemicals from legitimate channels by posing aslegitimate businesses. In one case a manufacturer shipped asubstantial amount of piperidine to a "chemicalcompany" over an extended period, all in good faith based onthe company's name. A check of the address by DEA showed it to bean auto repair shop. Precursors, reagents and solvents are used to manufacture manydrugs, including synthetic analogs, drugs so close in structureto controlled substances that they create virtually the sameeffect for the user. These are not covered under the ControlledSubstances Act because of minor differences in molecularstructure. Synthetic analogs, commonly known as "designerdrugs," pose particular health threats. The production of controlled substance analogs,pharmacologically active, chemically related substances, to avoidthe laws regulating controlled substances, was first observed inthe mid-1960's with the synthesis of amphetamine analogs ofmescaline, such as MDA and others. Some of this group ofhallucinogenic amphetamines sold on the illicit market werebrought under the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, a predecessor tothe Controlled Substances Act. Others in the group weresubsequently controlled under the Controlled Substances Act afterits passage in 1970. Later three PCP analogs were controlled. The process of designing analogs is, therefore, not new, andthe formulas are not primarily a phenomenon of clandestinelaboratories. Most of these drugs were developed by legitimatepharmaceutical chemists in search of better medicinal agentsthrough the testing of numerous analogs of a parent compound. Itis not surprising, therefore, that some of their precursors havenames such as N-(1-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl)-aniline (forfentanyl) or N-[1-(2-phenylisopropyl)]-4-piperidinone-4-one (foralpha-methylfentanyl). These analogs, in many cases, mimic thequalitative actions of the original compound but may vary inpotency or duration of action. Thus, there is a need to deal bothwith the problem of chemicals used in the production of illicitdrugs and with the problem of controlled substance analogs. Factors Affecting the Regulation of Chemicals There are in excess of 200 precursors, reagents and solventsused in the production of the 37 most commonly abused substances.Among these are amphetamines, barbiturates, cocaine, Diazepam,hash oil, heroin, LSD, MDA, PCP and methaqualone. In consideringwhat should be regulated two factors are most significant: (1)How common is the chemical interest? (2) How great is theworkload to track the needed information? Each situation must beexamined individually, if the objective is to reach an ultimatesolution for each drug. It is quickly apparent that there is no ultimate, universalsolution to absolute chemical control for all drugs. Acetone andether, although widely used, are subject to tracing. Piperidine,less available commercially, is easily synthesized. The firstconclusion might well be that if the source of the chemical isknown and that source will identify and report suspicious sales,the investigator will be able to pursue the investigation.Obviously, this will not help when all chemicals can be obtainedfrom illicit sources. But when the source will provide assistanceor at least when sales information is available for review,tracing can be attempted. The problem then becomes one of resources. How muchinformation can be reviewed and how many people are available topursue leads. These are very significant factors to consider. If,indeed, all chemicals used in the production of controlledsubstances were reported it is unlikely the responsible agencycould cull the most suspicious orders, let alone investigatethem. The computer input itself would be substantial.Furthermore, the drug abuse situation is constantly changing, anda chemical, not of interest today, might be a prime target as anew drug emerges. Case Study: Ether Because cocaine abuse is a serious problem in the UnitedStates at this time and because an increasing number of cocainelaboratories are being seized, it is important to examine thechemical control of cocaine. To refine coca, dried leaves aremoistened with an alkaline solution, such as lime water, sodiumor potassium carbonate. The moistened leaves are soaked inkerosene, which extracts cocaine and similar compounds. Thekerosene is extracted with aqueous sulfuric acid, and the acidneutralized with limestone or lime. After the cocaineprecipitates and is removed by filtering, it becomes coca paste.To become cocaine base, the paste is dissolved in a solution ofsulfuric acid, and a solution of potassium permanganate is addedto aridize impurities. The solution is filtered to removeimpurities and manganese oxides. Anmoniun hydroxide is added tothe filtrate, and the precipitate is collected and dried, formingthe base. The base is dissolved in acetone or ether and filteredto remove insoluble material. Concentrated hydrochloric acid isadded in acetone along with ether. Cocaine hydrochloride willcrystallize from this solution and is collected by filtration anddried. The ratio of base to cocaine hydrochloride is one to one. Because ether and acetone are readily available in the UnitedStates, traffickers recognized the advantage of processing here,and the number of base to hydrochloride laboratories seizedincreased steadily from 3 in 1980 to 21 in 1984; as of mid-1985,there were already 25. Six reagents are used to refine cocaine: ammonia, hydrochloricacid, lime, limestone, potassium carbonate, potassiumpermanganate and sulfuric acid. The four solvents used areacetone, ethanol, ether and kerosene. These could be targets formonitoring or control. However, after considering theavailability and usage of each chemical, the possible targets canbe narrowed to acetone and ether. As mentioned earlier, acetonehas a number of legitimate uses. An estimated 2.5 billion poundsis produced each year in the United States, a commercial value ofabout $400 million. There are 12 major U.S. producers and over 40 foreign sources.Although usually produced from petroleum or synthesized frombenzene, there are other processes to produce it. Nonetheless,acetone, in fact, was selected as a target, and the targeting didproduce results. Ether, likewise, has broad use, with a U.S.production estimate of over 60 million pounds, but with only fiveU.S. producers and seven major foreign sources. Ether, therefore,represents, and did turn out to be, an even better target. Early in 1982 a project was undertaken to determine how muchether was being shipped to Colombia and to what, if any,legitimate uses it was put. Colombia was selected because,although most of the coca is grown in Bolivia and Peru, most ofthe cocaine processing laboratories were known to be in Colombia.The Colombian government determined that thousands of gallons ofether were being imported annually, but that there was virtuallyno legitimate need for it. Most of the ether was imported fromthe Federal Republic of Germany and the United States. Throughliaison with those ether manufacturers and distributors who wouldcooperate, hundreds of barrels of the chemical were tracked toclandestine laboratories deep in the Amazon jungles of Colombia.Many of these labs were destroyed and thousands of pounds ofcocaine were seized. In the celebrated Tranquilandia raid inMarch 1984, 10,000 kilograms of cocaine paste and base wereseized and destroyed, along with thousands of barrels ofchemicals. Through court testimony and media attention, cocaineproducers have, no doubt, become aware of the detectiontechniques used to locate laboratories, and they are or will takeaction to avoid detection. Opportunities for a continuing supplyof ether exist through unscrupulous manufacturers anddistributors and through clandestine production from ethanol.However, the program has been useful and demonstrates theeffectiveness of the monitoring approach. Case Study: P2P In addition to tracking chemicals, such as ether, anotherapproach is to bring certain chemicals under the ControlledSubstances Act. For experience with this approach, it isimportant to examine methamphetamine and one of its precursors,phenyl-2-propanone (P2P). Domestic methamphetamine production issignificant. In fact, during a 45 month period beginning inSeptember 1981, more than 50 percent of the 751 clandestinelaboratories seized by DEA were methamphetamine labs. In order tocontrol clandestine methamphetamine production, P2P was placed inSchedule II of the Controlled Substance Act on February 11, 1980.P2P is an immediate precursor (used in the step just prior tocompletion) in the most desirable synthesis and was, therefore, agood choice for targeting. Furthermore, with the exception of itsuse as a cleaning solution, most of its uses are in connectionwith pharmaceutical manufacturing. Annual production in the U.S.is estimated to be about 10,000 pounds, with only two principaldomestic producers and nine foreign sources. Full control of P2Punder the Control Substances Act resulted in a significantincrease in the number of clandestine methamphetamine laboratoryoperators synthesizing P2P. More than 75 percent of thelaboratories seized after passage were refluxing phenylaceticacid and acetic anhydride with sodium acetate or pyridine. Inaddition, one laboratory was synthesizing phenylacetic acid aswell. Recommendations for Action (1) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting of allsales of selected chemicals used in the production of controlledsubstances, subject to public notice by the Administrator of DEAthat a particular chemical was selected for such control. Thiswould create a requirement similar to that affecting piperidine;however, reporting would only be required for those chemicalsspecified for a particular period of time. The requirement shouldapply to the importing and exporting of the specified chemicals. (2) That legislation be enacted to empower the Administratorof DEA or some other appropriate authority to identify and addnew chemicals to the list of those requiring reporting, as itbecomes known they are being used for the production ofcontrolled substances. (3) That DEA identify the resources needed for thecomputerization, analysis and follow up on reporting and thatthose resources be acquired through the budget process. Controlled Substance Analogs As previously stated, the controlled substance analog problemis not new. However, their wider illicit use and the greaterrecognition of their use has heightened concern. There have beenthree major types of analogs available in the United States:analogs of PCP, analogs of amphetamine and methamphetamine havinghallucinogenic properties, and the newer trend, analogs offentanyl and meperidine. There are, of course, hazards common toall three groups. They are likely to contain toxic impurities.Dosage is not consistent, i.e., one dose of a substance is likelyto contain a different amount of the active ingredient thananother. As a result, a single dose could contain a lethal amountof the drug in question. Because they are analogs, they may wellproduce toxic effects not caused by their parent drug. Anothercritical consideration associated with designer drugs is thedifficulty of identifying them in the body. Recent testimony at aSenate hearing indicated there are now only two laboratories inthe country, capable of identifying certain "designerdrugs" in body fluids, because standards for identifying thedrugs are not widely available. This creates two seriousproblems: (1) Without the ability to detect and determine whatdrugs are being used on the street it is impossible to evenidentify that a problem exists let alone judge its magnitude; and(2) without being able to determine positively what drugs hasbeen ingested, it is impossible to identify the correct antidote,which in many cases could be a matter of life and death. The Situation in More Detail PCP was originally developed in the early 1950's as ananesthetic for humans, but it was soon limited to veterinary usebecause of its adverse side effects. Licit production ceased in1978, and PCP is controlled in Schedule I of the ControlledSubstances Act, as are three of its analogs. They now arerecognized as having no medical use. The National Institute onDrug Abuse has identified 35 other analogs, but none haspresented an abuse problem as far as is known. Many analogs of amphetamine and methamphetamine are known tohave hallucinogenic affects. One receiving considerable mediaattention recently, known on the street as "Ecstasy,"is MDMA or 3,4-methylene dioxymethamphetamine from the parentcompound MDA. Its psychopharmacological effects are similar tothose of MDA, altered consciousness, increased acoustic, visualand tactile sensory perceptions and mild intoxication. There isconsiderable concern among some experts that MDMA is likely tocause damage to the serotonergic system, which has to do withregulating sleep, mood, sexual activity and sensitivity toaversive stimuli. The conclusion is based on research indicatingthat MDA can selectively destroy serotonergic nerve terminals inthe rat brain. First recognized in the illicit traffic by DEA in1970, MDMA was proposed for control under the ControlledSubstances Act in July 1984 because of increasing incidents ofdiscovery. However, because of rapidly mounting evidence of abusesince then and possible serious neurological damage, theemergency provisions contained in the Comprehensive Crime ControlAct of 1984 were used, and the drug was controlled as of July 1,1985. Fentanyl is widely used by the medical community as ananalgesic and anesthetic. It was first marketed in the UnitedStates for this purpose in 1968 and is the most popular analgesicused in surgical procedures in this country. There are likelyseveral hundred fentanyl analogs, many with pharmacologicalproperties similar to heroin or morphine but far more powerful.The alpha-methyl analog was the first synthetic analog drugrecognized in the illicit traffic and was associated withoverdose deaths in California in 1979. Sold on the streets assynthetic heroin, or "China White," it was placed inSchedule I of the Controlled Substances Act in September 1981,substantially eliminating its appearance in the illicit traffic.DEA has identified seven additional fentanyl analogs in theillicit traffic since then, however. Interestingly, two analogshave not been recognized in the scientific literature. There are two dramatic concerns related to the fentanylanalogs: (1) their potency; and (2) their production/profitmargin. This second element will be of obvious importance totraditional organized crime elements. Three methyl-fentanyl, thelatest analog to appear in the illicit market, is 3,000 times aspotent as morphine and has already been responsible for over adozen overdose deaths in the San Francisco Bay area alone. Thisis the highest rate of fentanyl related deaths to date. Dosagesfor fentanyl analogs are measured in micrograms and are likely tobe less than 1 percent of the dosage unit sold to the user. TheDrug Enforcement Administration has estimated that one kilogramof fentanyl analog could be manufactured for under $2,000 andthat this amount might equal as many as 50 million dosage units,with a street value exceeding one billion dollars. Meperidine, a synthetic narcotic used to control pain, isfrequently used by heroin users when the street supply of heroinis low. Meperidine, known more commonly by its trade name"Demerol," is in the Controlled Substances Act,Schedule II. Two analogs of meperidine have been found in currentuse. The first apparent MPPP (1-Methyl-4-Propionoxy piperidine)abuse came to light in 1976 when a young man synthesized what hethought was the analog for his own use. He soon sought treatmentfor symptoms of Parkinson's disease. In revealing his drug use heprovided the formula and procedures he had used. Subsequentanalysis revealed he had, in fact, created MPTP. Additionalresearch by a National Institute of Health grantee showed thatMPTP had produced the Parkinson's type symptoms. MPPP was firstidentified by a DEA laboratory in 1982; and samples of MPPP havebeen discovered to contain the neurotoxic byproduct MPTP, formedduring the synthesis of MPPP. The neurological damage produced byMPTP is irreversible and apparently worsens with time. The Stateof California has identified more than 500 people who have usedMPTP; many users thought it was a new synthetic heroin. Twenty ofthose involved have been permanently crippled. A group of sevenyoung addicts, who appeared at a California medical centerseveral years ago with symptoms resembling advanced Parkinson'sdisease, were unable to move or talk. Treatment withanti-Parkinson's therapy was, according to Californiaauthorities, probably life saving, yet the patients continued tobe severely handicapped, requiring medication every one to threehours just to be able to eat and drink. The other meperidine analog with effects similar to heroin isPePAP (l-(2-Phenylethyl)-4-Acetyloxpiperidine). The analgesicpotency of PePAP, measured in rodents, is described as from 12 to72 times the potency of meperidine itself. This analog has so farbeen discovered in California, although a clandestine laboratoryoperation in Texas may have been attempting the process but didnot succeed. Proposed Legislation As mentioned at the outset of this discussion, unless thespecific chemical makeup of the substance being abused can bedetermined by all laboratories regularly engaged in the analysisof substances being abuse, serious problems could go unrecognizedfor long periods, even years. Those who examine for and recordoverdose deaths and injuries must likewise be able to determinethe abused substance involved. Further, that information must becollected and analyzed at a central point. There is currentlyonly a limited mechanism for this collection (the NIDA DAWNsystem). When a situation needing attention is discovered,enforcement authorities must be empowered to act quickly. Thismeans that a mechanism must exist by which these "designerdrugs" can be controlled under the Controlled Substances Actand appropriate State laws. The Comprehensive Crime Control Actof 1984 does contain such a provision. Under that statute theAdministrator of DEA can bring a drug under Schedule I for up toone year, with a six month extension where justified, and onemergency basis, while the normal control mechanism is inprogress. The Administrator must decide that such scheduling isnecessary to avoid an imminent hazard to public safety. Controlof the substances occurs 30 days after public notice. Theefficacy of this legislation is yet undetermined, since it wasonly first used in the Spring of 1985. On July 16, 1985, a bill was introduced in the U.S. Senate, S.1437, known as the "Designer Drug Enforcement Act of1985." This proposed legislation would make it a felony tomanufacture or distribute a designer drug for human consumption.The proposed act, which would amend the Controlled Substance Act,reads in part "(31) The term 'designer drug' as used insection 403A means a substance other than a controlled substancethat has a chemical structure substantially similar to that of acontrolled substance in Schedule I or II." During a Senatehearing on the legislation by the Subcommittee on Children,Family and Drugs and Alcoholism, July 25, 1985, both the DEAAdministrator and the Administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuseand Mental Health Administration, supported the bill. Recommended Actions (1) That DEA provide assistance to the States in acquiringlaboratory standards for use in identifying "designerdrugs." (2) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting byanyone authorized to sign a death certificate, to an appropriateFederal authority (perhaps the Public Health Service) of deathscaused wholly or in part from the ingestion of any substance. (3) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting to anappropriate Federal authority (DEA) by all laboratoriesperforming drug analysis for law enforcement purposes: (a) thetotal amount of each controlled substance as defined in theControlled Substances Act, received for analysis each calendaryear, and (b) immediate notice of the receipt of samples of anysubstance suspected of being or found to be a "designerdrug" as defined in the proposed bill. That DEA formulate model "designer drug" legislation for the States as has been done for other aspects of the drug abuse problem. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-46IA031-000653-B003-180http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133831 text/html 63914HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:00 GMTContent-length: 63696 Drug Policy and Organized Crime Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Part 1: Drug Policy and Organized Crime Drug Policy and Organized Crime By Professor Mark H. Moore. Submitted: January 3, 1986. Dr.Mark H. Moore is Daniel and Guggenheim Professor of CriminalJustice Policy and Management at the John F. Kennedy School ofGovernment, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. He isformer Special Assistant to the Administrator of the DrugEnforcement Administration. Introduction: Drug Policy, Law Enforcement and Organized Crime Criminal laws prohibiting the production, distribution, andpossession of narcotics and dangerous drugs are the basis of drugpolicy in the United States. These laws target the drugs thathave no recognized legitimate medical uses: heroin, cocaine,marihuana, and hallucinogens. Enforcement efforts against thesedrugs can be uncompromising, for there are no legitimate uses orusers to be protected. Other drugs, however, pose similar threats to public healthand welfare, but they do have recognized legitimate uses. Thesedrugs include morphine, methadone, barbiturates, amphetamines,and tranquilizers. With respect to these drugs the aim of thelegal regime and associated enforcement strategies is morecomplex. It is not simply to eliminate the drugs but to preservea legitimate sector in which the benefits of these drugs may beenjoyed, while minimizing illicit use. Towards this end the lawslicense a limited number of people to produce, import, sell,distribute and use them. To prevent the drugs from leaking fromand to illicit distributors and users, licensees have to securetheir inventories, and deal only with other licensees. To makesure that the licensees meet these responsibilities, they mustkeep records and make them available to investigators forinspection. Failures to meet their responsibilities expose thelicensees to both civil and criminal penalties. To make sure thatno one can operate outside the boundaries of the legitimatesystem, the unlicensed production, distribution or use of theselegitimate drugs is prohibited. Drug Laws as a Comprehensive Drug Policy It has become customary to think of the drug laws as operatingprincipally on the "supply side" of illegal drugmarkets. For most practical purposes this is appropriate, forthese laws are the principal policy instruments directed at thesupply of illicit drugs. It is also generally true that theprincipal targets of enforcement are suppliers rather than users.However, these laws impose criminal liability on the illicitpossession and use of drugs, as well as to illicit production anddistribution. And indeed, each year more than 500,000 drug usersare arrested for possession. Therefore, criminal enforcement isdirected at the "demand side" of illicit drug use aswell as the "supply side." To the extent that theselaws attack both the supply and the demand for illicit drugs,they can be understood as a comprehensive drug policy, designedto distinguish legitimate and useful drug use from illicit useand to minimize illicit use in the society. To produce this result, three different mechanisms are reliedon. One is the moral force of the law itself. To the extent thatindividual citizens are guided in their decisions about drug useby the explicit instruction provided by the law, or to the extentthat the existence of the law mobilizes widespread informalinterventions by parents, friends and relatives, the existence oflaws that define illicit use may succeed in reducing overalllevels of illicit use without any public enforcement activities. A second, more widely understood mechanism is generaldeterrence: the notion that citizens might be discouraged fromillicitly selling or using drugs by the fear that they will bearrested and punished. This notion differs from the first in thatit depends on citizens' fears of punishment to motivatecompliance with the laws, rather than their desires to conform orseek virtue. The more severe the penalties, and the higher theprobability of being caught, the more compliance will result. A third mechanism is incapacitation: the notion thatimprisonment may physically prevent drug dealers and users fromcontinuing their activities. This concept differs from the secondin that it operates only on those dealers and users who arecaught, and only for as long as they remain under legalsupervision. If enough drug dealers and drug users are locked up,then the problem of illicit drug dealing and drug use willdisappear. Limitations of Drug Laws as a Drug Abuse Policy To describe these mechanisms is to reveal the limitations ofthe drug laws as a comprehensive drug abuse policy. The problemis not that they are directed only at the "supply side"of illegal drug abuse. Nor is it that they fail to producereductions in the level of illicit drug use. The problem is thatthe drug laws are imperfectly effective. They leave behind aresidual market, composed of drug dealers and users, who failedto get the message that they should abandon their drugactivities. Moreover, while the levels of drug distribution anduse that remain are undoubtedly lower than they would be in aworld of legalized drugs, the character of the market on both thesupply and the demand side are fundamentally altered andgenerally worsened as a result of their illegality. On the demand side the users who are not dissuaded from usingdrugs discover that they confront high prices and low quality inthe drugs they buy. In addition, they are exposed to socialstigmatization and criminal prosecution. These circumstancesproduce disastrous results for their economic status, physicalhealth, and social well-being. Of course, to the extent thatthese consequences are unpleasant to the users, they provide acontinuing incentive for users to abandon their drug use. And, tothe extent that the users do so, an important social objective isachieved. But to the extent they do not respond, their lives aremade miserable with little corresponding social benefit. Thesociety is left with drug users who are more dependent, dangerousand unhealthy than they would otherwise be. On the supply side the residual capacity takes the form of anillicit industry. Some of that industry operates outside theboundaries of the United States, and therefore to some degreebeyond the reach of its law. Another portion operates under thecover of predominantly legal drug production and distribution -within reach of the law, but a morally and legally ambiguoustarget. The vast majority of the illicit industry, however,consists of wholly illicit traffickers in the United States. The Illicit Drug Industry: A Problem for Drug and OrganizedCrime Policy The existence of this illicit industry creates two differentkinds of problems. Viewed from the vantage point of drug abusepolicy, the principal problem created by the illicit industry isthat it continues to supply drugs to illicit markets. To theextent that this continues, old drug users nay continue theirharmful activities, and new users may be recruited into dangerouspatterns of drug use. Thus, to achieve the objectives of drugpolicy, the society must find ways to constrict the supplycapacities of the illicit industry. Viewed from the vantage point of those concerned with thecontrol of organized crime, the existence of the illicit industrycreates a different kind of problem. To a degree, the illicitdrug industry engages in the sort of activities that makeorganized crime a specially important social problem. Not only dothe illegal dealers frustrate the aims of drug policy bycontinuing to supply drugs, but they grow rich in the process andtaunt the society with their financial success. Moreover, theindustry seems to spawn violence. Sometimes the violence spillsout into the general population. But even when the violenceremains confined to participants in the industry, its sheerviciousness creates a general sense of lawlessness and brutalitythat is threatening to the community. The illicit dealers alsoseem to become heavily involved in corrupting governmentagencies. Such activities undermine community security, and theintegrity of its basic institutions. Finally, the illicit drugindustry may gives birth to unusually large and powerful criminalorganizations, or nourish those that already exist. From thevantage point of organized crime policy, then, the drug lawscreate a major problem to be solved. Drug Policy as a Portfolio of Policy Instruments To deal with these side effects and residual problems, thedrug laws must be complemented by other policy instruments. Todeal with the limitations of drug laws in suppressing the demandfor drugs, a comprehensive drug policy necessarily includes drugtreatment and preventive education programs. Treatment programsmust be provided to help users make the transition to non-use andto save lives that would otherwise be lost. Preventive educationprograms must be operated to give more detailed explanations toindividuals of why illicit drug use is undesirable. Indeed, giventhe focus of drug enforcement on the supply side of the marketand the obvious limitations of the drug laws in discouraging useamong those who are already dependent, it is generallyappropriate to think of drug treatment and education programs asthe principal instruments focused on the "demand side"of the illicit drug markets. To deal with the limitations of the laws in suppressing thesupply of illicit drugs and preventing the appearance oforganized criminal activity, traditional enforcement methods mustbe supplemented by some special policy instruments. Diplomacy andforeign aid must be joined to enforcement and regulation to reachthe pieces of the illicit supply system that operate outside theUnited States. An effective regulatory enforcement system must becreated to prevent the diversion of narcotics and dangerous drugsfrom legitimate to illicit markets in the United States. Andperhaps some special enforcement strategies that are effective inconstricting the capacity of the supply system to move drugs toillicit markets or in dispersing well organized drug traffickersmust be designed and used. The Objectives of the Paper The purpose of this paper is not to design an effectiveoverall drug policy. Nor is it to consider the wisdom of relyingon criminal laws against drug distribution and use to the degreewe do now. My opinion is that our current drug policy is a wiseone, and that the balance of risks favors the continuation ofcriminal laws directed against the distribution and use ofnarcotics and dangerous drugs. The aim of this paper is to take the existence of the currentdrug laws and policies as a starting point and to design astrategy to reduce supply consistent with the aims of our currentdrugs abuse policy. In designing such a policy, special attentionwill be given to the relationship between the strategy to reducesupply that is necessary to achieve the goals of our current drugabuse policy and organized crime policy. As we have seen, there is some tension between these policies.Making drug distribution illegal establishes fertile soil fromwhich existing organized crime groups might take sustenance ornew groups might arise. Thus, the continuing prohibitions of drugdistribution may exacerbate the organized crime problem. On theother hand, to the extent that organized crime groups are nowactive in producing or distributing drugs, and to the extent thatour organized crime policy makes available resources andtechniques that are effective in immobilizing such groups,organized crime policy may make an important contribution to drugpolicy. In balancing these concerns the dominant emphasis will begiven to designing a supply reduction strategy that can achievethe purpose of drug abuse policy. This perspective will beadopted not because it is obvious that an effective drug controlpolicy is more important than an effective organized crimepolicy, but simply because, if it were true that it was moreimportant to combat organized crime than to keep drugs fromillicit users, the simple solution would be to legalize the drugsso that no illegal firms could arise. Since the society does notchoose this option, it must be that we are willing to pay a pricein terms of the objectives of organized crime policy to achievethe objectives of drug control policy. The only interestingquestions, then, are how to minimize that price, and how best todeploy the special resources and capabilities or organized crimecontrol policies to further the objectives of drug policy. Thatis what we will try to discover. The Analytic Framework As we have seen, the character of the illicit drug industry isimportant to the ultimate success of both drug abuse policy, andorganized crime control policy. To define objectives, setreasonable expectations for success, and guide strategic choicesin targeting supply reduction efforts, an analysis of the illicitdrug industry is essential. The Crucial Distinction Between the "Industry" andthe "Firms" In carrying out this analysis, it is important to distinguishthe concept of the industry from the concept of individual firmswithin the industry. The industry includes everyone who isengaged in producing, importing, or distributing narcotics anddangerous drugs to illicit markets in the United States. A firmwithin that industry is nothing more than a collection of assetswhose specific uses are determined by the authoritative decisionsof an identifiable organizational unit. Obviously, the firms that make up the industry could take avariety of forms. They could represent different productioncapacities, such as a boat, a person who knows the chemistry toproduce psychoactive drugs, or $50,000 in cash. They could beinvolved in all aspects of the deal from financing throughproduction, transportation, and distribution, or they couldspecialize in only one of these functions. For any given functionthe firm may be more or less dominant in more or less localgeographic markets. They could consist of a single entrepreneurlinked to others only through the fragile ties of economicinterest, or they could include many people linked to one anotherby family or cultural ties. They could be relative newcomers orhave a long history in the industry. They could enter theindustry with hopes for a single, big score, or they could planto become or remain a permanent fixture. Often, the distinction between the industry and the firms thatcomprise it is blurred, and the industry is viewed as a singlefirm. This casual assumption is justified on one of two differentgrounds. One is that the observed performance of the illicitmarket is so impressive in terms of its operations andadaptability that it is hard to believe that it is not guided bya single intelligence. Nothing short of a single coherententerprise could accomplish the enormously complicated tasks ofcollecting raw materials, processing then, and transporting thefinished product through the mine fields created by enforcementagencies. Nor could anything other than an enterprise guided by asingle intelligence adapt successfully to the frequent changes insupply reduction strategies. The problem with this argument is that legitimate industriesaccomplish similar feats of production, distribution andadaptation all the time without a single intelligence guidingthem. The reason legitimate industries are successful is thatthere are many guiding intelligences, but none predominant. Theaggregate result of the individual choices made by individualeconomic actors may look organized in the sense that the industrygradually moves from places where enforcement has become heavy toareas where it is weaker, or it shifts from one drug to anotherdepending on consumer demand. But this orderly response need notbe the result of a wise choice by a single, powerful firm. Itcould be the natural result of the firms in the heavily enforcedareas being wiped out, and the firms in the less heavily enforcedareas growing to meet the demand. In short, the adaptations aremade at the expense of individual firms, not under their control- nor, necessarily, to their advantage. The second line of argument supporting the notion that theindustry should be viewed as a single firm is somewhat moresophisticated. It is based on the hypothesis that some illicitfirms will develop crucial specialized capabilities, and thatthese will give the firm important advantages in producing anddistributing illegal drugs, or effective control over others whodo. These special capabilities could be access to capital,connections with foreign sources of raw materials, knowledge ofhow to produce the drugs, a special tie to corrupt officials, ora general capacity for disciplined violence that could be broughtto bear on anyone who produced or distributed drugs without theirpermission. This argument depends essentially on the idea thatthere are some natural economies of scale in the illicitindustry, and that these will tend to produce a concentratedindustry. This is a more powerful kind of argument than thefirst, but it is only an assertion. It needs to be examined withboth logic and evidence. The Analysis of Industrial Organization The form of analysis that is appropriate is an analysis ofindustrial organization. An analysis of this kind rigorouslymaintains the distinction between the industry and the firms thatcomprise it. Indeed, the principal objective of an analysis ofindustrial organization is to understand the relationships amongthe structure of the industry, the conduct of the firms withinthe industry, and the long run performance of the industry. The Definition of Industry Structure. The concept of industry"structure" explicitly captures the distinction betweenthe industry and the firms that comprise it. It focuses attentionon how the activities of the overall industry are divided amongdifferent organizational units called Firms. One key concern inexamining structure is the degree of concentration in theindustry. The fewer the firms, the more concentrated theindustry. A second is the extent of horizontal and verticalintegration. Integration refers to the proportion of activitiesessential to creating a product and delivering it to a marketthat are contained within a single firm. Vertical integration ismeasured by the extent to which a firm includes all the stepsfrom extraction of raw materials to final sales to ordinaryconsumers. Horizontal integration is measured by the proportionof a given step in the production and distribution of a productthat is controlled by a single firm. The Definition of Industry Conduct. "Conduct" refersto the distinctive ways that the firms within the industry goabout their business. Specific questions might focus on theproduction technologies now commonly utilized, major factorsinfluencing costs within the industry, levels of investment inresearch and development, the rate at which new products areintroduced, or the geographic organization of the industry'smarkets. Conduct might also be concerned with institutionalrelationships in the industry; e.g., the competitive strategiesbeing pursued by firms within the industry, the relationshipswith governmental regulators, and even patters of collectivebargaining and labor relations. The Definition of Industry Performance."Performance" focuses on the question of how successfulthe industry is over the long run in delivering a product at lowcost, expanding the market, and adapting to changingcircumstances. Performance is ultimately what an industry analystis trying to understand. Indeed, the observations about structureand conduct are made principally to explain and predictperformance. The more decentralized and competitive the industry,and the lower the costs of bringing new products or newproduction technologies on line, the more adaptable and dynamicthe industry. The larger the economies of scale in operating,marketing, or bringing new products or production technologies online, the more concentrated the industry is likely to be. Themore concentrated the industry, the higher the prices and theslower the rate of innovation. Propositions such as these linkobservations of structure and conduct to explanations andpredictions of performance. Objectives in Attacking the Illicit Drug Industry To a great extent this framework of analysis can be carriedover and used in examining the character of the illicit drugindustry. But some crucial differences are worth noting. By farthe most important is that the implicit evaluative perspectivereverses when we are analyzing illicit industries. An Evaluative Perspective. In standard industry analyses onegenerally hopes for high performance from the industry. The moresuccessful it is in delivering products at low prices, expandingits market to new areas, adapting to changing economiccircumstances, and maintaining high rates of innovation, thebetter the result for the society. In the case of the illicit drug industry, of course, thesociety's hopes run in the opposite direction. High performancefrom the illicit drug industry means that it adapts well togovernment efforts to eliminate it and continues to supply drugsat low cost to illicit markets. Over the long run, this meanshigher levels of illicit drug use. In analyzing the illicit drugmarket, then, what one hopes for is a failing industry: one thatcannot overcome the hurdles set by the government in trying toget its products to market. These hopes are generally frustratedby the sheer inventiveness and adaptability of illicitentrepreneurs in pursuit of money. Nonetheless, one keeps hopingthat this industry will stumble rather than flourish. Indeed,making it fail is an explicit purpose of public policy. A second important difference is that in the analysis of theillegal drug industry, the structure and conduct of the industryhave an elevated importance. As noted above, in traditionalanalyses of industrial organization, structure and conduct haveimportance primarily as factors that influence the performance ofthe industry. In the analysis of the illegal drug industry, theyretain that importance: to the extent that structure and conductenhance or hinder the industry's long-run performance indelivering drugs to illicit markets at low prices, they are asource of interest, and a possible target of enforcement actions. What increases the importance of structure and conduct in theanalysis of illegal drug markets, however, is that they arevalued by the society independently of their impact on theperformance of the industry. Crucial questions about the conductof the firms within the illegal drug industry include the extentto which they rely on violence to maintain internal discipline oreliminate competition, and the extent to which they rely oncorruption to ward off the threat of enforcement. To the extentthat they do rely on violence and corruption as essentialelements of their business, their conduct has importance to thesociety quite apart from how these practices affect their abilityto supply drugs. Similarly, the society seems to be deeply concerned about thestructure of the illicit drug industry. Specifically, the societyseems to regard the problem as worse if the industry is highlyconcentrated and composed of a few large, durable firms than ifit were less concentrated and populated by smaller and moretransient firms. No doubt, this view derives primarily from adominant concern about the performance of the industry, and anassumption that an illicit industry, composed of a few large anddurable firms, would be more effective over the long run insupplying drugs at low cost to consumers. It is important to keepin mind, however, that a highly concentrated industry mightperform less well over the long run in delivering drugs toillicit markets than a more atomistic market. Economic theorytells us that prices would be higher in a concentrated market,and it is quite possible that innovativeness and adaptability toattacks would be less. The firms might represent more formidableenforcement targets, but the result of dismantling them might belarger and more durable than would be true in an atomisticmarket. Even if this were true, however, it seems likely that thesociety would still regard an illicit industry, composed of a fewlarge, durable firms, as worse than one composed of many smalltransient firms. The reason is that large, durable firmsconstitute a social problem independent of their ability tosupply drugs. Large, durable criminal organizations can bringmuch more powerful pressures to bear on their employees,competitors, the government officials who are pledged to attackthem, and even the communities in which they operate than couldsmaller or more transient firms. It is partly that the large,durable firms become very wealthy; partly that they can maintaintruly frightening capacities for disciplined violence; butperhaps most fundamentally that they will be around for a longtime and therefore able to reward cooperation and punishopposition that makes them so powerful. Thus, the concepts of structure, conduct and performance helpto clarify the society's objectives in dealing with the illicitdrug industry. The concerns of drug abuse policy are capturedprincipally by questions about the performance of the industry,since it is the long run performance of the industry that willdecisively shape overall levels of drug abuse. The concerns oforganized crime policy are captured principally by questionsabout conduct and structure. The concept of conduct captures theconcern about levels of violence and corruption associated withan illegal industry. The concept of structure captures thespecial concerns that are raised for organized crime policy bythe existence of very large, durable organizations, whose wealth,disciplined use of violence, and long memories make themespecially powerful. A successful supply reduction strategy,then, would leave an illicit drug industry, which is high cost,ineffective in supplying drugs to illicit markets, not veryadaptable, reluctant to rely on bribery and violence, andcomposed of small, transient firms. Competition among Objectives. We are accustomed to thinkingthat any supply reduction strategy will move us towards improvedperformance on all of these objectives, and therefore there areno trade-offs between the objectives of drug abuse policy andorganized crime control policy. We have already seen that thereis a certain tension between the aims of these two differentpolicies insofar as the criminal laws against drug distributionand use create the basic conditions under which an illicitindustry night arise. But now it is possible to see a new tensionas well, one that is not only between drug abuse policy andorganized crime control objectives, but also between differentobjectives of organized crime control policy. Ironically, a supply reduction strategy that increased thedegree of concentration in the illicit industry might achievesome important objectives of a supply reduction strategy.Economic theory predicts, for example, that the actual supply ofdrugs will be less in a concentrated industry than in a moredecentralized competitive industry. It is also likely that theviolence would be less, or at least more disciplined and focusedon those who were actually involved in the industry in a tightlyorganized, concentrated industry. Thus, a supply reductionstrategy might succeed in reducing the overall performance of theindustry and even changing its conduct to reliance on threats andbribery rather than overt violence, but do so only at the priceof increasing the size, power, and durability of criminalorganizations. Whether this would be preferred to a strategy thatreduced the concentration in the industry, but enhanced itsperformance and shifted its conduct to more random patterns ofviolence depends on how the society values these competingobjectives, and how much improved performance and violence itwould have to accept as the price of reduced concentration. Thatwould be a difficult choice. The Definition of Improvements. At any rate, the directions inwhich improvement lie, are clear, and so are the objectives of asupply reduction strategy. The first and most important objectiveis to frustrate the performance of the illicit industry - toconstrict its capacity to supply drugs to illicit markets. Thesecond is to shape the conduct of the residual industry so thatit is less violent and less corrupting. The third is to dispersethe industry so that the firms that comprise it are small andtransient rather than large and durable. How are one can go inachieving these objectives, and how sharp the trade-offs amongthem can only be answered by a close look at the factors thatshape the structure, conduct and performance of the industry. Major Factors Shaping the Industry As in any industry performance is determined at least partlyby engineering or mechanical factors: e.g., the physicalrequirements of production and distribution. To get drugs toillegal markets, firms must have access to raw materials, havethe knowledge and the equipment required to transform the rawmaterials into finished products, be able to maintain and protectinventories, and be able to transport finished products toindividual markets. In addition, the performance of the industry will be shaped byeconomic factors: i.e., the perceptions of opportunities andrisks. Those who make investments of the time and energy inproducing or diverting raw materials, in learning the techniquesand acquiring the equipment for producing illegal drugs, instoring and transporting the drugs, and so on, must have someassurance that they will make money from their investments. Theymust have some capital to give them the time and the capacity toarrange the deals that will ultimately produce satisfactoryreturns. They must also have a certain tolerance for risk - notonly the risk that they might be imprisoned for their activities,but also that they might take economic losses as a result ofsuccessful enforcement actions against them, betrayals by theirassociates, or more common economic disasters, such asshipwrecks, plane crashes, spoiled production runs, or suddenchanges in exchange rates. Unless there is a reasonable chance intheir minds that they can make enough money from illicit drugdeals to compensate them for their time and their risks, thedeals will not be made. A third factor influencing performance is the structure ofcriminal liability that surrounds the industry, for it is thelaws and the way that they are enforced that determines many ofthe opportunities and risks facing illicit drug dealers. A simpleway to think about how this factor operates is to think of thecriminal laws and the specific methods of enforcement as a kindof tax confronting the illegal dealers. To maximize their return,they seek to avoid as much of the tax as possible. They do thisby avoiding activities that are heavily taxed, by takingadvantage of loopholes in the tax laws or weakness inenforcement, by concealing as much of their operation from thetax collectors as possible, or by corrupting the tax collectors.Such activities affect both the scale and the character of theillicit industry. The Apparent Influence of Geography Geography looks like a factor that plays an important role indetermining the conduct and performance of the illicit industry.Indeed, much of our thinking about supply reduction strategies isguided by the notion that there are important "sourcecountries" that become the targets of diplomatic andenforcement initiatives. Thus, for many years, Turkey and Francewere regarded as the principal sources of heroin, although theyhave now been replaced by Mexico and Southeast Asia. Similarly,Colombia is now considered the principal source of cocaine, andJamaica a primary source of marijuana. The reason that geography seems important is that differentcountries represent different clusters of conditions that givethem a comparative advantage as a supplier of drugs to illicitmarkets in the United States. Sometimes a country becomes animportant source country because of agricultural conditions thatmake it an especially attractive (perhaps even unique) place inwhich to produce raw materials. Thus, for a while, we imaginethat opium poppies could be successfully grown in only a fewcountries in the world, and we now hope this is true of cocaleaves. In short, a country may become an importance source ofsupply due to a physical advantage. Other times it seems that a country has become a major sourceas the result of a long tradition of producing the relevant rawmaterials, or a large domestic industry that is based on them. Ineffect, the country has a unique institutional and economicadvantage because it has a large infrastructure already investedin the cultivation of the opium, coca leaves, or marijuana. Still other times, it seems that the country's advantage comesfrom week laws governing the legitimate or illicit drugindustries, or weak governmental commitment and capacity forcontrolling the illicit drug industry. Just as Las Vegas canbecome the center of gambling simply by establishing a legalregime that tolerates it, Jamaica may become a principal sourceof marijuana by being particularly lax with respect to thesuppression of illicit cultivation. Thus, while geography looks like it plays an importantindependent role in determining the character of the illicit drugmarkets, this apparent influence actually derives from the morebasic causes already noted: the physical relations governingproduction and distribution, the economic/ institutionalrelations that give economic actors reasonable assurances thatinvestments in particular activities will be rewarded, and thelegal regime that has an independent effect on the risks andopportunities confronting illicit dealers. Thus, geography maydrop out of any close analysis of the factors shaping theperformance of the illicit supply system, and be replaced by aseparate consideration of how certain countries seem to representunusually favorably combinations of the underlying causalfactors, and which ones seem particularly important. The Irrelevance of Physical Requirements While it is tempting to search for the explanation of thestructure, conduct and performance of the illicit industry in thephysical mechanics of producing and distributing drugs, there isvery little in these relationships that is unusual, or that couldconstrain or shape the performance of the industry. Many of theraw materials necessary to produce narcotics and dangerous drugsare widely available. This is true primarily because they havemany legitimate uses, but also simply because they can be grownor artificially produced in many different locations. Of course,and occasional local shortage in basic raw materials may sometimeappear. But, given the alternative sources of supply, it is hardto imagine that the shortage would last. Indeed, it is hard toimagine long run shortages in the availability of opium poppies,marijuana, coca leaves, or even chemicals used to producedsynthetic opiates, hallucinogens, and other psychoactive drugs. It is equally difficult to imagine that either the knowledgeor the equipment necessary for manufacturing illicit drugs couldbe in long run short supply. The chemical structure of theillicit drugs are well known. Indeed, they are so well known thatillicit labs are now experimenting with small manipulations ofthe chemical structure of existing drugs to determine if thenewly created drugs will produce similar or superior psychoactiveeffects. These so-called "designer drugs" challenge thelegal regime regulating drugs because they may be legal toproduce and distribute until enough experience has accumulated todeclare them a significant abuse threat. The equipment required for the production of the drugs is alsocommonplace. Indeed, heroin "labs" in Mexico oftenconsisted of little more than wash-tubs and rubber hoses. And thedrugs can be made in many different quantities with fewimplications for the costs of production. So, there seems to belittle in the technology of production that would have a decisiveimpact on the structure, conduct or performance of the industry. The Impact of Illicitness on Industry Conduct My strong conviction is that the dominant factor shaping theillicit drug industry is the simple fact that it is illicit. Thisfact has broad and significant implications for its structure,conduct and performance. The immediate consequences ofillicitness register in the conduct of the illicit firms, but thechanges in conduct have important implications for structure andperformance. The Risk of Arrest. The most obvious consequence ofillicitness is that those who produce, import, distribute or usedrugs illegally are exposed to the threat of arrest, prosecutionand imprisonment. Moreover, in some countries, they arethreatened by the seizure of any property or assets used in theirillegal drug dealing - a threat whose significance may dwarf notonly any fine they may receive, but also some jail terms. The obvious effect of threatening illicit producers,distributors and users with jail is that the dealers who remainin the business will take steps to reduce their risks, or tocompensate themselves for the risks of being is the business. Theprincipal devices for reducing risks are to keep operationssecret so that enforcement agencies cannot discover them, or tocorrupt the agencies so that even if their operations arediscovered, they are not punished. The principal devices used tokeep their operations secret are to deal with a small number ofpeople, to conceal the traces of their activities, and to screenand discipline their employees, associates and customers to makesure they are not undercover agents, and do not become policeinformants. The principal ways of corrupting enforcement agenciesare to offer money to be allowed to continue to operate, and toinform on their competitors and associates so that the police canmake arrests without harming their operations. Such efforts can only be partially effective in eliminatingthe risk of punishment. To deal in large quantities of drugs andmake money from the enterprise, one must inevitably deal with alarge number of people, only some of whom are trusted andeffectively disciplined. Thus, the risk of informants andundercover agents among one's employees, associates or customersis always present. Similarly, drug dealing always involvesleaving traces of one's activities that cannot be entirelyconcealed: physical inventories of raw materials or drugs,records of financial transactions, even records of phone callsamong the conspirators. These, too, are vulnerable to discoveryby enforcement agencies. Also, there are so many agencies andagents involved in drug enforcement activities that one can neverbe sure whether all those who pose a threat have been corrupted.Since the risk can never be quite eliminated, the dealer'sresponse is to demand additional compensation for the risks intrafficking drugs. He demands higher prices for drugs than hewould if there was no risk of going to jail. The Risk of Rip-Offs. A less obvious but by no means lessimportant consequences of the illicit status of drug production,importation and distribution is that illegal dealers areconfronted by threats from other criminals as well as byenforcement agencies. Indeed, associates, competitors andordinary armed robbers probably create greater risks for illicitdrug dealers than enforcement agencies. Partly this is becausedealers are very tempting targets. They are likely to have largeamounts of cash, or large quantities of drugs that can beconverted to cash. Also, they are unlikely to turn to enforcementagencies to help protect their operations. They have to supplyprotection against armed attack or stealing. Those in thecriminal milieu may know more than enforcement agencies about whois "holding" or currently doing business, and theseother criminals may be less constrained by the niceties of dueprocess than the enforcement agencies. Thus, other criminals maybe more strongly motivated and better positioned to attackillegal drug dealers than the enforcement agencies, and thereforepose a graver threat to the illicit dealers. The implications of this fact are that the dealers must makespecial provisions to protect themselves from this threat. To adegree, the same methods of secrecy and discipline may be ashelpful against other crooks as against the police. But it seemslikely that the threat from other crooks is more apt to be met bycapacities for violence. In general, if an armed confrontationbetween the dealers and enforcement agencies occurs, the dealersknow they will lose. They may win a local fire-fight, but thereis no way they can compete over the long run with enforcementagencies in violent confrontations. Consequently, they rely mostheavily on secrecy and corruption to deal with the threat ofenforcement. With other criminals, however, the balance of armed power isless clear. Thus, it is tempting to build capacities for violenceto protect oneself and one's business from "take-off"artists, and to establish credible threats effective againstbetrayals by associates. This capacity for violence can also beused externally to drive out competitors. But the vulnerabilityto other criminals associated with illicitness provides the mostimmediate and compelling justification for developing a capacityfor violence, as well as for secrecy and corruption. Theexistence of these capacities for violence among dealers andthose who would steal from them produces the bulk of the violencewithin the illegal drug industry. Thus, the conduct of the firms within the illicit industry isprofoundly influenced by the fact of their illicitness. They areforced to maintain secrecy, and to prevent the infiltration ofpolice agents. They must develop capacities to bribe, suborn, ormislead government agents. Also they must develop capacities forviolence to enforce contracts with associates, protect theirproperty from armed robbers, and to discipline employees.Finally, because the risks of arrest or rip-offs cannot everwholly be eliminated, they must price their products not only tocover costs, but also to compensate themselves for the risk ofarrest or financial loss they are taking by engaging in such arisky business. These effects on the conduct of firms haveimplications for structure and performance. The Impact of Illicitness on Structure The consequences of illicit status for the structure of theillicit industry are hard to estimate, for they will bedetermined by a balance of conflicting influences. On one hand,the desire to prevent the police and other criminals fromlearning about their operation will motivate illicitentrepreneurs to keep their small firms, transient, and neithervertically nor horizontally integrated. The Virtues of Small Firms and Decentralization. Smallness hasthe virtues of involving only a small number of people and asmall number of transactions. This implies both that theintrinsic vulnerability of the operations is less, and that thecontributions of any special efforts to discipline or secure theoperation will go further because there are fewer associates,employees or transactions over which to spread these efforts. Transience has similar advantages to smallness. If theproblems for illicit dealers is to avoid others knowing they arein business, they can accomplish this by getting into thebusiness and out of it before anyone knows who they are. Indeed,from the perspective of avoiding detection, the best operation isone that is both small and transient. But that firm is not worthdisrupting, also, for it could never amount to much in terms ofits ability to supply drugs, its contribution to violence andcorruption, or to become a powerful institution to the community. Vertical and horizontal disintegration also have importantadvantages in avoiding detection. A vertically integrated firmwould require some system of information-gathering andrecord-keeping to exploit the advantages of explicit coordinationacross the different phases of the operation. But these recordswould become an important source of evidence against the dealers.Similarly, almost by definition, vertically integrated firm wouldbe large and involve many transactions, and each element of thefirm would know what other elements were doing. Thus, avertically integrated firm would present more possible points ofpenetration and would be much more vulnerable to any givenpenetration, than a firm organized as a set of largely separatecells that operated relatively autonomously. Similarly, a horizontally integrated firm would also have tobe large and would have to be in contact with all firms engagedin the activities at other stages of the production process.Thus, a horizontally integrated firm in the business ofoff-loading mother ships would come to know the principalimporting firms that arranged for the mother ships to appear offthe coast, and the principal firms engaged in storage anddistribution. This would make such a firm vulnerable to betrayalby the others, compared with a firm that handled less of theoverall off-loading business. Thus, to escape detection, firms in the illicit drug industrywould choose to be small, transient and disintegrated. This, inturn, would lead to a highly fragmented - even atomistic -structure in the industry. The Virtues of Scale and Concentration. On the other hand, itis possible there are some economies of scale in the productionand distribution of illicit drugs, or some opportunities forcontrolling competition that would lead to relatively large,durable firms, and a relatively high degree of concentration inthe industry. Ironically, the principal potential for economiesof scale do not seem to lie in the areas of production ormarketing. Instead they lie in the development of capacities forcorruption and violence that will give some firms specialopportunities to operate safely and efficiently in the dangerousillicit markets. The capacity for disciplined, irresistible violence may be aparticularly important factor of production in illicit supplysystems, and may be an area where there are natural economies ofscale. As we have seen, a capacity for violence is terriblyimportant in disciplining employees to keep then from becominginformants. It is also important in being able to enforcecontracts with business associates and in protecting life andproperty from other criminals in a world where one cannot rely onthe ordinary courts and police to perform this function.Moreover, once developed for these purposes, the capacity forviolence can become important in eliminating competition, orforcing it to be small and transient rather than large anddurable. For all these reasons, a firm had a substantial capacityfor violence would have an obvious competitive advantage insupply drugs to illicit markets. To argue that violent firms would have a competitive advantageis not quite the same as saying that the obvious value of acapacity for violence will tend to produce large, durable firms,and a concentrated structure in the industry. That argument restson an additional assertion that there are economies of scale inthe development of this special capacity for violence. Thisassertion, in turn, rests on the ideal that a useful capacity forviolence consists not in the production of actual violence, butinstead in a reputation for irresistible violence that canoverwhelm (in force, viciousness, sustainability or all three)any degree of violence that another illegal entrepreneur canimagine mounting. This is important, for it is quite obvious thatreal violence can be produced quite easily and inexpensively.What is valuable violence, however, is violence that need not beused but will still intimidate and discourage others because itis there to be used and cannot be successfully resisted. To havethis capacity, a firm must have available not only a largequantity of violence and demonstrate its willingness to use it,but also be a sufficiently permanent and relentless institutionso that the possibility of an opponent challenging it andescaping without retaliation seems remote. This capacity seems to have some natural monopolisticfeatures. One can easily imagine how a single organization couldgradually corner the market for irresistible violence and createa fairly impregnable local monopoly. One can less easily butstill plausibly imagine a small number of firms with suchcapabilities co-existing in an uneasy truce, and ignoring acertain number of violations of their tacit understandings, aswell as a small amount of minor competition from transientoutsiders. What is hard to imagine as a stable equilibrium is aworld in which there are large numbers of closely matched firmsvying for the position of a recognized dominant capacity forviolence. In that world the factor of production that has value -namely, a dominating capacity for violence that is sufficient todiscipline employees, enforce contracts, and protect reliablyagainst take-offs - is not available to any firm. Each firm istherefore vulnerable to all threats that a solid reputation forirresistible violence would guard against. If the reputation for irresistible violence is valuable, ittakes substantial investment to build the capabilities, and if itonly has value when it is greater than any other competingfirm's, the importance of this factor of production will tend toproduce high degrees of concentration in the industry. This willlead to the development of a few large, durable firms in anylocal market. This is true at least in part because thisreputation for violence can substitute for a small scale inpreventing the detection of the operation. If employees,associates, competitors and customers are all afraid to giveinformation about the operations of a firm to the police or othercriminals, then it can operate at any given scale with less riskthan another firm that is similar in all respects other than itscapacity and reputation for violence. The capacity for corrupting government officials may also bean important factor of production and distribution. This mightalso be an important factor of production and distribution thatmight also tend to create larger more durable firms and higherdegrees of concentration than one might hypothesize, if one werethinking only of how the illicit firms might escape detection.The easiest way to think about the problem of corruption is toimagine that the various government officials and agencies,responsible for enforcing laws against illegal production anddistribution, have a de facto power to grant a license to illegalentrepreneurs to operate legally - or at least with no treat fromthem. Obviously, the value of this license to the illicit dealersdepends on the extent to which a given official or agencymonopolizes the legal threat to them. If a given official oragency is the only official threat against an illicit dealer, thevalue of his protection will obviously be higher than if theofficial threat against an illicit dealer, the value of hisprotection will obviously be higher than if the official or agentis only one of many potential threats against the dealer. Thus, the question of whether corruption will tend toconcentrate in the industry depends crucially on the organizationof the enforcement agencies. If the enforcement agencies wereorganized in a single agency, and if the hierarchical controlwithin the agencies was very powerful, and if the illicit firmcould corrupt that agency, it would be able to gain and hold amonopoly in the area principally by using the enforcement agencyto help it eliminate competition, while keeping it safe. If, onthe other hand, the enforcement agencies had fragmentedjurisdictions, and quite imperfect control over their agents,then they might be more vulnerable to some degree of corruption,but the significance of the corruption would be much less.Essentially, the enforcement agency could not sell an exclusiveright to operate safely. It could only sell little pieces ofinsurance against threats from specific agents or agencies. Eventhis would produce some higher degree of concentration in theindustry than if corruption were not part of the operatingstrategies of the illicit firms, since it would establish somebarriers to entry and protect the position of some firms. But itwould by no means guarantee a monopoly. The Net Result of Conflicting Pressures. Therefore, there arepressures that push the drug industry towards small firms and anatomistic structure, and others that are consistent with thedevelopment of local monopolies and relatively concentratedstructures. My strong hunch is that the net result of this willbe to produce an illicit industry that includes a heterogeneousdistribution of firms. There will be a few firms that are instrong position to exploit the economies of scale that come froma reputation for trustworthiness, and for irresistible violencein the case of betrayal. Such firms may come to account for arelatively large fraction of the drugs reaching illicit markets,but they will be a small fraction of the total number of firmsoperating. This will be true partly because it is unlikely thatthese firms will become either horizontally or verticallyintegrated. The risks of long chains of command in the case ofvertical integration, or a wide network of contacts in the caseof horizontal integration are apt to be much greater than thepotential benefits. It is also true because these firms will notbe able to prevent (and will not find it worth preventing)occasional competition from transient or small operations whichhave their own sources of supply, and their own local markets.Therefore, there will be a great many firms of different sizes inthe industry. If one were thinking about analogies from legitimateindustries, my hunch is that the best analogy might be somethinglike the real estate industry, rather than the auto industry oreven the fast-food industry. Many developers put together large,uncertain deals, rather than producing or distribution a product.Moreover, the deals are likely to involve several differentpartners, and the partnerships and roles may change from deal todeal. Those in the industry who have a reputation fortrustworthiness, "deep-pockets," strong politicalconnections, and effective lawyers are likely to account for alarge fraction of the total dollar value of the deals made. Butthere will be a great many others in the industry who do smallerdeals. The Impact of Illicitness on Performance Because illicitness affects conduct and structure, it also hasan enormously importantly impact on industry performance. Thecrucial result is that drug prices are much higher than theyotherwise would be. This is partly because the defensivestrategies mounted by dealers against enforcement agencies andother criminals translate into higher operating costs per unit ofdrug delivered, and partly because dealers demand additionalcompensation for their risks. This is shown by the fact that theprice of drugs in illicit markets is higher than the price ofequivalent drugs in legal markets by factors of 20 or 30. Almost as important is that the drugs are less convenientlyavailable than they otherwise would be. Dealers have an incentiveto conceal their activities rather than advertise then. Growth inthe market tends to happen within intimate networks of friends,rather than through public advertising and widespreadavailability. In all likelihood, these are slower and lesseffective methods of market development than the same mechanismsjoined with a legitimate distribution system. We can combine the effect on price and the effect onavailability in a single concept called the "effectiveprice" of drugs in illicit markets. That would include notonly the monetary cost, but also the amount of time a customerwould have to spend looking for the drug, and the chance that hemight fail to find the drug, or be cheated by an unscrupulousdealer. In these terms, illicitness results in much highereffective prices for illicit drugs than if they were legal. Notethat this is probably true even if publicly supported enforcementactivities were relatively ineffective. For, even if the threatfrom the enforcement agencies were removed, the threat from othercriminals would remain, and that by itself would be enough byitself to increase dramatically the effective prices of illicitdrugs. So illicitness has a profound impact on the performance ofthe industry. The fact that the price of drugs is increased by the illicitstatus of the industry is evaluated in different ways fromdifferent vantage points. Viewed from the perspective of drugabuse policy, this is desireable because it will reduce overalllevels of drug use in the population by discouraging new usersfrom continuing their drug use, and motivating older users toseek treatment and abandon their use. Viewed from the perspectiveof organized crime policy, the increased prices mean a largerflow of revenues to illicit dealers and criminal organizations.This is damaging to the objectives of organized crime policy, forit creates the impression that crime pays, and provides thenecessary financial means to enlarge illegal operations, or toconsolidate a position vis-a-vis other criminal organizations orthe enforcement agencies. Regardless of whether the economicproceeds are used by illegal dealers for consumption orinvestment, the higher revenues become a problem for organizedcrime policy. It is also possible that over the long run, the higherrevenues become a problem for drug abuse policy. This would betrue, for example, if the conspicuous consumption of wealthy drugdealers attracted more people into the industry, or if theinvestments made by more disciplined dealers allowed them notonly to dominate the supply system, but to increase its overallcapacity to supply drugs. In each case, the revenues from theindustry would be operating to increase the overall supplycapacity of the system, just as excess profits in a legitimateindustry would attract new investment into that industry. It is important to keep in mind, however, that the reasonsthat prices are high in the drug industry is precisely becausedealers are confronted by risks of violence and financial lossfrom both the government and other criminals. This fact remainstrue and continues to discourage many from entering the business.Indeed, the greater the risks, the greater the profits must be toattract any one into the business. That is the explicit purposeof making the drug business illegal and attacking itaggressively. As long as that threat remains substantial, theoverall supply capacity of the industry will be much smaller thanotherwise, even though people in the industry are making money.People do not flock to the industry, even with high prices andhigh revenues, because the risks are also high. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-47IA031-000653-B003-194http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133839 text/html 60910HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:46 GMTContent-length: 60692 The Impact of the Legitimate Drug System Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Part 2: The Impact of the Legitimate DrugSystem The last important factor shaping the structure, conduct andperformance of the illicit drug industry is the character of thelegitimate drug system that operates alongside it. Thesignificance of the legitimate drug system is most obvious fordrugs such as methadone, amphetamines and barbiturates, whichhave important medical uses, and very large legitimate productionand distribution systems. Even those drugs that do not havelegitimate medical uses often have some contact with a legitimatemarket system. Some illicit heroin, for example, comes fromlegitimate opium crops grown to produce morphine. Hallucinogensand methamphetamine are often manufactured from chemicalprecursors that have significant legitimate uses. And evenmarijuana has a legitimate sector composed of researchers who areexperimenting with its pharmacological characteristics andpotential medical applications for the control of glaucoma anddepression. The existence of a legitimate sector in which raw materials,precursors, or finished goods are produced, stored, distributedand consumed has a potentially significant impact on thecharacter of the illicit industry. The reason is that diversionfrom the legitimate market becomes an alternative to whollyillicit production and distribution as a source of supply toillicit markets. Exactly what influence will be exerted dependson the size of the legitimate market, the strength of theregulatory regime that surrounds it, and whether the legitimatesystem includes the production and distribution of finished goodsor stops some place short of this goal. For drugs which have a large, loosely regulated legitimatesupply system that includes the distribution of finished goods,diversion from legitimate sources is likely to become thedominant source of supply to illicit users. For drugs that haveonly a small legitimate sector that is limited to raw materialsor precursors, the illicit supply will be dominated by whollyillicit production and distribution. Thus, the illicit demand fortranquilizers is likely to be supplied principally by diversion.The illicit demand for hallucinogens and marijuana will beprincipally supplied by wholly illicit production anddistribution. Also, the illicit demand for amphetamines andopiate analgesics, such as heroin, morphine and methadone, willbe supplied partly by diverted legitimate drugs, and partly bywholly illicit production and distribution. The existence of a legitimate sector from which drugs may bediverted to illegal use will generally improve the performance ofthe illicit market in that drugs will be cheaper and more readilyavailable than they would be if no legitimate sector existed.This is true simply because some portion of the activitiesnecessary to produce and distribute the drug will not be hamperedby the difficulties created by illicitness. Raw materials can beacquired, transformed into finished products, stored, anddistributed with fewer worries about theft and betrayal byassociates, or disruption by enforcement officials. True,operating costs will be increased by the requirements of theregulatory regime. And true, also, someone must absorb the costsand risks of diverting the drugs to illicit markets. But in alllikelihood, these costs will be much smaller than the costsimposed on the firms, if they had to assume all of the burden ofprotecting their property and enforcing contracts as they have toin wholly illicit industry. To the extent that only a portion ofthe supply system must pay these costs, operating costs andtherefore prices should be lower in illicit markets. The existence of the legitimate industry should also make theillicit markets much more flexible. If an illicit amphetaminelaboratory finds that it cannot obtain precursors from thelegitimate market, it can always go into the business of stealingthem from the legitimate sector. Once it has the capacity tosteal precursors, the illicit firm might find it easier to stealfinished products. In short, the existence of the legitimatemarket allows illicit dealers the options of relying on theft orfraud with or without the collusion of people within thelegitimate industry to meet market demands - options that wouldnot be available if there were no legitimate market. The impact of the legitimate market on the structure of theillicit industry is also quite important. The crucial variablesare the places where leaks occur in the process of production anddistribution and the size and regularity of leaked quantities. Obviously, if only raw materials and precursors leak from thelegitimate system, the illicit system will have to developillicit production capabilities to transform the raw materialsinto finished goods. This will exert a slight centralizing trend,for the knowledge and the equipment necessary to produce thedrugs constitute a form of capital that must be amortized andthat means those who possess these will stay in business longenough and produce enough drugs to achieve this goal. Thebreak-even point may not require a very large or very durablefirm. The point is that the diversion of raw materials will beassociated with larger more durable firms than the diversion offinished goods. When finished goods are stolen, the firm may have no capitalto amortize, and may stay in business only long enough to disposeof an existing quantity. Of course, a large theft, such as atruck hijacking, can make a firm look like a major trafficker. Ifthe firm arranges to continue hijacking drug shipments, it maybecome a major drug dealer with an unusual source of supply. Inthe more likely case, however, a large theft of legitimate drugswill produce a large, but transient firm. It will go out ofbusiness shortly. The other possibilities are that small quantities of finishedgoods are diverted either continuously or irregularly from thelegitimate supply system. This form of diversion will producesmall firms that are either durable or transient depending on howfrequently they go back to the well. Thus, the supply of drugs that have legitimate uses to illicitmarkets will be decisively influenced by the size and characterof the leaks from the legitimate system. The earlier in theprocess of production and distribution the leaks occur, thelarger and more continuous they are, the more the illicit supplysystem will be composed of large durable firms. The later in theprocess of distribution, and the smaller and more erratic theleaks, the more the industry will be atomized. Thus, one mightexpect the illicit market in tranquilizers and methadone to becomposed primarily of small, transient firms fueled by smallscale thefts. The illicit markets in amphetamines andhallucinogens are likely to somewhat more concentrated with moreof the illicit supply in the hands of larger, more of the illicitsupply in the hands of larger, more durable firms. Different Drugs, Different Industries So far, our analysis of the illicit drug industry hasabstracted from the particular features of the principal drugs ofabuse in the United States. We have treated heroin, cocaine,marijuana, hallucinogens, amphetamines, barbiturates andtranquilizers in a similar analytic framework. But to analyze thesupply systems for these drugs from the same analytic perspectiveis not the same as assuming that the supply systems will besimilar. It is only to assume that they will be pushed in similardirections by the factors we have considered. Exactly how farthey will be pushed in one direction or another strongly dependson all the factors we have considered, including how zealouslythe illegal supply systems are controlled by regulatory andcriminal enforcement. Heroin Heroin, for example, seems to be primarily a problem of whollyillicit production and distribution. The fields in which theopium poppies are grown are generally illicit fields in countriesthat cannot adequately enforce existing laws prohibiting thecultivation of opium. Similarly, the processing of the raw opiuminto heroin occurs principally in foreign countries - probably toreduce the bulk of the material to facilitate internationalsmuggling. Because the volume of heroin is so small, it comesinto the United States through many different devices - in thecarry-on luggage of pilots, hidden in small cans of tomatoes andolive oil, concealed in secret compartments built into cars, andso on. In the United States the distribution systems seemmoderately tightly concentrated with significant localmonopolies, but little vertical integration. There is probablysome degree of horizontal integration at the importing stage, andit is at this stage that the concentration of the distributionsystem is probably the greatest. Perhaps the few largest firms inany given city control more than two-thirds of the total volumeof heroin in the city, with some cities in the U.S. serving astransshipment points for other cities. This relatively tight andconcentrated structure is the result of the fact that theenforcement pressures are probably still the heaviest againstheroin dealers. Cocaine The cocaine supply system seems quite similar to the one forheroin. It is principally a problem of wholly illicit productionand distribution. The sources of raw materials and finishedproducts are primarily foreign. The physical volumes to behandled are small enough to make concealment of the drugs arelatively trivial matter and to allow smugglers to use a varietyof different methods for bringing the drugs into the country. Theaverage size of the deals measured in terms of financialrequirements seem to be approximately the same as those thatoccur in the heroin market. The major difference between the heroin and the cocaine supplysystems seems to be that the cocaine system is less concentrated,and more violent than the heroin market. There seem to be manymore entrepreneurs who enter the cocaine business on a short termbasis. Moreover, none of the groups operating on a more permanentbasis seems to have established predominance in the industry.Thus, it is not surprising that this market is more violent thanthe heroin market, for there are cash, drugs and market positionup for grabs in a way unlike the heroin market. Marijuana Marijuana is similar to heroin and cocaine in that it is awholly illicit system with predominantly foreign sources of rawmaterials. Three principal differences seem to make the marijuanasupply system quite different, however. One crucial difference isthat the bulk of marijuana per dollar of value is so much greaterthan that of heroin and cocaine that the smuggling problem isenormously exacerbated. A hundred thousand dollars of heroin orcocaine can easily be held in a suitcase, but to carry a hundredthousand dollars worth of marijuana, one needs a small truck,boat or plane. Because marijuana is so much more visible thanheroin or cocaine, the primary mode of smuggling is in largeloads landed between ports of entry rather than infiltratedthrough ports of entry in the huge volume of cargo and peoplethat daily cross the U.S. borders. This also implies that manyspecialized firms might grow up to cope with the special problemsof smuggling marijuana. A second difference between heroin and cocaine on the one handand marijuana on the other is that the pressures in the illicitindustry seem less. It is not that marijuana dealers do not facesubstantial financial risks. Indeed, it seems that quite theopposite is true. The best current estimates indicate thatmarijuana dealers lose from a quarter to a third of theirshipments to enforcement agencies. Instead it seems that thelosses are primarily financial, and primarily inflicted by thegovernment. Other criminals do not seem to prey on marijuanatraffickers in the same way that they attack heroin and cocainedealers. Moreover, even if the government seizes property andarrests the dealers, the prison terms meted out to marijuanatraffickers seem less severe than for those who traffick in otherdrugs. Since the marijuana dealers face smaller and less drasticthreats from both the government and other criminals, themarijuana market seems less preoccupied by the problems ofsecrecy, discipline and security than the heroin and cocainemarkets. The net result of this is an industry that is probablyless concentrated then either the heroin and cocaine market, andalmost certainly less violent. The third important difference shaping the marijuana industryis the existence of small scale domestic production anddistribution as well as foreign. Indeed, the potential for smallscale domestic cultivation of marijuana makes the marijuanamarket more like the market for barbiturates and tranquilizersthan for heroin, because some portion of the overall illicitdemand will be met by those who grow their own. It is this factthat guarantees the overall industry cannot become veryconcentrated, just as it is the widespread availability ofbarbiturates and tranquilizers through small scale diversion fromlegitimate sources that prevents a concentrated illicit industryin these drugs from developing. Hallucinogens, Barbiturates and Amphetamines The supply system for hallucinogens seems to be primarilydomestic illicit production, although it is possible that somedrugs come from Mexico or Canada. There is a degree ofconcentration in this industry as a result of specializedknowledge, and the creation of brand names to which consumersbecome loyal. It seems to operate with relatively little relianceon either violence or bribery, probably because the industry issufficiently small to not be worth the time of enforcementofficials or other criminals. The industry that supplies barbiturates to illicit marketsseems to depend primarily on diversion from the legitimatemarket. Thus, its structure mirrors the character of the leaksfrom the legitimate system. This seems to produce a highlyatomistic market composed of small or transient firms. Again,there is little reliance on either violence or corruption becausethe economic stakes seem too small to warrant such risky conduct. The amphetamine industry seems to be a combination of thesupply system for hallucinogens and barbiturates. There seems tobe small scale illicit production and distribution that isprimarily domestic, but also from our near neighbors. There isalso diversion from the large legitimate supply system. The netresult is an industry that is high in performing, relativeatomistic in structure, and relies little on either violence orcorruption. Designing a Strategy to Attack the Illegal Drug Industry From the perspective of drug abuse policy the primaryobjective of a strategy to attack the illegal drug industry is toincrease the effective prices of drugs in illicit markets. Givenour analysis of the factors shaping the structure, conduct andperformance of the industry, it is reasonable to suppose thatmaking the production and distribution of drugs illegal will tendto make drugs more expensive and less available than they wouldbe if they were legal. The important policy question is how theresources of the government - its diplomatic initiatives, itsinterdiction efforts, and its criminal investigations - might bedeployed to maximize the impact of supply reduction efforts onthe effective prices of illicit drugs. Priorities in Attacking the Illegal Drug Industries One way to establish priorities is to determine whichparticular drugs seem to be causing the greatest social problems,and which present opportunities that would give supply reductionefforts relatively powerful leverage. The worse the drug, and themore powerful the leverage that can be exerted, the higher thepriority. Of course, the question of which drugs pose the greatestthreat to the society is much debated. One way to resolve theissue is to gauge the number of chronic users of each drug, andto weight that number by the seriousness of the health, economicand social problems that the chronic users of each drug suffer.By this reckoning, heroin, amphetamines and barbiturates tend tocome out on top as the worst drugs. A second standard would be to consider which drugs are mostwidely used, and therefore operate as the principal transmitterof an illicit drug culture and the most common introduction todrug use for young children. By this standard, marijuana andtranquilizers would probably come out on top. A third standard would be to determine which drugs seem to beassociated with the most money, violence and corruption, andattack that drug as the principal threat to the society. Thislast standard would probably make cocaine and heroin the dominanttargets of drug policy. In thinking about which of these standards night beappropriate to use in deciding which drugs caused the greatestsocial problems, it is worth trying to keep the separateobjectives of drug abuse policy and organized crime policy inmind. The principal objective of drug use abuse policy is tominimize the social problems associated with drug use. A keyinstrument of that policy are criminal laws controlling thesupply of drugs. These policies succeed when there are few peopleusing drugs in patterns that create grave threats to their healthand economic welfare. In effect, we use criminal laws andcriminal enforcement to achieve a social welfare objective. The principal objectives of organized crime policy are tosuppress the provision of illegal goods and services thatconstitute the core of organized crime, to prevent the violenceand corruption that is more characteristic of organized crimegroups than other kinds of criminal activity, and to prevent theemergence of very large, durable organizations with welldeveloped capacities for violence and corruption. There is a substantial overlap in the goals of organized crimepolicy and supply reduction efforts insofar as organized crimepolicy takes the control of the supply of drugs as an importantobjective, and insofar as the illicit supply systems includedviolence, corruption and large firms. But to the extent that thecore of organized crime policy is really concerned with thedisruption of major criminal organizations, there is an overlapbetween the core of drug abuse policy and organized crime policyonly insofar as the drugs are supplied by rich, violent andpowerful criminal organizations. As we have seen, that is true ofonly a certain number of drugs, and not necessarily the drugsthat pose the greatest threats in terms of widespread anddangerous consumption. In fact, the third standard described above is closer to adescription of the core objectives of organized crime policy thanto the core objectives of drug abuse policy. In essence, thesociety has to decide whether it means to go after the drugs thatcause it the most problem in illicit use, or whether it shouldattack the drugs that are supplied by the nastiest and toughestdealers. These are not necessarily the same. The Instruments of a Strategy Against Illicit Drug Industries Once the society has implicitly or explicitly established itsobjectives, it must then look to the available instruments of asupply reduction strategy. Again, there are many different waysone can think about the available instruments. Attacking Different Drugs. One way is to think about them interms of the particular drugs they attack. Thus, one candistinguish the instruments of heroin policy (which include theeffective control of legitimate opium in Turkey, the suppressionof illicit crops in Mexico and Afghanistan, the encouragement ofcrop substitution in Thailand, the creation of specialized heroindetecting devices at U.S. ports of entry, and the targeting ofheroin importing and distributing organizations, and even theoccasional attacks on street level dealing in notorious areas ofa city) from the instruments of a marijuana control policy (whichincludes diplomatic initiatives and foreign aid to Mexico andJamaica, the eradication of illicit fields, the training ofmarijuana sniffing dogs to stand guard at the border, themobilization of the Navy and Coast Guard to aid in theidentification of ships engaged in large scale smuggling, and soon). The point is that many policy initiatives are specific to,or have their maximum impact on, one drug rather than another,and it is a useful exercise to see how our efforts are deployedagainst particular drugs. Operating in Different Locations. A second dimension in whichstrategies against the illegal drug industry can be described andevaluated is geography. One can talk about the division betweenthe international drug control effort and the domesticactivities. Among the international efforts, one can talk aboutpolicy towards Southeast Asia (which would be principallydirected at heroin), or towards Colombia (which would beprincipally directed against cocaine), or towards Mexico (whichwould embrace heroin, marijuana and amphetamines). Within thedomain of domestic supply reduction efforts, one can discuss theallocation of enforcement efforts across major cities in theUnited States, and this, too, has implications for the differentdrugs attacked. Enforcement efforts in New York and Los Angeleswill probably give more emphasis to heroin and cocaine thanefforts in Kansas City or St. Louis. Targeting Factors of Production. A third dimension incharacterizing and analyzing supply reduction policy instrumentsis the factor of production and distribution that is theprincipal target. Thus, one can distinguish eradication and cropsubstitution programs, which are directed at raw materials; fromfinancial investigations, which attack the capital of illicitdealers; from interdiction programs which attack goods intransit, from conspiracy investigations, which are designed toimmobilize trafficking network; from street level enforcementwhich is designed to discourage advertising and the developmentof new markets. Of course, many instruments allow one to reachother targets as well as its principal target. Indeed, conspiracyinvestigations are often built from the discoveries made ininterdiction and street enforcement programs. The point is thatthese different policy instruments have different factors ofproduction as their proximate targets. To the extent that somefactors of production and distribution are scarcer than others,the relative importance of the different supply reductioninstruments in constricting the supply of drugs may be gauged andappropriate adjustments made in the supply reduction strategy. Relying on Different Agencies. A fourth way of thinking aboutsupply reduction policy instruments, and probably the mostcommon, is in terms of the agencies that are principallyresponsible for carrying out different activities within theoverall supply reduction effort. Thus, one thinks in terms of theinternational supply reduction program as the principalresponsibility of the State Department; the interdiction effortas the primary responsibility of the U.S. Customs, Border Patrol,and Coast Guard with occasional assistance from the U.S. ArmedForces; the domestic investigation program as the primaryresponsibility of DEA and the FBI; and the street levelenforcement effort as the primary responsibility of the nation'sthousands of local police departments. Thinking about the supplyreduction effort in these terms has the advantage of bringingimmediately to mind which agencies are available for supplyreduction efforts, and of suggesting approximately where they canmake a contribution both geographically and in terms of squeezingparticular factors of production and distribution. It has thedisadvantage, however, of not sharply distinguishing among thedifferent efforts in terms of either drugs or specific factors ofproduction and distribution. The Strengths and Limitations of Alternative Instruments For purposes of a broad brush strategic analysis, we will usethis last set of categories, since they are the terms in whichmost of the policy discussions at the federal level are now beingcarried out. Our task will be to determine the potential of eacharea in minimizing the supply of drugs to illicit markets in theU.S. That, in turn, depends on our ability to see how each ofthese programs affects the factors of production and distributionfor the major drugs of abuse. The International Program. The international drug controlprogram has two principal liabilities as an instrument of supplyreduction efforts. The first is that this program is inevitablyhostage to the interests and capabilities of foreign governments:the U.S. can do no more in this area than other governments willallow it to do. Of course, there are numerous ways in which theU.S. government can increase the motivation and capacities offoreign governments to control drugs that reach U.S. markets. TheU.S. can indicate the importance it attaches to drug controlamong other interests it is pursuing within a given country; orit can appeal to obligations a country has under internationaltreaties; or it can appeal to the country's self interest bydocumenting the extent of the country's domestic drug problem. Onthe capacity side, the U.S. can contribute money, or particularkinds of equipment, or technical assistance in the forms ofspecific on-site advice, or more generalized training of drugcontrol officials. These specific measures constitute the dailyactivities of the international program. In the end, though, theyrun up against more or less unmovable barriers, such as thelimited control of central governments over out-lying areas of acountry, or the inefficiency and corruption of governmentagencies. Against these obstacles there is often little that theU.S. government can do. The second limitation is that the bulk of this program seemstoo targeted on the raw materials for heroin, cocaine andmarijuana. Arguably, this is not particularly effective, sincethere is not particular reason to believe that the raw materialsfor these drugs are in long run short supply. Indeed, all ourexperience and intelligence suggests that potential growing areasfor these drugs are widespread, and that the elimination offields in one place will fairly soon be replaced by cultivationelsewhere. These limitations are sufficiently severe that it wouldprobably be a mistake to rely on the international program as theprimary instrument in a supply reduction strategy. It simplycannot do enough work reliably enough to merit that position.Having said this, however, there are some very important thingsthe international program can do that will make an importantcontribution to the overall effectiveness of supply reductionefforts. The first is that it will occasionally occur that the standardefforts of the international program suddenly become effective.This usually occurs when a country important in supplying drugsto the United States suddenly becomes highly motivated to controldrugs. When this happens, support from the United States canoften result in a significant shortage of the drug. Typically,the shortage lasts no longer than a year or two as the illicitindustry adjusts to the new conditions. But even so, thatshortage is worth producing. That is particularly true for drugsthat are unusually dependence producing, for the shortage meansthat a cohort of children in the ages of maximum vulnerabilitysquirts through that period of relative shortages with much lowerprobabilities of dependence or addiction. Indeed, this is what happened in the early part of the 1970's,when Turkey suddenly shut down its legitimate production of opiumand helped to produce a two to three year shortage in the supplyof heroin. The effect of this success was high effective pricesin the United States, reduced incidence of heroin use, and ashift to Mexico and Southeast Asia as the principal sources ofsupply, although for a while at lesser volumes than had been truewhen Turkey was also a supplier. Keeping open such opportunities, and being in a position toexploit them when they come along, are the principalcontributions of the international drug program. Hut one cannotalways count on such successes. It is important, then, that theinternational program continue, trying to increase the likelihoodthat it can occasionally produce such successes, but no oneshould rely on it as the principal supply reduction instrument. A second way that the international program can be helpful isby stepping up its efforts to support international criminalenforcement. In essence, the focus of the international programmight usefully shift from crop eradication, to efforts to denyinternational traffickers "safe havens" anywhere in theworld. This would mean concretely increased progress innegotiating extradition treaties with countries that now harbortraffickers, and improving operational coordination betweenforeign and U.S. police agencies to take advantage of bothextradition and investigations and prosecutions within the hostcountry. Such a thrust has potential for two reasons. First, it is anarrowly focused program. It has none of the logistical andbureaucratic difficulties of massive crop control programs.Second, it is targeted against a factor of production anddistribution that is probably in long run short supply, namelyindividuals with a sufficiently well established reputation forboth reliability in successful transactions and viciousness inbetrayals, who become the primary people with whom large drugdeals can be made. If this is the factor in long run short supplyin the illicit industry; and if the international program couldsqueeze this factor even more by denying notorious dealers safehavens anywhere in the world; then the international programwould have another more reliable and more powerful way of makinga contribution than cultivating the motivations and capacities offoreign governments to control illicit crops. Interdiction. In recent years, the interdiction program hasprobably been the fastest growing component of the supplyreduction effort. The growth has come primarily as a result ofengaging the U.S. Coast Guard and other military agencies in thepursuit of smugglers on the ocean and in the air. The results ofthis effort can be seen in the dramatic difference in the priceof drugs landed in the U.S. as compared with the price of drugsoff-shore, or in foreign source countries. The principal problem with interdiction as the dominantinstruction of supply reduction efforts is that it is principallyfocused on a single drug - marijuana. That is particularly trueinsofar as it concentrates on bulk shipments clandestinely landedbetween ports of entry, for marijuana is the only drug whosevolume restricts smugglers to these methods of getting the drugsacross the borders. Smugglers of heroin and cocaine have manymore options, and much more of these drugs seem to come across inrelatively small containers through ports of entry. Thus, theengagement of the Coast Guard, the Navy, the Air Force, and theFederal Aviation Administration, turns out to be an initiativethat is primarily targeted against marijuana. To the extent thatone thinks marijuana is currently a high priority drug tocontrol, this may be counted a benefit rather than a problem. Butto the extent that one thinks other drugs are higher priority, orto the extent one wanted flexible supply reduction instrumentsthat could be used for controlling several different drugs, thecurrent interdiction program has important limitations. The interdiction program has a further limitation. It isprincipally targeted on finished inventories of drugs. There is acertain, concrete satisfaction in capturing drugs that wouldotherwise reach illicit markets. But as in the case of cropelimination, one can wonder whether the inventories are what isin long run short supply. When we think about legitimate firms,we don't think of their inventories of finished goods as beingparticularly important. Obviously, the inventories have value,and to the extent they are eliminated, the firm had less capitalthan it otherwise would. But the inventories usually reflect onlya small portion of the total value of the firm. When Tylenol hadto be taken off the market, for example, no one expected thecompany to go out of business, even though a month's worth ofproduction had to be written off, and their reputation had beenseriously tarnished. Similarly, it is hard to understand why we think it is soimportant when drugs are seized. This may be important if thefirm was a short term operation, and the seized shipmentrepresented a large fraction of its total assets, but there is noparticular reason to believe this. Most of the time it seems thatshipments are divided up precisely to hedge against thepossibility that he drugs will be seized, and this seems to be alikely event. Current estimates indicate that somewhere betweenone-quarter and one-third of all marijuana shipments are seized,but this has had little impact on the effective price ofmarijuana. Thus, our experience and our reasoning suggest thatfinished goods are not a factor of production and distributionthat is in long run short supply. Consequently, a policyinstrument directed primarily against such inventories will notexert enormous leverage on the long run effective price of drugsin illicit markets. Domestic Enforcement. The standard criticism of the domesticenforcement program is that it is "too far from thesource" of drugs to allow effective control. By thisreckoning both the international and the interdiction programsare preferred instruments because they attack the chain ofproduction and distribution at an earlier stage than domesticenforcement. A second criticism is that the quantity of drugsseized in the domestic enforcement program is too low to allow itto have much effective control. A third criticism is that toomuch of the effort within the domestic enforcement program goesinto low level cases, which are farthest from the source andinvolve the smallest quantities of drugs. The difficulty with these criticisms is that they rely onassumptions - with little evidence or reasoning behind them -about the best way to control the supply of drugs. In fact, theyemphasize physical over economic relationships. A priori there isno particular reason to assume that resources are better spent"nearer the source." True, if one stops the drugsearlier rather than later on need not worry about the laterstages; and, true, the drugs may be at their maximumconcentration with respect to volume at the point they areprocessed into finished products. But neither point indicatesthat he source is the most important point to attack. As we haveseen, it may be quite difficult to mount an attack at that point.Moreover, both arguments place too much emphasis on the drugs andnot enough on the entrepreneurs and firms whose continueddetermination and adaptability keep the drugs flowing, even ifproduction runs are spoiled and inventories seized. If the principal difficulties that confront dealers inproducing and distributing drugs are risks posed by enforcementagents and other criminals, then the crucial factors ofproduction and distribution are not raw materials and technologyand warehouses, but the determination and capacity to completetransactions in this risky environment. Those may be qualitiespossessed by specific individuals or trafficking networks - notthe raw materials, not the finished inventories, not even thefinancial capital. If these observations are accurate, then anyinstrument that attacked the capacities to complete risky transactions would be more effective than those that attacked rawmaterials or inventories. It is here that domestic enforcement operations haveadvantages as an instrument in a supply reduction strategy. Theprincipal objective of domestic enforcement is the traffickersthemselves. The drugs are important only as convincing evidencethat will be sufficient to jail, and therefore presumablyimmobilize, the traffickers. In addition, the tactics of domesticenforcement operate principally on the capacity to executetransactions. The principal tactics include informants,undercover agents, and wiretap investigations. The first twoattack the ability to make transactions by forcing dealers to bewary of associates, employees and customers, since any of thesemight become an informant or an undercover agent. The third makesit difficult for traffickers to communicate efficiently withassociates, employees and customers. Therefore domesticenforcement presses hard on the factors of production anddistribution that seem in long run short supply. It is worth noting that slowing transactions and forcingdealers to be cautious has value at many different stages ofproduction and distribution. Even at the lowest levels ofdistribution there are some advantages in forcing dealers to becautious, for it prevents the aggressive recruitment of newcustomers and makes it more difficult even for regular consumersto find drugs. In short, street level enforcement increases theeffective price of drugs in illicit markets. At intermediate orhigh levels each transaction that is slowed reduces the overallcapacity of the system to supply drugs, and each traffickingnetwork that is eliminated results not only in loss of currentinventories, but also in future capacity to supply. Moreover, it is possible that the same techniques of attackingtransactions, and immobilizing those networks that have developeda continuing capacity to execute transactions in a riskyenvironment, would have enormous value in the internationalprogram as well as in the domestic one. Indeed, while one cannotassume that foreign countries have laws enforcement agencies thatallow them to attack criminal trafficking organizations, it seemsthat it is primarily convention that makes us think of theinternational program as focused on raw materials, and thedomestic program as focused on trafficking networks. Inprinciple, one could have a criminal enforcement program thatmoved across national boundaries. And that might hold the bestchance not only for minimizing the supply of drugs to illicitmarkets, but also for advancing the subjectives and using theresources of organized crime policy. An Alternative Approach to Attacking Illegal Drug Industries If the right way to think about strategies against the illegaldrug industry is to guess which factor of production anddistribution is in long run short supply and then to devise astrategy that presses hardest on that factor, and if the factorin long run short supply is the capacity to make transactionsquickly and effectively, then a different way is opened to thinkabout the strategy against the illegal drug industry.Specifically, the principal aim should be to frustratetransactions and immobilize the largest traffickingorganizations. With this as the principal aim the way that we think abouteach of the other instruments changes. Of course, theinternational efforts to control legitimate crops and eradicateillicit fields retain their special, occasional importance, andthe separate arguments for maintaining pressure at the streetlevel remain strong. But we can also see that the internationalprogram, interdiction, and domestic enforcement all representdifferent opportunities to slice into the illicit industry, andcreate possibilities for developing cases against illicittraffickers. To see how this alternative strategy would work, itis useful to introduce some different analytic terms. Patrol versus Investigation. If the goal is to immobilizetrafficking organizations that are able to complete transactionswith ease and efficiency, the central problem is to determine whothe traffickers are and to develop evidence against them. Thissounds like a problem of criminal investigation, and so it is.But all investigations must begin somewhere. In ordinary criminalinvestigations the start is usually provided by a victim orwitness to the offense or by physical evidence available at thesite of the crime. In narcotics investigations there is novictim, the witnesses are likely to be implicated in the crime,and the physical evidence will not reveal much. On the otherhand, the traffickers are likely to continue committing offenses,and therefore the opportunity to observe a crime occurring ishigh, if the enforcement agencies can get themselves intoposition to see it. In practice this means that narcotics investigations areextremely dependent on informants and undercover operators, whocan provide evidence themselves or produce sufficiently preciseand accurate information to justify a wire-tap or other lessintrusive but more expensive and less penetrating form ofsurveillance. They can position the evidence-gatheringcapabilities of enforcement agencies and how to infiltrateundercover agents into the illicit industry. The question thusbecomes how to develop and use informants and how to useinformants and how to infiltrate undercover agents into theillicit firms. One answer to that question is to attack the illicit supplysystems in the places where it is least protected. This means onthe streets in central cities where the distribution system mustfinally come into the open. Or, it means at the point that isinherently vulnerable, where drugs are moved physically from oneplace to another. Or, it means as raw materials are beingcollected from remote fields in foreign countries. Surveillanceand undercover operations conducted in these areas will not onlyfrustrate transactions at these levels, and remove small stocksof drugs, but they will also produce the rumors, the physicalevidence, and the potential informants who might provide thebasis for more intrusive and determined investigations of largernetworks. This will not always work, of course. Many people arrested atthis level will be small scale, transient operators. Others willbe employees, but they may be unable to supply information. Stillothers may know a great deal but be afraid to reveal it.Moreover, there are other ways of developing informants. One canoffer large payments to those who are greedy, or protection tothose who are afraid, or both to potentially valuable sources.And, just as low level enforcement operations against streetdealers, smugglers, and collectors in foreign countries canproduce potential informants,, all successful investigationsagainst medium and high level investigations can also yieldinformants. Therefore, successful cases can be built from manysources other than low level cases. But the argument is that a high volume enforcement effort atlow levels is often quite valuable as a source of rumors,intelligence and informants. In fact, there is an argumentsupporting low level enforcement. Even more unexpectedly, thereis an argument for a low level enforcement that is not directedor guided by intelligence about the operations of majortraffickers. The strength of investigative efforts is their capacity tomake connections among known facts and inform enforcementagencies how to position themselves to penetrate existingtrafficking organizations and develop evidence for a successfulprosecution. The weakness of investigation is that it becomesincreasingly narrow and discounts information that cannot berelated to something that is already known. In attackingsomething as mysterious and dynamic as the illicit drug industry,this tendency to become narrow is potentially very dangerous.There is always the chance that one is concentrating on only asmall piece of the overall industry and that there is a newer orbetter shielded piece that has so far escaped notice. If this istrue, the only way that enforcement agencies could discover thisis to look in areas where they didn't expect to find something.That is the role of broad, untargeted low level enforcementagencies. Like pickets and patrols sent out by a main militaryforce to maintain contact with a mysterious enemy force, agentson the street, at the border, and in the bazaars of foreigncountries help the investigative forces stay in touch with theemergence and development of new trafficking capabilities. For analytic purposes it is useful to think of these broad,low level enforcement operations as "patrol"operations, which are scanning for drug offenses, and theremaining pieces as "investigative" operations, whichcan develop the leads into powerful cases that immobilize majortrafficking organizations. Moreover, in many ways, the patroloperations perform better, if they are broad and random, ratherthan narrowly targeted. A random strategy is more successful indeterrence, and in disclosing previously unsuspected traffickingnetworks. The Role of Intelligence and Conspiracy Investigations. Totake full advantage of the potential relationship betweeninvestigative and patrol functions and to produce the maximumimpact on trafficking organizations, it is necessary that somepreviously neglected capabilities be more fully developed. Twoare particularly important: the intelligence function within theinvestigative agencies, and the capacity to develop and prosecuteconspiracy cases within investigative and prosecutorial offices. By the intelligence function, I mean the capacity to makedisciplined use of the information about trafficking networksthat is potentially available to the investigative agencies. Thisis essential not only to take full advantage of any opportunitiesthat present themselves, but also to make sure the investigativeagencies are not misled by informants. As we have seen, there isalways an incentive for traffickers to inform on theircompetitors. And there is always an incentive for enforcementagencies to use the information and keep the informant alive.This is acceptable as long as the informant is not more importantthan the traffickers he is delivering to the enforcementagencies. But if the informant is himself a dealer, then theresult of his informing looks like he and the enforcement agencyare colluding to maintain his position in the market. The onlyway to guard against this is to have relatively accurateinformation about both the informant and the target and to havesomeone other than the case agent monitoring this situation. Thatis something that a good intelligence analysis function couldprovide. The capacity to make conspiracy cases is essential becausethere are many traffickers who can be revealed only throughconspiracy indictments. They may never be in direct contact withdrugs, or with the violence and corruption that provide thestructure within which the drugs can be confidently moved fromplace to place and from person to person. In addition, conspiracycases have the advantage of simultaneously immobilizing manypieces of a trafficking network, leaving no remnants from which anew network might be constructed. If a single person is removed,he may be replaced. If the entire network is eliminated,replacement is more difficult because none of the personalrelationships that are so essential to successful traffickingremain. The challenges to investigators in making conspiracy cases arepartly matters of technique. Electronic surveillance is often anessential ingredient, as are financial investigations. And eachrequire the development of special skills. Hut producing highquality conspiracy investigations also requires a change inattitude. They require patience - including situations whereenforcement agencies allow some dealers to continue operatingeven though they are indictable. They also require riskingcertain cases that are certain, for a future case that may or maynot develop. Finally, the prosecution of conspiracy cases oftendepends on telling convincing stories rather than hard physicalevidence. Even though the stories night be a more accurateaccount of what has been happening than the hard physicalevidence, it requires a real knack for analysis and inference tomake the story solid and convincing. In short, patience, awillingness to take risks for an uncertain gain, and thought arerequired, and these are not always qualities plentiful inaction-oriented enforcement agencies. Yet, without these, theaggressive actions might have less impact than they otherwisecould. Summary and Conclusions Criminal statutes directed at illicit drug trafficking and useare an important part of drug abuse policy. If they wereperfectly effective in discouraging people from drug traffickingand drug abuse, there would be little need for any otherinstruments. The problem is that these laws are imperfectly effective: theyleave a residual market that consists of a continuing (butsmaller) demand for drugs, and a continuing (but smaller)capacity to supply drugs to that market. To deal with thecontinuing demand, the society relies on drug treatment andpreventive education programs. To deal with the continuingsupply, the country invests in diplomatic efforts to motivateforeign countries to control drugs destined for the U.S.,interdiction efforts to keep the drugs from landing on ourshores, domestic enforcement to disrupt trafficking networks anddiscourage the aggressive marketing of drugs to non-users,regulatory efforts to keep legitimate drugs contained inlegitimate channels of distribution and use. These efforts on the supply side of the illegal drug marketare helpful in achieving the purposes of drug policy. Theyincrease the price and reduce the availability of drugs, andtherefore discourage new drug use and motivate older users toabandon their drug use. But the laws create a problem fororganized crime policy, for they establish the soil from which anillegal industry can grow. The firms that continue in theindustry will make a great deal of money as compensation for therisks they run by continuing in the business. In addition, theywill engage in violence and corruption as crucial elements oftheir strategies for surviving in an illicit industry. Finally,some of the individuals and organizations involved in drugtrafficking may grow to become powerful criminal institutionsthat seem to defy effective control by law enforcement agencies.To the extent that these illicit firms become more adept atdealing drugs, they may become not only an organized crimeproblem, but an increased threat to the objectives of drug abusepolicy. Thus, the special instruments we associate with organizedcrime policy must be deployed not only to deal with the organizedcrime problem that is created by our drug abuse policy, but alsoto prevent organized criminal groups from defeating the purposesof drug abuse policy. Viewed from the perspective of drug abuse policy, the centralobjective of a strategy attacking the illegal drug industry is tominimize the capacity of the illicit drug industry to supplydrugs to illicit markets. In terms of traditional analyses ofindustrial organization, this objective can be described asminimizing the "performance" of the illicit industry. Viewed from the perspective of organized crime policy, thecentral objectives are to prevent the development of wealthy andpowerful criminal groups and to reduce the violence andcorruption associated with the illicit drug industry. Again, inthe traditional analyses of industrial organization, theseobjectives can be captured by attacking the structure and shapingthe conduct of the industry. There may be some tension between the objectives of drug abusepolicy on the one hand, and organized crime on the policy on theother. To the extent that the drug laws create the conditionsunder which an illicit industry might arise, there is an obviousconflict. Legalization of the drugs would almost certainlyincrease the number of chronic, intensive drug users andtherefore make the drug problem worse. But it would alsoeliminate drugs as an organized crime problem. Beyond thisobservation is another paradox, however. From the perspective ofdrug abuse policy, a highly concentrated industry may bepreferable to an atomized industry. A concentrated industry mightsupply fewer drugs at higher prices than an atomized industry.And, although each firm in the industry may be harder to attackeffectively, the impact of a successful attack might be largerand more enduring than the results of ten successful attacks onsmaller firms that accounted for a smaller portion of the totalsupply capacity and were easier to replace. From the perspectiveof organized crime policy, however, a concentrated industry wouldbe worse because it would imply the existence of large, enduringorganizations of substantial power and influence. What is not inconflict, however, is the need of both drug abuse policy andorganized crime policy to develop and use tactics that aresuccessful in attacking large, entrenched criminal organizations.This is useful to drug policy and essential to organized crimepolicy. In controlling the supply of drugs to illicit markets theUnited States relies on many instruments, in addition toattacks" on organized criminal groups that deal in drugs.There is an "international program" that tends to focuson the production of raw materials to produce heroin and cocaine.This has the advantage of occasionally producing a significantbut short-lived result when a foreign country's increasedmotivation and capacity to deal with the problem eliminates animportant source of supply to the U.S. But the value of theinstrument overall is limited by the widespread availability ofraw materials and the fact that U.S. objectives are alwayshostage to the motivations and capacities of foreign governments. There is also an "interdiction program" designed tointercept the drugs and shipment before they cross U.S. borders.This has the advantage of creating a significant obstacle totraffickers and inflicting economic losses on traffickers as aresult of seizures. It has the disadvantages of focusingprincipally on the inventories of drugs rather than on theorganizations that continue to send them, and of being relativelyless successful in dealing with heroin and cocaine than withmarijuana. Finally there is a "domestic enforcement program",designed to attack domestic trafficking organizations, and todiscourage the aggressive marketing of drugs through street levelenforcement. This program has the advantages of focusing on thetrafficking organizations and engaging the substantial resourcesof the nation's 400,000 local police officers. It has thedisadvantages to being only occasionally successful ineliminating major trafficking organizations. What appears to be missing in this common conception of thenation's strategy against the supply of drugs to illicit marketsis precisely the perspective that a focus on internationalcriminal organizations would bring. It seems likely that thecapacity to execute large scale transactions in the riskyenvironment of an illicit industry is in long run, short supplyin the illicit drug industry. The firms that can overcome thesedifficulties are likely to be large scale, enduring,organizations with a well established reputation for irresistibleviolence. Thus, these firms - in all likelihood, internationalfirms - should become the main targets of a supply reduction/organized crime policy. If this is the principal target, one's view of how the societyshould deploy it resources should change dramatically. Theinterdiction and domestic enforcement programs are suddenly seenprincipally as "patrol operations", which can produceintelligence and informants to be used in mounting attacks onmajor trafficking organizations. Moreover, the focus of theinternational program should shift from concerns about cropcontrol to the support of foreign enforcement efforts and thenegotiation of treaties, which would allow the more convenientprosecution of drug traffickers whose crimes cross nationalboundaries. Finally, major investments should be made in thecapabilities of intelligence agencies and an orientation towardssustained conspiracy cases among investigators and prosecutors.This strategy holds the greatest potential to achieve theobjectives of both drug abuse policy and organized crime policy.Moreover, this strategy depends most heavily on the continuingdevelopment of our capacity to deal with organized criminalgroups no matter what illegal goods and services they happen tobe supplying. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-48IA031-000653-B003-212http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133847 text/html 15575HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:33 GMTContent-length: 15357 Consultant Paper: Winning the War Against Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Winning the War Against Drugs By Mitchell S. Rosenthal, M.D. Submitted: October 1, 1985. Dr.Rosenthal is President of the Phoenix House Foundation, a drugrehabilitation program. There is a popular perception these days that America islocked in a "no win" struggle against drugs. Thisnotion of "the endless battle," in which we seem unableto prevail, that has prompted a good many lawyers, scientists,and writers to suggest that it might be time for the UnitedStates to quit. Some Americans have always believed that the use of certainillicit drugs is not such a terrible thing and others have arguedthat the government has no right to tell citizens what they canor cannot ingest. But the strongest opposition to the nation'sdrug laws and policies has come from those who believe that theyshould be scrapped because they do not work well. The latestconverts to this cause contend that legalization of marijuana andcocaine (some would include heroin) would eliminate drug profitsand crime overnight and substantially reduce the costly burden ofenforcing drug laws. The "quit now" crowd plainly does not recognize thatthere is a world of difference between "not winning" awar and "losing" one. The war against drugs, althoughit is going badly at the moment, is far from lost. But quittingnow and attempting to solve the drug crime problem throughlegalization would he tantamount to losing - at least in terms ofthe impact on drug abuse. The notion that we could make drugs legal, whilesimultaneously mounting (as some advocates of legalizationsuggest) a massive public education campaign to discourage theiruse would give cocaine and marijuana the same status ascigarettes. The most likely result, according to the formerdirector of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, would be atenfold increase in cocaine use. There would be just about asmany Americans using cocaine as now smoke cigarettes. Another reason not to give up the fight is because we can win.After more than 20 years of treating and curing drug abuse, I seeenough evidence to convince me that the war is winnable - notnow, but in time. It is winnable because what denies us victorytoday is the nature of the war we are waging and not the natureof the enemy we are fighting. The war is going badly for much the same reasons that any wargoes badly. In part, it is inappropriate strategy fighting thewrong enemy, in the wrong place and with the wrong weapons. Inpart, it is a failure of will. We are on the defensive, with battle lines stretching alongour borders. Our main weapon is interdiction. Most of the billiondollars a year the Federal government spends enforcing drug laws(two-thirds of all it spends to fight drug abuse) goes to haltthe flow of illicit drugs into our country. Yet, the drugs keep flowing, even though 13 tons of cocaineand 1,500 tons of marijuana (with a total street value of $11billion) were seized by federal agents last year. It would seemthat when $5 million or $50 million or $500 million worth ofdrugs is impounded, the total available for distribution would hereduced by a like amount. Hut that is not the case. Drugs lostthrough seizure are instantly replaced by producers andimporters. The more Federal agents seize at our end of thepipeline, the more drug traffickers feed into the other end.Although interdiction efforts have expanded dramatically and vastquantities of drugs have been seized, the flow to the street hasdiminished hardly at all, and cost to consumers has actuallyfallen. In frustration, Americans have turned their ire on producingnations. Apparently, we feel more comfortable and justifiedpressuring Colombians, Peruvians and Bolivians to stop producingcocaine than pressuring Americans to stop using it. In spite of minimal success, we remain committed to battlingdrugs primarily by reducing supply rather than by reducingdemand. Yet, the supply side is obviously harder to hit and tohurt. Producers are beyond our reach. Major dealers aresophisticated, secretive, and ruthless, willing to acceptenormous risks and enormous losses as long as profits remainequally enormous. The demand side, however, is easier to reach. It is vast,barely concealed at all these days, and it consists of the morethan 20 million Americans who now regularly use illicit drugs.What's more, the demand side is where all three weapons at ourdisposal can be deployed - not only law enforcement, but drugtreatment and drug prevention as well. Our reluctance to attack demand as vigorously as we attacksupply reflects nothing less than a failure of will - not on thepart of the administration, law enforcement agencies or drugabuse professionals, but on the part of the American public.Public attitudes and public expectations determine how we goabout fighting this war, limit how much we can do and how far wedare go. What limits drug treatment is not just reduced governmentsupport. Even if resources were available, there is no way wecould help the great majority of drug abusers in this country toovercome their drug dependency because most of them are notseeking help. They are not seeking help because society does notrequire them, and the law does not compel them. Limits on what drug prevention can accomplish reflect what canonly be called a public demand for selective prevention theprevention of some but not necessarily all drug use. Just abouteveryone wants to prevent one kind of drug use or another. Mostparents believe that kids shouldn't use drugs. Most employers areconvinced that workers ought not use them. The public in generalwould like to see criminals stop using drugs and stop stealing inorder to buy drugs. But, beyond this point, public demand softensconsiderably and attitudes become ambivalent. Nowhere is our ambivalence more evident than in our attitudestowards law enforcement. We are content with a "trickledown" approach - one that focuses almost exclusively onputting major dealers behind bars. But we learned during the daysof strict enforcement in New York State during the 1960's andfrom recent crackdowns on street dealers in New York City, thatthe real victories of law enforcement are not the number ofdealers or users arrested or convicted but the number motivatedto seek treatment. We know that when it becomes too dangerous ortoo difficult to sell drugs or to buy them, then a great deal ofdrug use will simply disappear and demand for treatment will riserapidly to the level of real need. Lenient or selective enforcement of drug laws - what amountsto non-enforcement and de facto legalization - in some areas - isa reflection of our ambivalence. It comes down to the way thatAmericans feel personally about drugs - not only about our ownuse, but about use by our grown and half-grown children and byour friends, and about what is wrongheadedly called"recreational" use of marijuana and cocaine. While itmay make us uncomfortable, most of us do not think of it in thesame way as we think about drug use by nine- and ten-year-olds orabout the heroin addiction of criminals. And we are generallyunwilling to see our friends and children at risk of arrest andprosecution because of drug use. But I do not believe we can win the war against drugs until wehave positive consensus on the strict enforcement of drug laws.However, we need not make that decision any harder than it mustbe. We don't have to agree that drug users should go to jail. Thepurpose of drug laws is not punishment - certainly not whenapplied to users. These laws serve what must be recognized as apublic health function - a means of controlling a contagiousdisease by imposing on its carriers the requirement of whateverit takes in the way of education and treatment to overcome theirdrug use. We are not likely to see this consensus come soon. Too manydrug-using young adults are still convinced they enjoy somespecial "right" to use illicit drugs and believe theycan handle them. Too many Americans are torn between the urge tocondemn behavior, of which they disapprove, and the need totolerate behavior they have somehow come to believe is a matterof individual freedom or simply none of their business. But both drug users and drug tolerators ignore the contagiousnature of drug abuse. The hostess who overlooks a little discreetafter-dinner pot-smoking or the professional who pointedlyignores covert coke-sniffing by his or her colleagues musteventually come to realize that a person can no more tolerate alittle recreational drug use than he or she can tolerate a littlerecreational smallpox. As for users, even those convinced thattheir own drug habits are under control cannot guarantee that thefriends, coworkers or teenagers they influence will be able toavoid drug dependency and the other high risks of drug use. Noris there any basis for them to believe that they will continue toenjoy immunity from the costs of drug use - if indeed they enjoyit now. Broad societal disapproval of illicit drug use is neededbefore we can come to a consensus about strict drug lawenforcement. Needless to say, active disapproval and the use ofinformal social sanctions will make more aggressive lawenforcement irrelevant in most cases. The hostess who is certainenough of her own unwillingness to tolerate pot smoking in herhome doesn't need to call the cops to keep her guests fromlighting up - no more than she need call them to stop her guestsfrom stealing the silver or spitting in the soup. Nor doprofessionals who recognize the danger of drug use to theircolleagues, need to turn to the law. They have far more effectiveways of bringing the behavior of these colleagues into line -once they accept the need to draw such a line. In many ways our society resembles the American family in the1960's. Many parents then believed they were doing their childrena favor by laying back and not taking a hard-line stand againstdrugs. They allowed youngsters to stumble through the drugexperience. Only later they came to realize the costs. Thosecosts ran high, both in chronic impairment and lost educationaland career opportunities. As a result, parental attitudes havechanged markedly. Parents are now taking the hard line, which isreally the loving line, one that shows responsible concern. More recently, the Navy has demonstrated how to go aboutattacking drug use on the demand side. While it brought heavyweapons into play - drug tests and disciplinary actions - it alsoeffectively reduced widespread tolerance for drug use. Bystressing the interdependence of seamen, the Navy began replacingthis attitude with a far more responsible one expressed by themotto: "Not on my watch, not on my ship, not in myNavy." This is the kind of attitudinal change I expect to seeoccurring throughout the country over the next decade. It isalready underway. Adolescents have become far more critical ofdrug use by their friends, and this is the result not only ofbetter drug education in the schools, but also of more awarenessof drug dangers on the street. Employers are now responding toincreasing evidence of economic costs directly attributable todrug use in the work force. So, there is every reason to believe that public attitudesabout illicit drugs will become firmer and more responsible. As aresult, the limitations on what we have been able to achievethrough prevention, through treatment, and through lawenforcement, will gradually be removed. They will no longerdictate strategy that prevent us from moving as aggressivelyagainst domestic demand as we do against foreign supply. If law enforcement is to work effectively in cooperation withtreatment and with prevention in this attack on the demand side,then we need to adopt consistent goals. While we should certainlypersist in interdiction and target major dealers, we cannot focusmost of our energy and resources on these high visibilityefforts. It is on the street that the final battle is going to bewon, and it will be won by constant pressure, over time, thatwill be felt by every drug dealer and every drug user. This kind of pressure will not result in any impressive stringof convictions, but it will respond directly to the desperateneeds of drug-ridden communities. It will strengthendrug-troubled families, and it will improve the quality of lifefor millions of Americans. This kind of pressure, supported by a popular mandate, willresult in the gradual erosion of the drug market and the gradualdecline of drug use. Demand for treatment will grow. Preventionwill cease to be selective but reach out broadly across allsociety. And drug abuse, while it may never entirely disappear,will cease to pose any substantial threat to the nation, itsyouth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-49IA031-000653-B003-231http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133854 text/html 9621HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:28 GMTContent-length: 9404 Preventing Drug Abuse: What Can We Do? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits America's Habit Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, & Organized Crime President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 Consultant Paper: Preventing Drug Abuse: What Can We Do? By Dr. Arnold M. Washton. Submitted: October 1, 1985. Dr.Washton is Director of the Addiction Research and TreatmentCenter, The Regent Hospital, New York, New York; and ResearchDirector of The National Cocaine Hotline "800-COCAINE,"Fair Oaks Hospital, Summit, New Jersey. The most dramatic increase in drug use has occurred since the1960's, a time of radical change in political and social beliefs,lifestyles and mores. Traditional values, authorities, andrestrictions on behavior were vehemently challenged. Psychoactivedrugs and the breakdown of traditional taboos against using thembecame symbols of the rebellion against the established order. Wehave come to recognize in the 1980's that we are paying a veryhigh price for the casual attitude towards drugs that developedin the 1960's. Much misinformation has been corrected, and wehave begun to formulate a more realistic appraisal of theproblem, but now we must take specific actions to reduce thedemand for drugs. Interventions that merely condemn drug use and try to frightenchildren about the potential dangers ("scare tactics")are futile. The most effective prevention strategies are thosethat address the factors that make drugs attractive and thwartthe process that leads youngsters to try them. Children use drugsfor many different reasons. Usually there are at least severalfactors that enter into the decision to experiment or continuewith drug use. Drug use itself is no evidence that parents havefailed to properly raise their children. Many children with agood family upbringing have yielded to the enormous outsidepressures to use drugs. The influence of peers can often overrideeven the best parental input. Effective drug abuse prevention must address the most basicand fundamental forces that promote drug-taking in our society.These fall into two main categories: supply and demand. Reducing Supply Reducing the supply of illicit drugs is an obvious way ofcurtailing use. Although this does little to alter the demand fordrugs, the widespread availability and abundant supplies of manydifferent types of powerful mood-altering substances makes iteasier for our citizens to become involved in drug use. Itreinforces the notion that illicit drugs are an expected part ofAmerican life. People are more likely to try drugs when they aresurrounded by them - and children are no exception. Most Americanadolescents know someone who "deals" drugs, uses drugs,or is able to get them. To counter the supply problem, we must continue to enforce andstrengthen our laws against the manufacture, sale, and possessionof drugs. We must also take a firmer stand against drug-producingcountries that receive American foreign aid. The failure of Prohibition is a dramatic example of howdifficult it is to eliminate the use of a drug by law enforcementefforts alone; especially when the drug is so well-entrenched insociety. Nonetheless, to legalize drugs, such as cocaine,marijuana, or heroin would cause nothing short of a nationaldisaster. When drugs are cheaper and more readily available, morepeople use them, become addicted to them, and suffer seriousconsequences to their health and functioning. Legalization ofdrugs would create an epidemic of unprecedented proportions. Although enforcement efforts are necessary to check abuse,they cannot prevent the problem by themselves. Neither cantreatment programs, which are utilized only after a serious drugabuse problem has been identified. Reducing Demand Prevention of drug use in the United States must focusintensively on the problem of demand. The cultural forces thatencourage and perpetuate drug use in our society must beeliminated. We must recognize that drugs have become adeeply-ingrained part of American life and that prevention cannotoccur unless social attitudes toward drug use change. Changingsocial attitudes toward drugs is a difficult undertaking, but notan impossible one. Many segments of society must become involvedin the effort. The message that drug use is unacceptable,unhealthy, and unnecessary must be communicated in a credible andconsistent manner by the family, schools, media, businesscommunity, medical and legal experts, politicians, professionalathletes, and other public figures. This message must bereflected in every aspect of American life including education,entertainment, business management practices, and lawenforcement. Being free of drugs must become a highly desirablepersonal attribute: one that is seen as mandatory for success inour society. One might hope that non-involvement with drugs wouldbecome at least as desirable as physical fitness andattractiveness. Several prevention strategies are outlined below. Recommendations 1. Public Education and Media Campaigns. The media ispotentially one of our most powerful prevention tools. It couldbe used to better educate the public about the dangers of drugsand to change attitudes about drug use through direct andindirect communications. Public service messages, educationalprograms, documentaries, and greater efforts to eliminatepro-drug programs, might help to counteract accepting attitudestoward drugs. 2. School-based Prevention Programs. Every school system inthe United States must have an active and creative drug abuseprevention program. Prevention efforts, such as saying"NO" to drugs and learning of their potential dangers,must start in the early grades, not just in high school. Studiesshow that drug use often starts before the 7th grade and that bythe time youngsters reach teenage it may be too late to changetheir attitudes about drugs or their willingness to"try" drugs. Nonetheless, early identification ofdrug-abusing youngsters and swift efforts to ameliorate theproblem are essential in our nation's high schools. In this regard, the "Student Assistance Program"(SAP) in New York's Westchester County has served as a modelprogram to other school systems around the country. The SAP isbased on the EAP (Employee Assistance Program) model usedsuccessfully in business and industry, utilizing on-sitesubstance abuse counselors, who are especially skilled atidentifying drug-abusing youngsters and providing the necessaryassistance or referral. 3. Education of Health Professionals. Despite epidemic levelsof drug abuse over the past two decades, most healthprofessionals receive no formal training in the diagnosis andtreatment of drug dependency. This situation must be corrected bymandating that a core curriculum in the clinical management ofdrug abuse problems be part of the training of physicians,nurses, psychologists, social workers, and other healthprofessionals. Drug Testing in DWIs. Currently, not a single state in the United States requires drug testing of drivers stopped for suspected driving under the influence of alcohol. Someone "stoned" on drugs may be able to pass a breathalyzer test with no difficulty, but still be too impaired to drive safely. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Government Publications | America's Habits WT01-B40-50IA087-000632-B036-35http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/args1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070527 text/html 79418HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:05:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:35 GMTContent-length: 79200 Arguments and Answers -- the drug policy debate Arguments and Answers - Page 1 by Clifford A. Schaffer This is a collection of actual arguments and answers from along chain of debates on drug policy. Somewhere in this archive,every argument you ever heard in favor of the drug war isencountered and rebutted. If I missed any, please send them to meby e-mail: schaffer@smartlink.net My opponent's comments are in boldface. My commentsare in plain text. {{1. "....After adjusting for covariants, themarijuana group showed small but statistically significantincreased risk for all three catagories of conditions(Respiratory, accidental injury, and other)."}} Other, longer studies, such as the Jamaican studies haveshown no statistically significant differences between marijuanasmokers and non-smokers, even when the marijuana smokers had anaverage daily dose about 28 times that consumed by the average USuser. Therefore, one study is not going to break the back of thecollected research on marijuana. The collected summation of marijuana research is this:"Marijuana, in its natural form, is probably the safesttherapeutically active substance known to mankind. It is saferthan many of the foods we commonly eat." -- Francis Young,Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, after two years of review of all of the evidencepresented by the DEA and by those asking for reform. That is thesame conclusion supported by every major study of drug policy. {{2. "Respiratory deposition of tar and adsorption ofcarbon monoxide in experimental subjects were four and five timeshigher, respectively, after smoking marijuana than after smokingtobacco."}} Assuming this is true, how does this prove that throwingmillions of people in prison is the best approach to the problem? {{3. "Marijuana has repeatedly been found to be thesecond most common drug, after alcohol, present in the blood ofnonfatally and fatally injured persons."}} There might be a good, logical reason for this. Marijuana isdetectable in the blood for up to two months after a personsmokes a joint, even though the high is long since gone. It maysimply be an indicator that far more people are smoking marijuanathan you thought. You also have to remember that common over thecounter drugs will make people test positive for marijuana. You will note that they did not say "drivers." Itis irrelevant what the passengers were using. And, by this sort of reasoning, the penalties for alcoholsale and possession ought to be even higher than the potpenalties. Why aren't you fighting even harder for alcoholProhibition? {{4. "Laboratory studies have shown decreaseddriving-related skills after smoking marijuana."}} Repeated real world experience has shown that marijuana isnot a major factor in traffic accidents. The reason is fairlysimple -- pot has a very mild effect on people and does notdestroy coordination the way alcohol does. The real problem hereis that the people who want to throw people in prison for drugsdo not actually know anything about the drug and its effects. {{5. "In a Swedish study following a cohort of 45,540male military conscripts for 15 years, heavier cannabis users hada nearly three times greater risk of death than nonusers....andhad an elevated risk of schizophrenia compared withnonusers."}} A Johns Hopkins study, just as credible, showed thatmarijuana smokers were more ambitious than their peers andusually succeeded better than the rest. The question here is "Death from what?" Theircannabis users could have been concentrated in those areas with ahigher risk of death, in light of the fact that they engage insomewhat more risk taking than their peers. Like, for instance,our soldiers who smoked pot in Vietnam. As for schizophrenia -- Did the pot cause the schizophrenia,or would it be more likely that a person with severe mentalproblems would try all sorts of self-medication to stop thevoices in their head? I have a relative with schizophrenia and Ican tell you what the answer is. And, if the person is developing schizophrenia -- for anyreason -- how does it help the situation to throw them in jail? {{" The insoluable particulate (tar) phase of thesmoke from marijuana contains about 50% of some carcinogenic arylhydrocarbons, including benz[a]anthracene, and benzo[a]pyrenethen the smoke from a comparable quantity of unfiltered Kentuckyreference tobacco."}} So? Should the prison sentences for tobacco be 50% of thosefor pot? Or should we also account for the fact that pot smokerstypically smoke far fewer cigarettes than a tobacco smoker? Justhow long should we put tobacco smokers in jail, anyway? {{"The smoking of one marijuana cigarette - 800 to900 mg, 1% to 3% delta-tetrahydrocannabinol - led to thedeposition in the lower respiratory tract of about a four-foldgreater quantity of insoluable particulates (tar) than smoking afiltered tobacco cigarette of comparable weight..."}} See above. {{"...the authors [Polen, et al, of the accompanyingarticle] are the first to use a systematic review of medicalrecords to assess the health consequences of marijuana...Theirfinding that near-daily marijuana smoking is a significantindependent risk factor for the development of respiratoryillness, injuries, and other medical problems requiring medicalattention CHALLENGES THE VIEW THAT MARIJUANA POSES INSIGNIFICANTHEALTH RISKS." }} It will have to do a lot of challenging, because there isalot of evidence to challenge. Actually, this is more evidencefor a change in the law because every major study of drug policysaid that prohibition only INCREASED the dangers which werealready present in illegal drugs. The more dangerous you assumethem to be, the more important it becomes to treat them in anon-criminal manner. But, of course, that is not really the point, anyway. Let'ssuppose that I totally believed everything you just said. Why doyou automatically assume that putting millions of people inprison is the best approach to the problem? If it wasn't a goodidea for alcohol, and we can see that it would be a dumb idea fortobacco, why do you suppose it is such a great idea for any otherchemical? {{So, it would appear the marijuana is more dangerous thantobacco. Itwould also appear that, given the statisticsconcerning fatal accidents, that marijuana use can be deadly.}} So how many people are actually killed by all these drugs ina typical year, anyway? And, while you're at it, there are perhaps thirty millionpeople who are regular users of pot. How many millions of peopledo you think we ought to throw in prison in order to control thisproblem? And why was the most common agricultural crop in America madeillegal in 1937 in the first place? Was it because of these"dangers", or was it for some entirely differentreason? How did the most common crop in America suddenly become adreaded menace to society? {{}}Netherlands has fewer addicts per capita than the US.So does almost every country in the world. So what?}} Gee, that would seem to argue that our prohibition isn't soeffective, wouldn't it? And you said it was easy to control!!! {{ Germany recently decriminalized possession of smallamounts of marijuana, as have several states in the U.S. Sowhat?}} Maybe you could tell me why hemp (and the other drugs forthat matter) were made illegal in the first place. {{"When a heroin addicts can get precise doses atregular intervals, he can function pretty normally." Theydon't want to get high?}} Ever heard of Dr. William Halsted? Or Senator JosephMcCarthy? What do they have in common? {{ I went and looked it up. You need 100 grams of herointo get a 5-year sentence or a whole kilo to get a 10-yearsentence. For cocaine, the figures were 500 grams and 5 kilos.That's a lot of dope.}} See the 7-8-93 op-ed piece by Federal Judge Weinstein in theNY Times. He points out that it varies from one city to another.In some major metropolitan areas, 100 pounds will not get you anyjail time, while in others, a marijuana seed might mean life inprison. {{ If there is no evidence that punishment reduces crime,we should shut down the prisons entirely.}} There are thirty million illegal drug users. Just tell me themost reasonable number to put in prison. {{ You say that junkies don't do any harm, but would youwant to live next door to one?}} A better question is if you would want to have a drug addict(William Bennett) as a drug czar? {{ I keep hearing this. No one provides any evidence. Itdoesn't seem logical that people who have so much troublesupporting a drug habit *outside* somehow acquire the necessaryincome when you lock them up.}} Talk to someone who has been in prison. {{ Then why lock up drunk drivers? Or any criminal?Generally, we lock people up because they are a menace tosociety. It is *always* possible to lose a potential"contributing member" in this way, but generally we aremore interested in the rights of potential victims: Who could beyou, me, or anyone.}} Anyone who commits an offense against another person shouldbe tried for the offense. What should be different is that aperson on cocaine who commits a crime should not get life inprison while a drunk would plead diminished capacity for the samecrime. We should have consistent standards for all drugs and weshould apply our limited resources to the part of the problemwhere it will do the most good. For example, we don't lock upwine drinkers to try to control drunk driving. Generally, we dolock people up because they are a menace to others. Of course,that never was the reason for the drug laws. You are far more likely to be the victim of something relatedto alcohol and tobacco than from the effects of the illegaldrugs. {{ The properties of heroin and alcohol are verydifferent, and the social context is also different. For example,most people can use alcohol in moderate amounts without everbecoming addicted. Also, alcohol can be brewed up in any bathtub,or derived from common products such as after-shave andmouthwash, so the potential for controlling abuse is much less.}} Yes, the properties are different. Alcohol is just asaddicting and far more damaging to the health. Yes, the social context is different. The illegal drugs wereoutlawed primarily because they were associated (wrongly) withracial minorities, while alcohol and tobacco were perceived as"white" drugs. The evidence shows that most drug users of all types use inmoderation. This can be shown quite quickly by a simplecomparison between the total number of users and the number ofaddicts. The fact that alcohol can be brewed in a bathtub is hardly asensible argument for any kind of policy. It is equallynonsensical for other drugs. Does that mean we should legalizemarijuana because people can grow it in their closet? {{ Since "every major study" agrees with you, itfollows that youagree with "every major study," forexample: * The President's Commission on Organized Crime (1986) * The National Report of the Bureau of Justice Statistics(1992) * The President's Commission on Model State Drug Laws(1993) So, can I quote these studies as authoritative, or haveyou suddenly changed your mind?}} The first study has little to do with drug policy andcannot be considered any kind of a study of the drug policyissue. The second is a statistical report with no considerationof the historical or medical aspects of the problem (or manyother aspects for that matter.) The third did not do any real research on drug policy. But, since I so rarely run into anyone who tries naminganything, I will give you credit. Let's assume, for the sake ofargument, that all three studies were about drug policy and righton the money. The score is now 10 to 3 against you. When you geta little closer I will name some more on my side. {{ I believe your chronology is wrong. I remember readinga book on the subject (_Chasing the Dragon_, as I recall), whichwas published around 1985. Unfortunately I don't have it to hand. . . But, as I recall, Britain had legalized prescriptionnarcotics in the 60s, and they were still legal at the time thebook was published. The result was an explosive increase in druguse, along with the accompanying things that drug abusers like todo: abuse their spouses, neglect their children and live off thepublic dole. I believe it was the Majors administration, sometimearound 1990, which flirted with stricter drug enforcement (stillnot very tough by American standards). Is this that what you'retalking about?}} The correct chronology is given in the text of the 60 Minutesshow contained in Hoover.zip. In the 80s, under US pressure, theBritish adopted a get-tough policy. It was a disaster, causingboth health problems and rising crime. In Liverpool at thecurrent time, they prescribe heroin and cocaine to addicts. Mostof the addicts are healthy, employed, and living with theirfamilies. One of the conditions of their treatment is that theymust not commit crimes. It works. They originally did it becauseof the AIDS infection rates, and the infection rate has droppedto less than one percent of the addicts -- while in the US therate is over fifty percent. They also found that Liverpool, whichhad become famous for crime, was suddenly peaceful again. It ishappening now and about a half dozen of my friends (includingdoctors) are now in England discussing it with them. }}The Dutch, may not be alone for long. Many otherEuropean countries are looking to decriminalization; many havesigned the Frankfort Accord agreeing that is the best approach. Idunno about that,}} The following countries have already either legalized drugsor taken steps toward legalization: The Netherlands, Germany,Switzerland, England, Italy, Spain, and Colombia. }}But it indicates that Germany is moving in the directionof common sense, while we are not. Yeah, they are liberalizinghash and persecuting the hard drug users. That's the direction ofcommon sense.}} Why is it common sense to persecute anyone? {{ Still, when soldiers returned to the States, wheredrugs were neither cheap nor easy to find, they gave up thehabit.}} The studies of the issue said that all of the soldierssurveyed reported they could get heroin after they got back anytime they wanted it. The reason they quit was because they wereno longer under stress. {{ And we also lock up left-handed people . . . as I havealready pointed out. However, there are very few people in prisonsimply for being junkies; most of them have committed otheroffenses.}} Absolutely not true. There are considerable numbers. See thetestimony of the Corrections Commissioner of New York inHoover.zip. See also the op-ed piece by Federal Judge Jack B.Weinstein in the 7-8- 93 New York Times. {{ Not at all. It is you have ignored my objection: Theargument that expensive to lock up junkies ignores the experiencewith drunk driving. The fact is that severe penalties discouragecrime, and therefore reduce the number of people who need to belocked up.}} There are thirty million illegal drug users in the US (giveor take). How many millions do you propose to lock up? {{ More deceptive figures. According to my 1993 WorldAlmanac, only 7% of prisoners serving terms of 1 year or more arein federal prisons.}} What does that have to do with the price of eggs? }}How many people must we imprison, and at what cost,before you think we will have solved the problem? --I dunno. }} You hit the nail on the head that time. You obviously neverthought about it. That is the problem in a nutshell. As PresidentNixon's commission said, the real drug problem is not marijuana,heroin, or cocaine. The real drug problem is the ignorance of ourpublic officials who have never bothered to read the evidence. {{}}There are way more alcholics than there are heroinaddicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Thishas much to do with the relative cheapness and availability ofalcohol. Do you really want to make narcotics equally cheap andavailable?}} Narcotics are freely available at reasonable prices to anyonewho wants them. {{There are way more alcoholics than there are heroinaddicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Doesn'tthat fact support continuing constraints against heroin, beforeit can cause damage on an "alcohol" scale?}} No, not necessarily, but it does make me wonder why youaren't campaigning even harder for alcohol prohibition. {{ }}Prohibition of alcohol did not work...{{{ Depends what you mean by "work".}} I will accept the Wickersham Commission's definition. Theysaid it was a hopeless disaster in all respects. {{ Alcohol consumption absolutely, positively went downduring prohibition.}} Absolutely false. The Wickersham Commission found thatalcohol use went down in the first year of Prohibition, but roseevery year thereafter, and that alcohol-related health problemswere much more severe. {{ Society, however, preferred its legal drug and repealedprohibition.}} No, the Wickersham Commission, which was originally empoweredto find ways to improve Prohibition, concluded that it washopeless folly which did more harm than if we did nothing at all. {{ It is also societies right to keep the lid on thePandora's Box of legalization of cocaine and heroin.}} So, how many millions of people should we put in prison fordrugs? {{ Clearly prohibition DID reduce consumption.}} That wasn't right the first time. It is equally wrong thesecond. {{ In Malaysia, they are executed (at least the dealersare).}} In Malaysia, the authorities kill more people for drugs thanthe drugs do. And they still have a growing problem. {{ I wouldn't be so quick to discount the deterrent effectof draconian measures.}} Neither would I. How many people do you think we ought toexecute to solve a problem that kills about 5,000 people a year? {{ I would personally love to see an intoxicant developedthat was safe, not physically addicting and doesnt make you (too)stupid. (I'm dead serious). Marijuana is almost OK, but I trulybelieve it makes one stupid (while under the influence) and a lotof kids would have their intellectual growth stunted if it werelegalized.}} The Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, after hearing years of arguments on the subject,concluded that "marijuana, in its natural form, may be thesafest therapeutically active substance known to man" andthat it is "safer than many of the foods we commonlyeat." There is no evidence to support what you said aboutintellectual growth. In fact, marijuana was a common food in the19th century. {{ Alcohol does not directly involve the brain's internal"reward via euphoria" mechanism, opiates do. They aremuch more "fun" and way more addicting.}} Nope. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs for a good discussion of the issue. {{ The Liverpudlian addicts had to first come to thedoctor for help, before being registered. Are you suggesting thatpotential heroin users come to the doctor for "controlledmedically supervised doses" before starting the habit - ordo they come after realizing they may have a problem?}} They come after they realize they have a problem. But theprogram has dried up the sellers on the street, and it hasgreatly reduced the number one source of new addicts -- oldaddicts looking for recruits to support their habit. As a result,crime rates, health problems, and addiction have droppeddramatically. {{ Is it possible that heroin, at cigarette prices, maylead to a lot of folks to suffer severe vocational andinterpersonal damage, before finally presenting themselves for"Controlled, medically supervised doses"? Theexperience during Prohibition is instructive.}} Is it possible that tobacco addicts under the same conditionswould behave in the same manner as junkies? The experience inEurope, after WWII, when tobacco was scarce is instructive. Theexperience of Prohibition is instructive. It was a failure in allrespects. {{ Despite the obvious problems associated withprohibition, the rates of cirrhosis of the liver and of wifebeating plummetted.}} Wrong. See the report of the Wickersham Commission. {{I agree that substance abuse is the trigger for muchcrime, violent and non-violent. In those cases, if you caneliminate the abuse, you probably have a much better chance ofthe individual becoming a contributing member. }} The great majority of such crime is due to the effects ofprohibition, not the effects of the drugs. {{Instead of spending the money to maintain them inprison, some sort of supervisd home confinement, coupled withvocational training, counseling for the abuse, and routine drugtesting. Clean 'em up, train 'em, put 'em to work. That may soundto simplistic, but what we're doing now isn't working, IMO. }} The vast majority of drug users do not need treatment anymore than the vast majority of wine drinkers need treatment. Forthe others, treatment is at least seven times as cost effectiveas prison, with a far greater rate of success. {{ Alcohol is addicting to those predisposed.}} Correct. {{ Heroin is addicting (if used for non-analgesicpurposes) in everyone. Cocaine is the most addictive of all.}} Wrong. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs for a good discussion. Heroin addicts commonly report thatit is much harder to kick tobacco than to kick anything else. Orsee the recent NIDA rankingsof addictive qualities. {{ Increased drinking during prohibition!! No way, noevidence, makes no sense. The logistics of obtaining, and theblack market price of alcohol during prohibition were HUGEnatural constraints on drinking for the vast majority. (ie. forall but the speakeasy crowd).}} See the Wickersham Commission report, or any of the otherstudies I have mentioned. {{ Be careful who you say things like " the deceptivething about... liver disease are DEGENERATIVE diseases which takea little while to develop" to {g}. In 20 yrs as a generalinternist, I've treated plenty of alcohol relatedliver disease.}} If you are a doctor, let me ask you a question. My mothersuffers from severe chronic pain as the result of a nerve injuryduring surgery. It is bad enough that it has driven her to thepoint of seriously considering suicide. She has been to the MayoClinic, the National Pain Institute, the USC Pain Clinic and along list of others. She has tried a long list of treatments. Youname your best list, she has tried it. The doctors, and her ownexperience, tell her that the best treatment for her condition iseither morphine or heroin. The doctors will not prescribe it toher because they are afraid of the DEA -- they have said so. TheDepartment of Health and Human Services has issued two reportswhich have stated that the undertreatment of pain is a nationaltragedy and that is caused by fear. The California MedicalAssociation recently encouraged doctors to prescribe morenarcotics and said that the reason they did not was because offear of the police. I will not ask you if you would prescribe morphine for mymother because I have asked every other doctor who has appearedhere and they all copped out. I expect you would too. Just tellme: Who should determine the medicine my mother gets -- her andher doctors -- or the police? {{ It is clear that when prohibition was repealed, liverdisease jumped up within the year, because of resumed drinking.}} No, alcohol use continued the rise that it had alreadystarted during Prohibition. And, even if this was true, are yourecommending that we bring back alcohol Prohibition? Why not? {{ I'm sorry, but the statement that heroin is harmlessflies in the face of long-agreed-on clinical experience.}} What does your clinical experience tell you about the effectsof prison? Is it beneficial or harmful to someone with a drugproblem? {{ Show me the references. I will be willing to betanything, that they are not the result of well designed trials}} Read any of the studies that I posted. I would suggest thatyou start with the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs, so you would understand how we got into this situation. By the way, did you know that the medical communityunanimously opposed these laws when they were proposed and saidthey would be a medical, social, and criminal disaster? Did youknow that one of the first actions of the drug police was to jailmore than 3,000 doctors, especially those who advocated drugtreatment? And, can you tell me why hemp is illegal? {{ Historically technical question. Shouldnt be too hardto look up. I doubt very much that it was the OVERT crime issue.Society was not much affected by bootleggers killing otherbootleggers.}} One of the major factors was a campaign to "save thechildren." You see, the bootleggers discovered that theycould escape harsh penalties by having kids do the dirty work,and there was quite a bit of concern about that. Sound familiar? {{ However one related factor may well have been societywas very concerned about corruption in the police and judiciary.It would have been scary, back then, to think this corruption wasabout to become institutionalised.}} Prohibition gave us the institution of organized crime, whichis still with us 60 years later. {{ This doesnt seem to be much of a factor, however, inour current "prohibition"}} Where have you been? The entire narcotics squad of the LACounty Sheriff was sent to prison for corruption. The situationis the same in New York and other major cities. I seriously doubtif there is an honest drug enforcement agent living. I could goon with stories of their corruption that would curl your hair. {{I don't like that picture very much at all.}} You painted a picture of what could happen. How about apicture of what IS happening? According to the current rates ofincarceration, we will put more people in prison than AdolfHitler did, including about one-half of an entire generation ofblack men. Do you want to continue with that? {{ No, only studies which are about legalizing drugsconclude that it is important to legalize them.}} You obviously have not read them, have you? {{ "Decriminalization" is not the same as"legalization." The "decriminalization" ofsmall amounts of marijuana -- reducing possession to the statusof a traffic fine -- has already been tried in several states,without stirring much controversy. This is a good deal differentfrom legalizing crack and heroin however. You really won'timpress anyone by trying to equate the two.}} The issue is not legalization or decriminalization (whateverthey may mean), because we don't know if we will do either, oranything like them. The issue is prison, because that is what weare doing now. How many millions of people do you think we oughtto put in prison? {{ What makes you think they *want* to contribute?}} What makes you think they don't? Most drug users are employedindividuals, not much different from their neighbors. {{ Not at all. Heroin is far more addictive than alcohol.}} Not true. See the recent NIDA rankings of addictivequalities. Isn't it true that an alcohol addict is far more likely todie during withdrawal than a heroin addict? {{ This makes it an important substance to control.}} Let's assume that this statement is true. Where did you getthe idea that jailing massive numbers of people is the bestmethod of control? {{ Heroin is also far less widely used than alcohol, anddomestic production is close to zero. This makes it relativelyeasy to control.}} "relatively easy to control"? Someone is out oftouch with reality here. There is no credible evidence anywherethat any of these drugs are under control. {{ You left out the key step: motivate 'em. That's thehard part.}} Yeah, it is so much easier to throw them in prison at a halfmillion dollars a pop. {{ This information is outdated. I have here a psychologytextbook, _The Mind_, by Dr. Richard M. Restak, which says:"Sigmund Freud was convinced that cocaine could be used tocure heroin addiction. . . .}} Now that you brought up Sigmund Freud, you ought to know thathe kicked the cocaine habit but died from the effects of cancercaused by his cigar smoking. He could not quit, even though mostof the lower part of his face had been removed by surgery. Whatdid you say about one drug being more addictive? By the way, if you are a doctor, you should be able to tellme who Dr. William Halsted was, and what was so remarkable abouthim. {{ I believe then you should urgently warn the people atthe Hoover Institute that this so-called expert, Cliff Schaeffer,is feeding them bad information. I have a book here about theBritish drug experience (_Living With Heroin_), which waspublished in 1988, and prescription narcotics were still legalthen. Obviously, the supposed American-style drug crack-downSchaeffer told you about didn't happen.}} My associates and I have talked directly with the Britishauthorities and some of my friends (doctors) are there right nowtalking to them. The British did try a crackdown, and it was afailure. The British Association of Chiefs of Police, as well asthe head of Interpol have now called for decriminalization. {{ These "sensible" policies led to a majorincrease in drug-related crime, according to _Living withHeroin_.}} The doctors in Liverpool and the doctors in other Europeancountries disagree. {{ Liverpool and the Netherlands are too utterly differentfrom the United States in too many ways to document here.}} So what are the specific differences that would make theirplans impossible here? {{ First offense simple possession usually just gets youprobation. Keep it up, and you'll eventually have to do some jailtime. Hardly anyone goes to prison for simple possession.}} Absolutely false. That is the reason that 52 Federal judges(about ten percent of the total Federal judiciary) have refusedto enforce the drug laws. {{ A lab. rat will starve himself pushing the cocainelever (instead of the rat chow lever) when offered the choice.This tells me that there is a whole lot more biology involved indrug addiction than simply volition.}} It seems to indicate that it gets beyond their ability toconsciously control their actions. Which makes it all the moresilly to punish them as a response. {{ How confident are you that you would remain clean ifoffered cheap legal cocaine or heroin?}} As confident as I am that I can walk past the tobacco andalcohol displays without the least desire to take either. {{ And even if you have the knowledge that lets youresist, what about the millions that dont?}} For the millions that don't, prison hardly seems theappropriate response. {{We may just have a difference in semantics, here. Ibelieve the majority of drug related crime is caused byindividuals seeking funds to support the habit.}} That is a direct result of Prohibition. Without prohibitionsuch criminal activity is not necessary. That is why the policeauthorities in the Netherlands, England, and other countries havecalled for decriminalization. {{The vast majority of individuals who drink are notalcoholics. I'm not familiar with statistics on theaddict/non-addict fractions of the total population of drugusers. The ones who need treatment are the ones whose addictionis affecting their live and the lives of those around them.}} The vast majority of drug users of all t ypes (exceptperhapstobacco) are not addicted. I agree that drug use whichgets to the point of affecting their lives or others, it is timeto change their habits. But why should there be a differentstandard for how we view that when the problem occurs because ofalcohol as opposed to cocaine or heroin? {{Thanks for your post. I also hate to think of what lifewould be like in this country if drugs were legalized. Especiallysince, if we did legalize them, it would be sooo hard to turnback.}} Well then, we could look to Europe for guidance. Most majorcountries in Europe are going toward decriminalization orlegalization and they report that it is much better than the drugwar. {{Do I want to continue with that? Of course not! Whatsane person would want to throw so many people in prison. }} Clearly, nobody. But that's what we are doing. If you reallydon't like it so much then we ought to honestly investigate ouralternatives. {{But the scenario I see, if we legalize drugs as youpropose, would be worse.}} When did I propose legalizing drugs? {{ Do you want to see this country worse off? So a lot ofpeople wouldn't go to jail. Instead, they could easily die.Abusing drugs tends to have that effect. I know - I have knownmany who have died from it. It is a terrible waste. }} So how many people actually die from drugs each year, anyway? {{ Your proposal would result in the quality of drugsgoing up, the cost of drugs in money going way down, and the risk(prison) going way down. }} Yeah, it would probably eliminate most of the bathtub gin andwood alcohol which is sold to unsuspecting buyers, it wouldeliminate the Mafia's prime source of revenue, and it would keepa lot of little people from having their lives ruined with astretch in prison. {{ Instead of government programs to fight drug use, therewould be advertising campaigns to encourage drug use.}} Who said that? You are assuming an awful lot that I did notsay. {{ As you propose legalizing drug use, you must considerthe fact, that due to all these facts, drugs use would soar.}} No, that is simply not true. In areas which have changedtheir laws, drug use has stayed the same or gone down. Every major study of drug policy agreed that there was noevidence to support your conclusion. Furthermore, they agreedthat EVEN IF drug use did go up, the benefits ofdecriminalization would be so great that it would far outweighthe problems of increased use. {{I think thowing drug users in prison is a terriblewaste. I think legalizing drugs is much worse.}} I agree with you on the first point. There never was a goodreason to start this policy in the first place. But those aren'tthe only two options. {{Oh yes, your stat on one-half of a generation of blackmen interested me. Are you saying that an absolute minimum of 50%of black males are drug abusers? I assume many get away with it,and don't go to prison, so what is the actual figure??? }} The actual figures appear to be about the same as for thewhite population. However, the drug laws were originally intendedto target minorities (look it up) and they target minoritiesabove all other groups today. For example, about 95 percent ofall the people sentenced under the mandatory minimums are blackmen. Over time, because of the police pressure on drugs, andbecause of the limited economic opportunities for black men, manyof them will turn to drug dealing as a way to make a living andthen, with the first stint in jail their future is formed. Blackmen who have been to prison are virtually permanentlyunemployable, so they return to the streets and act as bad rolemodels for the kids. {{}}Legalization will flood the market place with cheaperdrugs --thats the box I want to keep the lid on. Interestingarticle in the _Journal of Drug Issues_ (Spring 1993) analyzesthe issue on the basis of dynamic simulation modeling andconcludes: "The model suggests that elimination of drugseizures by itself would pose little risk of increasedprevalence, but neither would it alleviate the load on thecriminal justice system. A policy of reduced arrests at theretail level probably would reduce the criminal justice load, butwould also lead to a relative increase in cocaine use andaddiction by a factor of two or three or more. A more sweepingpolicy that eliminates both seizures and arrests would certainlyreduce the criminal justice load, but would lead to a relativeincrease in cocaine use and addiction by a factor of four toeight or more."}} So, under the worst circumstances they cite, there would beperhaps 10,000 to 20,000 deaths per year from cocaine (4 to 8times the current 2,500), compared to more than 400,000 fortobacco, and more than 100,000 for alcohol. For heroin thenumbers would be similar, and for marijuana 4 to 8 times zero isstill zero. On the other hand, we would not have an expensive andfutile policy to put millions of people in prison. In fact, forthe same money that it took to put one person in prison we couldprovide treatment for about one hundred. Relative to your earlier statements on treatment, perhaps youmissed the recent study that said that treatment saves sevendollars in related social costs for every dollar spent ontreatment. On the other hand, prison costs an additional fifteendollars for every dollar spent on prison. {{ I've seen you in these discussions before, and peoplehave gone over the fiscal issues for addicts ad nauseam. Try itagain; maybe you'll make more sense this time.}} OK, let's start out with the simple aspects. How many peopledo you think we ought to throw in prison? }} And why do they steal money to buy drugs?}} Because the drugs are illegal and therefore higher priced. {{ I do have an interesting book here, called _Living WithHeroin_ which studied the drug situation in the English town ofWirral. On page 99, there is a report which shows that, . . . The'extra' crime Wirral has experienced in recent years appears tobe closely related to the community's heroin 'epidemic.'"}} Liverpool found that their addiction and crime went up asdrug enforcement went up. They found it just about disappearedwhen they took their current approach. It may also interest youto know that the British Association of Chiefs of Police and thehead of Interpol have both come out for decriminalization.Apparently they know something you don't. {{ What about the legalized prescription-narcotics?Doctors are getting burned out .. .}} Not so in Liverpool. The doctors report a high rate ofsuccess with their patients, perhaps because they base theprescription on the addicts continued good behavior. {{ Junkies just are not good patients. Actually, theyaren't really "patients" at all. . . .}} Yeah? I could have guessed that. I also find most of thempersonally distasteful. That still does not mean that the bestapproach to the problem is to try to throw them all in prison. {{According to the 1992 report of the Bureau of JusticeStatistics, the number of individuals surveyed (18-25 age group)who reported using an illicit drug in the past month hasdramatically decreased:}} Do you thnk it may have anything to do with the surveyprocess? For example, with increasing penalties, and increasingpublicity about the penalties, they call people up at random andask them if they have used any illegal drugs (committed a felony)in the last month. I know what I would tell you, regardless ofthe truth. From what I have seen of that age group (having fourdaughters in that age group) the use habits are not terriblydifferent than they were in the 60's -- but none of them wouldadmit it to a telephone interviewer, either. {{ The United States unfortunately has a far higher crimerate than other nations; this accounts for the higherincarceration rate.}} That was not true until the war on drugs went into high gearand it is currently true only because of the war on durgs. {{ Most prisoners are not convicted of drug-relatedoffenses. }} Correct, but the largest single portion are and nearly all ofthe rise in prison population over the last fifteen years can beattributed to drug offenses. {{ The high rate of recidivism is not due to the weaknessof the prison system, but the broader failures of Americansociety. Poverty, poor education, the lack of family support, theprevalence of narcotics and a tradition of violence combine toproduce a high crime rate, which is not susceptible to any easysolution.}} Perhaps you did not see the 60 Minutes piece on Pelican Bay.They showed a series of convicts being released from California'stoughest prison. They were put out at the bus stop with $200 (outof which they had to buy their only civilian clothes) with noinstructions, help, advice, or anything else. They had no jobskills, little education, and no real chance at employment anywaybecause of their prison record. What do you expect they would do? {{* To begin with, heroin is one of the most powerfuldrugs known to man. The effect of a heroin dose is to flood thebody with endorphins. This is incapacitating in the short run andcan lead to long term personality changes.}} Wrong. I can cite a whole long list of internationallyrecognized medical experts in the field who state that, exceptfor the fact that heroin produces addiction, otherwise it is"harmless". Their words, not mine. Can you tell me whoDr. William Halsted is? {{* Heroin is also extremely addictive.}} True, but no more than alcohol or tobacco {{The overwhelming majority of heroin users becomeaddicts.}} Absolutely false. There is no evidence to support thisnotion. {{* Heroin is incredibly dangerous. A dose that is normalfor one addict may kill another. Even a "normal" dose,to which an addict has long been accustomed, can kill him indifferent environmental circumstances.}} See above about "harmless." The doctors inLiverpool state that they have patients on "massivedoses" with no risk of overdose. They say "heroin isnot a dangerous drug" and they prescribe it every day. Thenumber of people killed by heroin in the US runs about 2,000 ayear or about one half of one percent of the number killed bytobacco. Aspirin also kills about 2,000 people a year. TheConsumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs investigatedthe issue of heroin "overdoses" and did not find asingle instance which they believed could be attributed to a true"overdose". Nearly all of the "overdoses",they said, had symptoms which were fundamentally incompatiblewith an overdose, such as instant death, or pulmonary edema. Theysaid their research showed that the most probable cause of thesedeaths was the impurities mixed with the heroin, not the her oinitself. As the doctors in England put it, if an addict is buyingheroin on the black market which is 10 percent heroin and 90percent cement, it does not take a genius to figure out what isgoing to cause the most problems. The low number of deaths from heroin is all the moreremarkable because it is usually taken in the most dangerousmanner possible. {{* Tolerance for heroin declines rapidly afterwithdrawal. A junkie who abstains for only a short time can killhimself with a "normal" dose when he resumes.}} False. See above. {{* Even if the addict takes a "normal" dose ina stable environment, the lethal dose is not much greater thanthe effective dose, so the chances of a fatal miscalculationremain high.}} False again. See above. {{* Beyond that is the effect of withdrawal, includingchills, runny nose, aching, abdominal cramps, vomiting anddiarrhea. Insomnia and irritability may persist for weeks.}} My mother-in-law gets that when she gives up her morningcoffee. Should we put her in prison to improve her mood? {{* Withdrawal symptoms may be reoccur long after the drugis withdrawn if the addict experiences environmental cues relatedto his former drug experience.}} Same is true with any other addictive drug. Talk toex-smokers. {{* Street heroin is likely to contain impurities,anything from quinine to rat poison.}} True, which is why every major study of the issue said thatProhibition causes more problems than it solves. {{* Self-administered injections are also dangerous, oftenleading to septisemia, endocarditis, damaged veins, hepatitis orAIDS.}} More reasons why the doctors in Liverpool decided to take theapproach they did and why the cities of Los Angeles and SanFrancisco have decided to openly violate state drug laws (at theurging of the medical community) to properly address the issue. {{* The addict lifestyle is unhealthy. Doing heroin is notconducive to balanced diets, regular exercise, safe sex norregular check-ups. Addicts often experience health problems notdirectly related to drugs.}} So let's throw them in prison to improve their health? Doesnot make sense. {{ The drug policy of the United States is to punishdealers severely. However, *users* face little or no punishment.}} There are tens of thousands of people now in prison who knowyou are wrong. One woman got a mandatory minimum of ten years,even though she was not a user or a dealer. {{ Hence, demand remains high. Economic theory predictsthat where there is a high demand, there *will* be a supply . . .The principle effect of our enforcement policy is to raise theprice.}} Now that doesn't sound like a very effective approach, doesit? We might have done just as well by taxing it. {{ Strict drug laws have practically eliminated narcoticsin Singapore and Turkey, which were once important centers of thedrug trade.}} Actually, no. And these countries kill more people than thedrugs do. Is that what you want? {{}}Sixty Minutes corroborated Schaeffer's version.Wouldn't be the first time they screwed up. Did you see theepisode on Dungeons & Dragons?}} As I said in another message -- we talked to the docto rsinvolved personally. Those doctors confirmed that 60 Minutes wasaccurate. {{ My point was, when Americans moved from a loose-drugenvironment (Viet Nam) to a tight-drug environment (the U.S.)they gave up the habit. }} As stated before, the studies of this phenomenon found it hadnothing to do with availability because all the returningsoldiers reported that they could get heroin any time they wantedin the US, they just did not want it anymore. {{ Holland is a very small country, with a culturesignificantly different from the United States. In any case, youhave not provided any figures to support your contention thatdrug use didn't increase in Holland after legalization.}} I offered to put you in touch with the Dutch authorities soyou can ask them yourselves. One of them volunteered to come tothe United States to speak for us because he wanted to stop thiskind of disinformation. {{ I don't have that study (of over 20 years ago) here,but I'm old enough to remember that Nixon was greatly embarrassedwhen his commission recommended decriminalizing marijuana. It didnor recommend legalizing narcotics.}} You may also remember that the commission was composedentirely of Nixon's handpicked law and order conservatives andthey refused to even hear testimony from anyone who supportedlegalization or decriminalization. Still, they concluded therewas no real choice in the matter. As they said, the real drugproblem is not heroin, or cocaine, or marijuana. The realproblem, they said, is the ignorance of our public officials whohave never bothered to read the evidence. Nixon refused to evenread his own report. {{ But you apparently do not understand the differencebetween marijuana and narcotics. Allow me to explain. Marijuanais a herbaceous plant which grows wild in the United States andis easily cultivated. It is not highly toxic nor highlyaddictive.}} Then maybe you can explain to me how hemp became illegal. {{ Narcotics are derived from the opium poppy or from thecoca plant, which are not grown in the United States, and whichmuch be subjected to an elaborate refining process beforeconsumption. Narcotics take various forms, all of them far moretoxic and addictive than marijuana.}} Nothing derived from the coca plant is a"narcotic". It is defined that way in law, but alwayshas been incorrect. Seeing as how there has never been a recorded human death dueto marijuana, almost anything would be more toxic. {{ While young and naive people may easily leap to theconclusion that all drugs are the same, this is simply not thecase.}} True, alcohol and tobacco are far more dangerous than most ofthe illegal drugs. {{ None of your "credible studies" support thepoint you are trying to make. Not one advocates legalizingnarcotics.}} Which ones have you read, and what did they say? (I will betI get a short answer, or none at all, to that question.) ((Note: When I pressed my opponent on this point, heultimately admitted he had never read any of them.)) {{ This program was only recently adopted, so we don'tknow yet how well it works, but it certainly is not simply"being locked ia a cage."}} Check that again. Most prisons are so overcrowded that thereare no rehabilitation efforts of any kind. Those words on paperthat you sent are nice, but they don't mean s**t in the realityof today's prisons. {{ The experience of a recovering alcoholic may be similarto that of a heroin addict, but the fact is that mostalcohol-users never become alcoholics. Most heroin-users dobecome addicts.}} False. See the references cited earlier. {{ The error of our present drug policy is that we punishthe dealers, but fail to effectively punish the users. Dealingdrugs is a high- risk activity; using them is low-risk.Therefore, there continues to be a demand for drugs. The maineffect of our policy is to raise the price.}} There are thirty million drug users. How many millions do youthink we ought to throw in prison? {{I assume you are not just being cute, and therefore youdo not propose legalizing drugs. Excuse me for misreading you. Iam glad you want to keep them illegal. }} I did not say that either. Please read my other message toyou. }}So how many people actually die from drugs each year,anyway? {{Good question! I haven't a clue. But neither do you. Inyour stats on drug caused deaths, what is included? If a heroinaddict gets so run down he dies of pneumonia, is that listed asheroin caused? }} The official Federal figures, which have been prettyconsistent for a long time show the following approximate annualdeath rate: Tobacco -- 400,000 Alcohol - 100,000 Sidestream tobacco smoke --- 3,000 to 50,000 Prescription drugs - at least 10,000 All illegal drugs combined -- 4,500 Cocaine - 2,500 Aspirin -- 2,000 Heroin - 2,000 Marijuana - No recorded deaths in human history. The above figures do not include pneumonia type deaths. TheAMA published figures recently which stated that the total of allsuch deaths for illegal drugs was about 20,000, still only asmall fraction of the damage caused by alcohol and tobacco. As Ihave pointed out in other messages, there is a good deal ofresearch to suggest that making drugs illegal increases thehazards of drugs -- such as impure bathtub gin duringprohibition. {{There were approximately 25,000 deaths on the highwaylast year in which at least one driver was drunk. Were thoselisted as alcohol caused deaths? }} No, they were not listed as such in figures I gave above. {{ I don't know the numbers, but I know that your figuresare low. }} Then how do you know my figures are low? {{ I also know that any drug caused death is a waste of alife. You keep asking, over and over, how many people do we haveto throw in prison. Let me ask you - how many deaths will it takefor you to cry "Enough!"}} Enough what? At the current rate we can't enforce this law nomatter how many people it kills. There just aren't enough jailcells available to solve the problem this way and there is no waywe can build them. It doesn't matter what you want to do, it is amatter of what you can do -- and there is no way we can solve thedrug problem with prison. The reason I keep asking this question is a simple one. Youcan figure out yourself what a good policy would be if you willjust seriously address this question. There are thirty milliondrug users out there. We are currently working on putting an evenmillion of them in prison, with no perceivable difference in theproblem on the streets. Should we put five, ten, or twentymillion people in prison? Just tell me what the most reasonablenumber is and you will have figured out why this policy cannotwork. {{ Naturally, the people who were running the program gavean objective account of the results, and of course a message froman e-mail friend in Liverpool settles the issue. There is reallyno need to read any academic studies from Liverpool University;you can learn everything you need to know just by watchingtelevision.}} Well, no, actually you would be better off to go to Liverpooland talk to both the medical and police authorities there -- as afew of my close personal friends are doing right now. One, by theway, is a member of the Board of Directors of the CaliforniaAcademy of Family Physicians. But, he has already talked with thedoctors and other officials there and confirmed that the 60Minutes show is an accurate portrayal. {{ If you want it compared, then it's practicallyidentical, otherwise it's "utterly different."}} Kinda sums up your attitude about comparing us with othercountries, doesn't it? Singapore and Turkey are good comparisonsbut the Netherlands is not. {{ Surprise! The study I have been referring too comesfrom Wirral, which happens to be a suburb of Liverpool. Youinsist, without having seen it, that this study is mistaken.However the information from Liverpool, which you know about froma 15-minute television episode, must be good and also relevant tothe situation in America.}} Then why did the British Association of Chiefs of Police --including the Liverpool Chief of Police -- vote fordecriminalization? As I said above, members of our group are overthere right now - - for the second time -- talking with theofficials there. {{ You don't see any danger, then, from extrapolating froma small, homogenous country to a large, unhomogenous one?}} Considering the same thing is happening all over Europe, thatkind of equates to a large, unhomogenous one, doesn't it? And, bythe way, what is the exact difference which would keep theirapproaches from producing benefits here? That is, assuming youknow enough about what is happening over there to know thedifference. {{ They "go to jail" quite frequently; theydon't do much prison time unless they deal or commit some othercrime.}} There are at least 52 Federal judges who disagree with you. Iwill take their word, and the word of the New York StateCorrections Commissioner, over yours. {{ Prescript ion was a miserable failure in England,according to _Living With Heroin_.}} Check again, and this time talk to some of the peopleactually involved, as we have done. {{ By and large, the Legalizers are disturbed, unhappypeople who have friends and loved ones who are in prison orstrung out. The aim of the Legalizers is simply to spread themisery around as much as possible. The more druggies there are,the more "normal" it is. The farther the web ofdestruction spreads, the better. The more people they can ruinand destroy, they happier they will be. The driving force behindlegalization is Revenge.}} Now we come down to the real driving force behind drugprohibition -- bigotry and ignorance. Do you really think that itis the desire of such organizations as the British Association ofChiefs of Police? {{ To advocate legalizing narcotics isn't politicalsuicide (the surgeon general did it) . . . but it is incrediblydumb.}} No she did not. I suppose then, that the British Associationof Chiefs of Police, the head of Interpol, and the ColombianAttorney General, as well as the California Medical Association,the California Society of Addiction Medicine, etc., etc., etc.,etc., are incredibly dumb? (I could go on with a list of about 40pages of such people, but why belabor the point?) {{ If I were strung out, it's entirely possible my ownfamily would turn me in. Lots of druggies get turned in by theirown families; it's the only way to ensure treatment.}} Judge Gray was on a radio show one night and one of thecallers was a heroin addict who wanted help to get off drugs. Hesaid he had called the police to ask for help but they just threwhim in jail when he was desperately ill (with things other thandrugs), he got a criminal conviction and no help at all. The pity is that people who think they ought to throw peoplein jail "for their own good" hardly ever get the samefavor granted to them. {{ Interesting study. The fact that everyone is doingdrugs has "nothing to do with drug availability."Presumably, then, they would do just as much if there were nodrugs to be found . . . clever.}} That is not going to happen, so why worry about it? {{ Even the most strung-out junkie still wants to gethigh. They keep increasing their dosage, every chance they get.Higher dosage -}more drug tolerance -} fewer highs -} higherdosage. It's a vicious circle.}} So the solution is to throw millions of people in prison? {{ Heh, half of all drug arrests are for minors. How doyou propose to legalize drugs for adults and keep them away fromthe kids?}} You admit it is not happening under the current system, sowhat's the difference? You can't think of anyone who couldcontrol the sales to children better than the current people whosell drugs, right? {{ "Worth more" means more expensive. Moreexpensive means less demand . . . even if one assumes that peoplein prison have just as to spend as those outside . . .}} More expensive means more profits -- enough to corrupt entirelaw enforcement agencies, like the LA County Sheriffs who went toprison. {{Perhaps you are correct in saying the vast majoritywouldn't become addicted. Perhaps. But then, I didn't like iteither, and I did become an addict. Was one for about 12 years.}} It is as illegal as it can be and that didn't stop you, didit? What makes you think it stops anyone else? Our policy, as itis, does not seem to have benefited you. Would your life have been improved if you had spent twentyyears in prison? By what you are recommending, you still probablywould not be out on the streets to engage in this conversation.And, couldn't you still get your drugs if you decided you wantedto? {{ I don't believe a non addict ever truly understandswhat it is like.}} On the other hand, maybe it is the addict who does notunderstand. In general, I don't believe that becoming an addictgives anyone any great insights into national policy. That isgiving more credit to drugs than they deserve. {{ When you and Mona say that it isn't magical, you don'tknow what you are talking about. When the first buzz of the drughits me, I become alive, and feel that I have become reallyhuman. When straight, I do not have that feeling. }} That is not my experience with any of the drugs I have triedand it is not the experience of the majority of people I know. Ifyou do not have the feeling of being human when you are straightthen it seems the problem is there whether you have the drug ornot. I (and most people I know) feel alive all the time so thereis not much need for drugs of any sort. {{ I continued using while convinced that I would die fromit. }} So prison, by comparison, would not do nearly as much todissuade you, would it? {{ However - I very rarely drove while high, because offear of getting caught. Addiction is _not_ logical. }} Another good reason why stiff penalties are unlikely todissuade addicts from using. Their behavior is not logical. {{ If it is legalized, there will be folks who will justtry it to see what it is like, and will never be straight again.You do not account for those people. }} Yes I do. I don't like their behavior but I don't pretendthat putting them in prison is the proper approach to theirproblem, either. {{Drugs _are_ magical to the addict. }} Lots of things are magical to the addict. The addicts I haveknown used drugs of all types without regard for much ofanything. If they could not get heroin they would do other thingssuch as sniff gasoline, or inject coffee (quite a rush, they tellme). That still does not mean that it is a good idea to throwthem in prison. {{}}As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noblegoal. Sarcasm does not become you. If you never want to inflictpain, then never raise a child. Never become a supervisor. Neverperform any function where you have the responsibility to modifysomeone's behaviour. Pain, whether it be a swat on the butt, awritten reprimand, or a jail term, is an integral part ofbehaviour modification.}} I don't believe in inflicting pain to the point where itrenders someone permanently unemployable and submits them tothings like gang rape, for trivial causes. Punishment, when used,should be corrective, not destructive. {{I issue a mild protest over your figures on black maledrug use. You said 50% go to prison for drug abuse. Now you say50% go to prison period, with drug use the single biggest cause.But it is not a big point - I was just very shocked at your stat.}} No, you misinterpreted. I am very careful about what I say onthis subject, because I have been saying it for a long time tolots of people. {{The two most dangerous? Do you think smoking a cigaretteis as dangerous as free basing cocaine? C'mon Cliff! Sure, a lotmore people die from tobacco, but that is because a whole lotmore people use that. Tobacco is legal and marketed. That issomething I want to avoid for cocaine.}} Compare the death rates. The death rate, per user, forcocaine is less than that for tobacco. And, just for interest, Iquote from a study done in 1967 - "Cigarette smoking isunquestionably more damaging to the health than heroin." --Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie Nyswander, Rockefeller Univ. {{What do you think about increasing educational efforts?Teach school kids more about it. Pound home what it can do, andwhat help is available. }} As all of the major studies have said, most of theeducational efforts have been based around ridiculous scaretactics which the kids soon discovered were hokey anddisregarded. The main problem is a massive lack of accurateinformation by the people teaching the courses. {{What about more money to help folks get straight? Ithink it would be poetic to increase the taxes on tobacco andalcohol to pay for this. }} A recent Rand study showed that every dollar spent ontreatment saved seven dollars in related social costs. How aboutjust increasing the taxes on alcohol and tobacco until they paytheir own costs? {{Judge Gray's idea is intriguing. If we were to go tolegalization, that would be a much better way to handle it thenjust turning it over to the market. Of course, that would makethe government our pushers. Sounds a little scary. }} His basic thought is that drugs are here anyway, so we shouldnot kid ourselves that we are stopping them. The truth is that wecurrentlyinflict smaller losses (percentage-wise) on the drugdealers than K-Mart suffers from shoplifters. As you probablyknow, shoplifters are not about to put K-Mart out of business.Given the fact that they will be here forever, let's at leastguarantee that there are pure, reliable sources which will notmake the related problems worse, and which will provide a taxbasis for providing treatment. Keep in mind that Judge Gray is a former prosecutor withnumerous drug convictions. He has also sentenced more than hisshare of people to prison for drug offenses, and is not regardedas lenient. When he first came out for a change in policy a little overtwo years ago, he was vilified by all kinds of people. He justgot back from the State Bar Convention and reported that theatmosphere has changed completely. He says he is getting more andmore support from other judges and law enforcement officials.They don't all agree on what would be a better response, but theyagree that our current policy is a failure and should beabandoned. {{As to your repeated mentioning of the Netherlands andLiverpool, I am reminded of another drug success story. Accordingto reports, we had found a way to successfully combat heroinabuse. It was low cost, and supplied free to addicts. Amreferring to the methadone program. It took us a long time torealize what a horrible waste it was. But all the reports wereglowing..... }} The medical authorities I have talked to, and the research Ihave read (see the list) have indicated that the methadoneprograms were a major improvement. Not perfect, but a majorimprovement. Of the authorities I have talked to they have allsaid that the biggest problems with the methadone program werecreated by the government itself. First, they said, was aconsistent pattern of lies about the results. The Europeanauthorities have reported the same thing about what the USGovernment says about their programs. Second, there wererestrictions on methadone which, in effect, granted monopolies tocertain people and allowed them to abuse the situation. It wouldbe much better, they said, if addicts could go to their regulardoctors for prescriptions, like any other medication. Also, many of them point to the methadone programs as proofthat the narcotics are not especially dangerous, becausemethadone is prescribed routinely without any significantoverdose problem. {{Let us look at some of your stats. You say the deathrate for tobacco is 400,000. For alcohol it is 100,000. Forcocaine it is 2,500. You then answer my question by saying the2,500 does not include pneumonia type deaths. What does itinclude? No doubt (correct me if I am wrong) it is a count ofthose who OD, and die. Probably from ER's. How many of the400,000 tobacco deaths are based on that criteria? }} As I said, the AMA published figures on this subject, andsaid that, using the same standards of classification for thedeaths, the comparable figure for illegal drugs is about 20,000,to tobacco's 400,000+. {{ Only way to die of an OD of tobacco is to be in atobacco wharehouse as it burns down. So, using that criteria, thedeath rate for tobacco is probably close to zero. }} Absolutely wrong. You must have missed the news shows thatreported on the problem of nicotine poisoning in people who workin the fields and pick tobacco. There are far more people whoreceive permanent nervous system damage (and even die) from thatthan from most of the illegal drugs. Nicotine, you may haveforgotten, is an insecticide. {{ Now if we include lung cancer, etc, with the tobaccodeaths, we must also include pneumonia, suicides, trafficaccidents, dehydration, AIDS, etc, in the cocaine deaths.}} The AMA's figures included those causes. Tobacco still killsat least 20 times as many people as the illegal drugs. {{ Many people become very aggresive on crack, and get infights - and get killed. That is a cocaine caused death.}} Wrong. A study done in NY during the height of the crackepidemic showed that, of 414 homicides, only three could betraced to the effects of cocaine in any form, and two of thesewere victim- precipitated. For example, in one case the murdervictim tried to rape someone who was high on crack and got killedin the process. The study showed the only drug with a realconnection to violence was alcohol. This was recently confirmedby the DOJ report "Psychoactive Substances andViolence." {{ In the same way, how many alcohol deaths are caused byOD? Maybe a few hundred?}} Wrong again. Alcohol overdose death is not at all uncommon,especially on college campuses. Former HEW Secretary JosephCalifano once estimated that about 40 percent of all hospitalcare in the US is due to alcohol related conditions, includingoverdoses. {{ It is not easy to OD on alcohol so badly you die. Youtend to pass out first.}} False. People are simply lucky if they pass out, but alcoholoverdose deaths are not at all uncommon. The main reason youdon't hear about them so much is because they are not news. {{ So your stats include liver disease, etc. I have met aheroin addict, who was unconscious, half in a gutter, on a coldnight. If he had died of exposure, he should have been listed asa heroin caused death. It, of course, wouldn't have been.}} So maybe we should adjust the death figures for heroindownward. As I said, even if you assume that, for whateverreason, the deaths from illegal drugs are grossly underestimated,you still don't get anywhere near the deaths caused by alcoholand tobacco. You should take a big clue from this. The reasonsfor the drug laws never did have anything to do with the reasonsyou are stating. When the laws were first passed, no medicalevidence was even presented to show that these drugs were harmfuland, in fact, the medical authorities in the US were opposed tothe laws. While we are on the subject of history, maybe you cantell me why hemp was outlawed? {{Please see the above. Also, your figures are nowcounting deaths only. Not fair for a discussion like this. Howmany messed up lives do cocaine and heroin cause? If a man issent to prison, it does not kill him, it messes up his life. So -lets compare like to like. }} So we take someone who already has a problem and mess up hislife some more? Interesting approach, but I fail to see how itprovides any benefit. {{You say there are approximately 1,000,000 people inprison for drug abuse. That is 1,000,000 messed up lives.According to your stats, that leaves 29,000,000 still abusingdrugs outside. That leaves 29,000,000 messed up lives. Now, tosave the 1,000,000 in prison, youwant to vastly increase the29,000,000. }} The first point you should recognize from these stats is thatit is folly to believe that anything is under control right now.So, basically, you are supporting a campaign that has no way toachieve your stated goals, even if it was a good idea. The livesmessed up in prison are messed up permanently. Black men (by farthe majority of those prosecuted for drug offenses) are virtuallypermanently unemployable once they have a prison record. They canrecover from a drug habit (and many do) but it is much moredifficult to recover from a stretch in prison. And, as for the other 29,000,000, the vast majority of themare not any more messed up than the average wine drinker. Thatmuch is self-evident, or the problem would be far worse than itis. {{Have you ever had a person you truly cared about who wasan addict? }} Sure, one of my aunts and a cousin I grew up with, amongothers. I deplore their behavior and I wish they would stop but,at the same time, I recognize that neither they nor society wouldbe better off if we spent a million dollars to put them inprison. {{What do I think is a reasonable number of people toimprison in order to stop drug abuse? Enough so that the overallwelfare of the country comes out ahead. }} I agree with that last part. So how many should we put inprison to come out ahead? Just tell me what the number is so wecan make plans to build that many prison cells. {{ I think we are a long way from passing the point wheremore people are messed up by the prison than by drug abuse. }} How would you know if you admit you don't know the stats ondeaths or people in prison? {{How many additional deaths, resulting from thelegalization of drug use, would it take for you to cry "Toomany!" }} What evidence do you have to show that there would beadditional deaths? Other than your own opinion, that is. All theevidence I have seen says that the death rate would probably godown with a more intelligent policy. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-51IA086-000615-B002-100http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/mjgate.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024624 text/html 8477HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:45:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:03 GMTContent-length: 8260 The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effect Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effect by John P. Morgan, M.D. and Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. The Partnership for a Drug-Free America, in cooperation withthe National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the White HouseOffice of Drug Control Policy, recently announced a new anti-drugcampaign that specifically targets marijuana. Instead offeaturing horror tales of marijuana-induced insanity, violenceand birth detects, this campaign is built upon the premise thatreducing marijuana use is a practical strategy for reducing theuse of more dangerous drugs. The primary basis for this "gateway hypothesis" is arecent report by the center on Addiction and Substance Abuse(CASA), claiming that marijuana users are 85 times more likelythan non-marijuana users to try cocaine. This figure, using datafrom NIDA's 1991 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, isclose to being meaningless. It was calculated by dividing theproportion of marijuana users who have ever used cocaine (17%) bythe proportion of cocaine users who have never used marijuana(.2%). The high risk-factor obtained is a product not of the factthat so many marijuana users use cocaine but that so many cocaineusers used marijuana previously. It is hardly a revelation that people who use one of the leastpopular drugs are likely to use the more popular ones -- not onlymarijuana, but also alcohol and tobacco cigarettes. The obviousstatistic not publicized by CASA is that most marijuana users --83 percent -- never use cocaine. Indeed, for the nearly 70million Americans who have tried marijuana, it is clearly a"terminus" rather than a "gateway" drug. During the last few years, after a decade of decline, therehas been a slight increase in marijuana use, particularly amongyouth. In 1994, 38 percent of high school seniors reported havingever tried the drug, compared to about 35 percent in 1993 and 33percent in 1992. This increase does not constitute a crisis. Noone knows whether marijuana use-rates will continue to rise. Buteven if they do, it will not necessarily lead to increased use ofcocaine. Since the 1970s, when NIDA first began gathering data, ratesof marijuana and cocaine use have displayed divergent patterns.Marijuana prevalence increased throughout the 1970s, peaking in1979, when about 60 percent of high school seniors reportedhaving used it at least once. During the 1980s, cocaine useincreased while marijuana use was declining. Since 1991, whendata for the CASA analysis were gathered, marijuana use-rateshave increased while cocaine use-rates have remained fairlysteady. The over-changing nature of the statistical relationshipbetween use-rate for marijuana and cocaine indicates the absenceof a causal link between the use of these two drugs. Therefore,even if the proposed Partnership campaign were to be effective inreducing marijuana use it would not guarantee a proportionalreduction in the number of people who use cocaine. To the extentanti-drug campaigns are effective, they seem to be most effectivein deterring those people who would have been fairly low-levelusers. There is no reason to believe that anti-marijuana messagesof any sort would deter many of those marijuana users --currently 17 percent of the total -- who also develop an interestin cocaine. Nor is there reason to believe that the Partnership's newcampaign will actually reduce the overall number of marijuanausers. For a decade now, American youth have been subjected to anunparalleled assault of anti-drug messages. They have seenhundreds of Partnership advertisements, on television and in theprint media. They have been urged to "just say no" byrock stars, sports heroes, presidents and first-ladies. They havebeen exposed to anti-drug educational programs in the schools.Yet this is the same generation of young people that recentlybegan increasing its use of marijuana. It seems unlikely thatmany of them will be deterred by hyperbolic claims of marijuana'sgateway effect, particularly when it contradicts the reality ofdrug use they see around them. If the creators of American drug policy are truly interestedin reducing the risk of marijuana users using other drugs, theyshould take a closer look at Holland, where drug policy since the1970s has been guided by a commitment to diminishing anypotential gateway effect. Wanting to keep young marijuana usersaway from cocaine and other "hard drugs," the Dutchdecided to separate the retail markets by allowing anyone 18years of age or older to purchase marijuana openly ingovernment-controlled "coffee shops" which strictlyprohibit the use and sale of other drugs. Despite easy availability, marijuana prevalence among 12 to 18year olds in Holland is only 13.6 percent -- well below the 38percent use-rate for American high school seniors. More Dutchteenagers use marijuana now than in the past; indeed, lifetimeprevalence increased nearly three-fold between 1984 and 1992,from 4.8 to 13.6 percent. However, Dutch officials consider theirpolicy a success because the increase in marijuana use has notbeen accompanied by an increase in the use of other drugs. Forthe last decade, the rate of cocaine use among Dutch youth hasremained stable, with about .3 percent of 12-18 year oldsreporting having used it in the past month. In the United States, the claim that marijuana acts as agateway to the use of other drugs serves mainly as a rhetoricaltool for frightening Americans into believing that winning thewar against heroin and cocaine requires waging & battleagainst the casual use of marijuana. Not only is the claimintellectually indefensible, but the battle is wasteful ofresources and fated to failure. Received by Iowa NORML from the National Organization for theReform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), 1001 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.,Suite 1010, Washington, D.C. 20036, on Tuesday, February 7, 1995.For more information, call Allen St. Pierre, NORML AssistantDirector, at (202) 483-5500, or e-mail NORML at natlnorml@aol.com Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation WT01-B40-52IA031-000655-B031-294http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/args1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110358 text/html 79418HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:03:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:35 GMTContent-length: 79200 Arguments and Answers -- the drug policy debate Arguments and Answers - Page 1 by Clifford A. Schaffer This is a collection of actual arguments and answers from along chain of debates on drug policy. Somewhere in this archive,every argument you ever heard in favor of the drug war isencountered and rebutted. If I missed any, please send them to meby e-mail: schaffer@smartlink.net My opponent's comments are in boldface. My commentsare in plain text. {{1. "....After adjusting for covariants, themarijuana group showed small but statistically significantincreased risk for all three catagories of conditions(Respiratory, accidental injury, and other)."}} Other, longer studies, such as the Jamaican studies haveshown no statistically significant differences between marijuanasmokers and non-smokers, even when the marijuana smokers had anaverage daily dose about 28 times that consumed by the average USuser. Therefore, one study is not going to break the back of thecollected research on marijuana. The collected summation of marijuana research is this:"Marijuana, in its natural form, is probably the safesttherapeutically active substance known to mankind. It is saferthan many of the foods we commonly eat." -- Francis Young,Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, after two years of review of all of the evidencepresented by the DEA and by those asking for reform. That is thesame conclusion supported by every major study of drug policy. {{2. "Respiratory deposition of tar and adsorption ofcarbon monoxide in experimental subjects were four and five timeshigher, respectively, after smoking marijuana than after smokingtobacco."}} Assuming this is true, how does this prove that throwingmillions of people in prison is the best approach to the problem? {{3. "Marijuana has repeatedly been found to be thesecond most common drug, after alcohol, present in the blood ofnonfatally and fatally injured persons."}} There might be a good, logical reason for this. Marijuana isdetectable in the blood for up to two months after a personsmokes a joint, even though the high is long since gone. It maysimply be an indicator that far more people are smoking marijuanathan you thought. You also have to remember that common over thecounter drugs will make people test positive for marijuana. You will note that they did not say "drivers." Itis irrelevant what the passengers were using. And, by this sort of reasoning, the penalties for alcoholsale and possession ought to be even higher than the potpenalties. Why aren't you fighting even harder for alcoholProhibition? {{4. "Laboratory studies have shown decreaseddriving-related skills after smoking marijuana."}} Repeated real world experience has shown that marijuana isnot a major factor in traffic accidents. The reason is fairlysimple -- pot has a very mild effect on people and does notdestroy coordination the way alcohol does. The real problem hereis that the people who want to throw people in prison for drugsdo not actually know anything about the drug and its effects. {{5. "In a Swedish study following a cohort of 45,540male military conscripts for 15 years, heavier cannabis users hada nearly three times greater risk of death than nonusers....andhad an elevated risk of schizophrenia compared withnonusers."}} A Johns Hopkins study, just as credible, showed thatmarijuana smokers were more ambitious than their peers andusually succeeded better than the rest. The question here is "Death from what?" Theircannabis users could have been concentrated in those areas with ahigher risk of death, in light of the fact that they engage insomewhat more risk taking than their peers. Like, for instance,our soldiers who smoked pot in Vietnam. As for schizophrenia -- Did the pot cause the schizophrenia,or would it be more likely that a person with severe mentalproblems would try all sorts of self-medication to stop thevoices in their head? I have a relative with schizophrenia and Ican tell you what the answer is. And, if the person is developing schizophrenia -- for anyreason -- how does it help the situation to throw them in jail? {{" The insoluable particulate (tar) phase of thesmoke from marijuana contains about 50% of some carcinogenic arylhydrocarbons, including benz[a]anthracene, and benzo[a]pyrenethen the smoke from a comparable quantity of unfiltered Kentuckyreference tobacco."}} So? Should the prison sentences for tobacco be 50% of thosefor pot? Or should we also account for the fact that pot smokerstypically smoke far fewer cigarettes than a tobacco smoker? Justhow long should we put tobacco smokers in jail, anyway? {{"The smoking of one marijuana cigarette - 800 to900 mg, 1% to 3% delta-tetrahydrocannabinol - led to thedeposition in the lower respiratory tract of about a four-foldgreater quantity of insoluable particulates (tar) than smoking afiltered tobacco cigarette of comparable weight..."}} See above. {{"...the authors [Polen, et al, of the accompanyingarticle] are the first to use a systematic review of medicalrecords to assess the health consequences of marijuana...Theirfinding that near-daily marijuana smoking is a significantindependent risk factor for the development of respiratoryillness, injuries, and other medical problems requiring medicalattention CHALLENGES THE VIEW THAT MARIJUANA POSES INSIGNIFICANTHEALTH RISKS." }} It will have to do a lot of challenging, because there isalot of evidence to challenge. Actually, this is more evidencefor a change in the law because every major study of drug policysaid that prohibition only INCREASED the dangers which werealready present in illegal drugs. The more dangerous you assumethem to be, the more important it becomes to treat them in anon-criminal manner. But, of course, that is not really the point, anyway. Let'ssuppose that I totally believed everything you just said. Why doyou automatically assume that putting millions of people inprison is the best approach to the problem? If it wasn't a goodidea for alcohol, and we can see that it would be a dumb idea fortobacco, why do you suppose it is such a great idea for any otherchemical? {{So, it would appear the marijuana is more dangerous thantobacco. Itwould also appear that, given the statisticsconcerning fatal accidents, that marijuana use can be deadly.}} So how many people are actually killed by all these drugs ina typical year, anyway? And, while you're at it, there are perhaps thirty millionpeople who are regular users of pot. How many millions of peopledo you think we ought to throw in prison in order to control thisproblem? And why was the most common agricultural crop in America madeillegal in 1937 in the first place? Was it because of these"dangers", or was it for some entirely differentreason? How did the most common crop in America suddenly become adreaded menace to society? {{}}Netherlands has fewer addicts per capita than the US.So does almost every country in the world. So what?}} Gee, that would seem to argue that our prohibition isn't soeffective, wouldn't it? And you said it was easy to control!!! {{ Germany recently decriminalized possession of smallamounts of marijuana, as have several states in the U.S. Sowhat?}} Maybe you could tell me why hemp (and the other drugs forthat matter) were made illegal in the first place. {{"When a heroin addicts can get precise doses atregular intervals, he can function pretty normally." Theydon't want to get high?}} Ever heard of Dr. William Halsted? Or Senator JosephMcCarthy? What do they have in common? {{ I went and looked it up. You need 100 grams of herointo get a 5-year sentence or a whole kilo to get a 10-yearsentence. For cocaine, the figures were 500 grams and 5 kilos.That's a lot of dope.}} See the 7-8-93 op-ed piece by Federal Judge Weinstein in theNY Times. He points out that it varies from one city to another.In some major metropolitan areas, 100 pounds will not get you anyjail time, while in others, a marijuana seed might mean life inprison. {{ If there is no evidence that punishment reduces crime,we should shut down the prisons entirely.}} There are thirty million illegal drug users. Just tell me themost reasonable number to put in prison. {{ You say that junkies don't do any harm, but would youwant to live next door to one?}} A better question is if you would want to have a drug addict(William Bennett) as a drug czar? {{ I keep hearing this. No one provides any evidence. Itdoesn't seem logical that people who have so much troublesupporting a drug habit *outside* somehow acquire the necessaryincome when you lock them up.}} Talk to someone who has been in prison. {{ Then why lock up drunk drivers? Or any criminal?Generally, we lock people up because they are a menace tosociety. It is *always* possible to lose a potential"contributing member" in this way, but generally we aremore interested in the rights of potential victims: Who could beyou, me, or anyone.}} Anyone who commits an offense against another person shouldbe tried for the offense. What should be different is that aperson on cocaine who commits a crime should not get life inprison while a drunk would plead diminished capacity for the samecrime. We should have consistent standards for all drugs and weshould apply our limited resources to the part of the problemwhere it will do the most good. For example, we don't lock upwine drinkers to try to control drunk driving. Generally, we dolock people up because they are a menace to others. Of course,that never was the reason for the drug laws. You are far more likely to be the victim of something relatedto alcohol and tobacco than from the effects of the illegaldrugs. {{ The properties of heroin and alcohol are verydifferent, and the social context is also different. For example,most people can use alcohol in moderate amounts without everbecoming addicted. Also, alcohol can be brewed up in any bathtub,or derived from common products such as after-shave andmouthwash, so the potential for controlling abuse is much less.}} Yes, the properties are different. Alcohol is just asaddicting and far more damaging to the health. Yes, the social context is different. The illegal drugs wereoutlawed primarily because they were associated (wrongly) withracial minorities, while alcohol and tobacco were perceived as"white" drugs. The evidence shows that most drug users of all types use inmoderation. This can be shown quite quickly by a simplecomparison between the total number of users and the number ofaddicts. The fact that alcohol can be brewed in a bathtub is hardly asensible argument for any kind of policy. It is equallynonsensical for other drugs. Does that mean we should legalizemarijuana because people can grow it in their closet? {{ Since "every major study" agrees with you, itfollows that youagree with "every major study," forexample: * The President's Commission on Organized Crime (1986) * The National Report of the Bureau of Justice Statistics(1992) * The President's Commission on Model State Drug Laws(1993) So, can I quote these studies as authoritative, or haveyou suddenly changed your mind?}} The first study has little to do with drug policy andcannot be considered any kind of a study of the drug policyissue. The second is a statistical report with no considerationof the historical or medical aspects of the problem (or manyother aspects for that matter.) The third did not do any real research on drug policy. But, since I so rarely run into anyone who tries naminganything, I will give you credit. Let's assume, for the sake ofargument, that all three studies were about drug policy and righton the money. The score is now 10 to 3 against you. When you geta little closer I will name some more on my side. {{ I believe your chronology is wrong. I remember readinga book on the subject (_Chasing the Dragon_, as I recall), whichwas published around 1985. Unfortunately I don't have it to hand. . . But, as I recall, Britain had legalized prescriptionnarcotics in the 60s, and they were still legal at the time thebook was published. The result was an explosive increase in druguse, along with the accompanying things that drug abusers like todo: abuse their spouses, neglect their children and live off thepublic dole. I believe it was the Majors administration, sometimearound 1990, which flirted with stricter drug enforcement (stillnot very tough by American standards). Is this that what you'retalking about?}} The correct chronology is given in the text of the 60 Minutesshow contained in Hoover.zip. In the 80s, under US pressure, theBritish adopted a get-tough policy. It was a disaster, causingboth health problems and rising crime. In Liverpool at thecurrent time, they prescribe heroin and cocaine to addicts. Mostof the addicts are healthy, employed, and living with theirfamilies. One of the conditions of their treatment is that theymust not commit crimes. It works. They originally did it becauseof the AIDS infection rates, and the infection rate has droppedto less than one percent of the addicts -- while in the US therate is over fifty percent. They also found that Liverpool, whichhad become famous for crime, was suddenly peaceful again. It ishappening now and about a half dozen of my friends (includingdoctors) are now in England discussing it with them. }}The Dutch, may not be alone for long. Many otherEuropean countries are looking to decriminalization; many havesigned the Frankfort Accord agreeing that is the best approach. Idunno about that,}} The following countries have already either legalized drugsor taken steps toward legalization: The Netherlands, Germany,Switzerland, England, Italy, Spain, and Colombia. }}But it indicates that Germany is moving in the directionof common sense, while we are not. Yeah, they are liberalizinghash and persecuting the hard drug users. That's the direction ofcommon sense.}} Why is it common sense to persecute anyone? {{ Still, when soldiers returned to the States, wheredrugs were neither cheap nor easy to find, they gave up thehabit.}} The studies of the issue said that all of the soldierssurveyed reported they could get heroin after they got back anytime they wanted it. The reason they quit was because they wereno longer under stress. {{ And we also lock up left-handed people . . . as I havealready pointed out. However, there are very few people in prisonsimply for being junkies; most of them have committed otheroffenses.}} Absolutely not true. There are considerable numbers. See thetestimony of the Corrections Commissioner of New York inHoover.zip. See also the op-ed piece by Federal Judge Jack B.Weinstein in the 7-8- 93 New York Times. {{ Not at all. It is you have ignored my objection: Theargument that expensive to lock up junkies ignores the experiencewith drunk driving. The fact is that severe penalties discouragecrime, and therefore reduce the number of people who need to belocked up.}} There are thirty million illegal drug users in the US (giveor take). How many millions do you propose to lock up? {{ More deceptive figures. According to my 1993 WorldAlmanac, only 7% of prisoners serving terms of 1 year or more arein federal prisons.}} What does that have to do with the price of eggs? }}How many people must we imprison, and at what cost,before you think we will have solved the problem? --I dunno. }} You hit the nail on the head that time. You obviously neverthought about it. That is the problem in a nutshell. As PresidentNixon's commission said, the real drug problem is not marijuana,heroin, or cocaine. The real drug problem is the ignorance of ourpublic officials who have never bothered to read the evidence. {{}}There are way more alcholics than there are heroinaddicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Thishas much to do with the relative cheapness and availability ofalcohol. Do you really want to make narcotics equally cheap andavailable?}} Narcotics are freely available at reasonable prices to anyonewho wants them. {{There are way more alcoholics than there are heroinaddicts however, and the cost to society is astronomical. Doesn'tthat fact support continuing constraints against heroin, beforeit can cause damage on an "alcohol" scale?}} No, not necessarily, but it does make me wonder why youaren't campaigning even harder for alcohol prohibition. {{ }}Prohibition of alcohol did not work...{{{ Depends what you mean by "work".}} I will accept the Wickersham Commission's definition. Theysaid it was a hopeless disaster in all respects. {{ Alcohol consumption absolutely, positively went downduring prohibition.}} Absolutely false. The Wickersham Commission found thatalcohol use went down in the first year of Prohibition, but roseevery year thereafter, and that alcohol-related health problemswere much more severe. {{ Society, however, preferred its legal drug and repealedprohibition.}} No, the Wickersham Commission, which was originally empoweredto find ways to improve Prohibition, concluded that it washopeless folly which did more harm than if we did nothing at all. {{ It is also societies right to keep the lid on thePandora's Box of legalization of cocaine and heroin.}} So, how many millions of people should we put in prison fordrugs? {{ Clearly prohibition DID reduce consumption.}} That wasn't right the first time. It is equally wrong thesecond. {{ In Malaysia, they are executed (at least the dealersare).}} In Malaysia, the authorities kill more people for drugs thanthe drugs do. And they still have a growing problem. {{ I wouldn't be so quick to discount the deterrent effectof draconian measures.}} Neither would I. How many people do you think we ought toexecute to solve a problem that kills about 5,000 people a year? {{ I would personally love to see an intoxicant developedthat was safe, not physically addicting and doesnt make you (too)stupid. (I'm dead serious). Marijuana is almost OK, but I trulybelieve it makes one stupid (while under the influence) and a lotof kids would have their intellectual growth stunted if it werelegalized.}} The Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Drug EnforcementAdministration, after hearing years of arguments on the subject,concluded that "marijuana, in its natural form, may be thesafest therapeutically active substance known to man" andthat it is "safer than many of the foods we commonlyeat." There is no evidence to support what you said aboutintellectual growth. In fact, marijuana was a common food in the19th century. {{ Alcohol does not directly involve the brain's internal"reward via euphoria" mechanism, opiates do. They aremuch more "fun" and way more addicting.}} Nope. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs for a good discussion of the issue. {{ The Liverpudlian addicts had to first come to thedoctor for help, before being registered. Are you suggesting thatpotential heroin users come to the doctor for "controlledmedically supervised doses" before starting the habit - ordo they come after realizing they may have a problem?}} They come after they realize they have a problem. But theprogram has dried up the sellers on the street, and it hasgreatly reduced the number one source of new addicts -- oldaddicts looking for recruits to support their habit. As a result,crime rates, health problems, and addiction have droppeddramatically. {{ Is it possible that heroin, at cigarette prices, maylead to a lot of folks to suffer severe vocational andinterpersonal damage, before finally presenting themselves for"Controlled, medically supervised doses"? Theexperience during Prohibition is instructive.}} Is it possible that tobacco addicts under the same conditionswould behave in the same manner as junkies? The experience inEurope, after WWII, when tobacco was scarce is instructive. Theexperience of Prohibition is instructive. It was a failure in allrespects. {{ Despite the obvious problems associated withprohibition, the rates of cirrhosis of the liver and of wifebeating plummetted.}} Wrong. See the report of the Wickersham Commission. {{I agree that substance abuse is the trigger for muchcrime, violent and non-violent. In those cases, if you caneliminate the abuse, you probably have a much better chance ofthe individual becoming a contributing member. }} The great majority of such crime is due to the effects ofprohibition, not the effects of the drugs. {{Instead of spending the money to maintain them inprison, some sort of supervisd home confinement, coupled withvocational training, counseling for the abuse, and routine drugtesting. Clean 'em up, train 'em, put 'em to work. That may soundto simplistic, but what we're doing now isn't working, IMO. }} The vast majority of drug users do not need treatment anymore than the vast majority of wine drinkers need treatment. Forthe others, treatment is at least seven times as cost effectiveas prison, with a far greater rate of success. {{ Alcohol is addicting to those predisposed.}} Correct. {{ Heroin is addicting (if used for non-analgesicpurposes) in everyone. Cocaine is the most addictive of all.}} Wrong. See the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs for a good discussion. Heroin addicts commonly report thatit is much harder to kick tobacco than to kick anything else. Orsee the recent NIDA rankingsof addictive qualities. {{ Increased drinking during prohibition!! No way, noevidence, makes no sense. The logistics of obtaining, and theblack market price of alcohol during prohibition were HUGEnatural constraints on drinking for the vast majority. (ie. forall but the speakeasy crowd).}} See the Wickersham Commission report, or any of the otherstudies I have mentioned. {{ Be careful who you say things like " the deceptivething about... liver disease are DEGENERATIVE diseases which takea little while to develop" to {g}. In 20 yrs as a generalinternist, I've treated plenty of alcohol relatedliver disease.}} If you are a doctor, let me ask you a question. My mothersuffers from severe chronic pain as the result of a nerve injuryduring surgery. It is bad enough that it has driven her to thepoint of seriously considering suicide. She has been to the MayoClinic, the National Pain Institute, the USC Pain Clinic and along list of others. She has tried a long list of treatments. Youname your best list, she has tried it. The doctors, and her ownexperience, tell her that the best treatment for her condition iseither morphine or heroin. The doctors will not prescribe it toher because they are afraid of the DEA -- they have said so. TheDepartment of Health and Human Services has issued two reportswhich have stated that the undertreatment of pain is a nationaltragedy and that is caused by fear. The California MedicalAssociation recently encouraged doctors to prescribe morenarcotics and said that the reason they did not was because offear of the police. I will not ask you if you would prescribe morphine for mymother because I have asked every other doctor who has appearedhere and they all copped out. I expect you would too. Just tellme: Who should determine the medicine my mother gets -- her andher doctors -- or the police? {{ It is clear that when prohibition was repealed, liverdisease jumped up within the year, because of resumed drinking.}} No, alcohol use continued the rise that it had alreadystarted during Prohibition. And, even if this was true, are yourecommending that we bring back alcohol Prohibition? Why not? {{ I'm sorry, but the statement that heroin is harmlessflies in the face of long-agreed-on clinical experience.}} What does your clinical experience tell you about the effectsof prison? Is it beneficial or harmful to someone with a drugproblem? {{ Show me the references. I will be willing to betanything, that they are not the result of well designed trials}} Read any of the studies that I posted. I would suggest thatyou start with the Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs, so you would understand how we got into this situation. By the way, did you know that the medical communityunanimously opposed these laws when they were proposed and saidthey would be a medical, social, and criminal disaster? Did youknow that one of the first actions of the drug police was to jailmore than 3,000 doctors, especially those who advocated drugtreatment? And, can you tell me why hemp is illegal? {{ Historically technical question. Shouldnt be too hardto look up. I doubt very much that it was the OVERT crime issue.Society was not much affected by bootleggers killing otherbootleggers.}} One of the major factors was a campaign to "save thechildren." You see, the bootleggers discovered that theycould escape harsh penalties by having kids do the dirty work,and there was quite a bit of concern about that. Sound familiar? {{ However one related factor may well have been societywas very concerned about corruption in the police and judiciary.It would have been scary, back then, to think this corruption wasabout to become institutionalised.}} Prohibition gave us the institution of organized crime, whichis still with us 60 years later. {{ This doesnt seem to be much of a factor, however, inour current "prohibition"}} Where have you been? The entire narcotics squad of the LACounty Sheriff was sent to prison for corruption. The situationis the same in New York and other major cities. I seriously doubtif there is an honest drug enforcement agent living. I could goon with stories of their corruption that would curl your hair. {{I don't like that picture very much at all.}} You painted a picture of what could happen. How about apicture of what IS happening? According to the current rates ofincarceration, we will put more people in prison than AdolfHitler did, including about one-half of an entire generation ofblack men. Do you want to continue with that? {{ No, only studies which are about legalizing drugsconclude that it is important to legalize them.}} You obviously have not read them, have you? {{ "Decriminalization" is not the same as"legalization." The "decriminalization" ofsmall amounts of marijuana -- reducing possession to the statusof a traffic fine -- has already been tried in several states,without stirring much controversy. This is a good deal differentfrom legalizing crack and heroin however. You really won'timpress anyone by trying to equate the two.}} The issue is not legalization or decriminalization (whateverthey may mean), because we don't know if we will do either, oranything like them. The issue is prison, because that is what weare doing now. How many millions of people do you think we oughtto put in prison? {{ What makes you think they *want* to contribute?}} What makes you think they don't? Most drug users are employedindividuals, not much different from their neighbors. {{ Not at all. Heroin is far more addictive than alcohol.}} Not true. See the recent NIDA rankings of addictivequalities. Isn't it true that an alcohol addict is far more likely todie during withdrawal than a heroin addict? {{ This makes it an important substance to control.}} Let's assume that this statement is true. Where did you getthe idea that jailing massive numbers of people is the bestmethod of control? {{ Heroin is also far less widely used than alcohol, anddomestic production is close to zero. This makes it relativelyeasy to control.}} "relatively easy to control"? Someone is out oftouch with reality here. There is no credible evidence anywherethat any of these drugs are under control. {{ You left out the key step: motivate 'em. That's thehard part.}} Yeah, it is so much easier to throw them in prison at a halfmillion dollars a pop. {{ This information is outdated. I have here a psychologytextbook, _The Mind_, by Dr. Richard M. Restak, which says:"Sigmund Freud was convinced that cocaine could be used tocure heroin addiction. . . .}} Now that you brought up Sigmund Freud, you ought to know thathe kicked the cocaine habit but died from the effects of cancercaused by his cigar smoking. He could not quit, even though mostof the lower part of his face had been removed by surgery. Whatdid you say about one drug being more addictive? By the way, if you are a doctor, you should be able to tellme who Dr. William Halsted was, and what was so remarkable abouthim. {{ I believe then you should urgently warn the people atthe Hoover Institute that this so-called expert, Cliff Schaeffer,is feeding them bad information. I have a book here about theBritish drug experience (_Living With Heroin_), which waspublished in 1988, and prescription narcotics were still legalthen. Obviously, the supposed American-style drug crack-downSchaeffer told you about didn't happen.}} My associates and I have talked directly with the Britishauthorities and some of my friends (doctors) are there right nowtalking to them. The British did try a crackdown, and it was afailure. The British Association of Chiefs of Police, as well asthe head of Interpol have now called for decriminalization. {{ These "sensible" policies led to a majorincrease in drug-related crime, according to _Living withHeroin_.}} The doctors in Liverpool and the doctors in other Europeancountries disagree. {{ Liverpool and the Netherlands are too utterly differentfrom the United States in too many ways to document here.}} So what are the specific differences that would make theirplans impossible here? {{ First offense simple possession usually just gets youprobation. Keep it up, and you'll eventually have to do some jailtime. Hardly anyone goes to prison for simple possession.}} Absolutely false. That is the reason that 52 Federal judges(about ten percent of the total Federal judiciary) have refusedto enforce the drug laws. {{ A lab. rat will starve himself pushing the cocainelever (instead of the rat chow lever) when offered the choice.This tells me that there is a whole lot more biology involved indrug addiction than simply volition.}} It seems to indicate that it gets beyond their ability toconsciously control their actions. Which makes it all the moresilly to punish them as a response. {{ How confident are you that you would remain clean ifoffered cheap legal cocaine or heroin?}} As confident as I am that I can walk past the tobacco andalcohol displays without the least desire to take either. {{ And even if you have the knowledge that lets youresist, what about the millions that dont?}} For the millions that don't, prison hardly seems theappropriate response. {{We may just have a difference in semantics, here. Ibelieve the majority of drug related crime is caused byindividuals seeking funds to support the habit.}} That is a direct result of Prohibition. Without prohibitionsuch criminal activity is not necessary. That is why the policeauthorities in the Netherlands, England, and other countries havecalled for decriminalization. {{The vast majority of individuals who drink are notalcoholics. I'm not familiar with statistics on theaddict/non-addict fractions of the total population of drugusers. The ones who need treatment are the ones whose addictionis affecting their live and the lives of those around them.}} The vast majority of drug users of all t ypes (exceptperhapstobacco) are not addicted. I agree that drug use whichgets to the point of affecting their lives or others, it is timeto change their habits. But why should there be a differentstandard for how we view that when the problem occurs because ofalcohol as opposed to cocaine or heroin? {{Thanks for your post. I also hate to think of what lifewould be like in this country if drugs were legalized. Especiallysince, if we did legalize them, it would be sooo hard to turnback.}} Well then, we could look to Europe for guidance. Most majorcountries in Europe are going toward decriminalization orlegalization and they report that it is much better than the drugwar. {{Do I want to continue with that? Of course not! Whatsane person would want to throw so many people in prison. }} Clearly, nobody. But that's what we are doing. If you reallydon't like it so much then we ought to honestly investigate ouralternatives. {{But the scenario I see, if we legalize drugs as youpropose, would be worse.}} When did I propose legalizing drugs? {{ Do you want to see this country worse off? So a lot ofpeople wouldn't go to jail. Instead, they could easily die.Abusing drugs tends to have that effect. I know - I have knownmany who have died from it. It is a terrible waste. }} So how many people actually die from drugs each year, anyway? {{ Your proposal would result in the quality of drugsgoing up, the cost of drugs in money going way down, and the risk(prison) going way down. }} Yeah, it would probably eliminate most of the bathtub gin andwood alcohol which is sold to unsuspecting buyers, it wouldeliminate the Mafia's prime source of revenue, and it would keepa lot of little people from having their lives ruined with astretch in prison. {{ Instead of government programs to fight drug use, therewould be advertising campaigns to encourage drug use.}} Who said that? You are assuming an awful lot that I did notsay. {{ As you propose legalizing drug use, you must considerthe fact, that due to all these facts, drugs use would soar.}} No, that is simply not true. In areas which have changedtheir laws, drug use has stayed the same or gone down. Every major study of drug policy agreed that there was noevidence to support your conclusion. Furthermore, they agreedthat EVEN IF drug use did go up, the benefits ofdecriminalization would be so great that it would far outweighthe problems of increased use. {{I think thowing drug users in prison is a terriblewaste. I think legalizing drugs is much worse.}} I agree with you on the first point. There never was a goodreason to start this policy in the first place. But those aren'tthe only two options. {{Oh yes, your stat on one-half of a generation of blackmen interested me. Are you saying that an absolute minimum of 50%of black males are drug abusers? I assume many get away with it,and don't go to prison, so what is the actual figure??? }} The actual figures appear to be about the same as for thewhite population. However, the drug laws were originally intendedto target minorities (look it up) and they target minoritiesabove all other groups today. For example, about 95 percent ofall the people sentenced under the mandatory minimums are blackmen. Over time, because of the police pressure on drugs, andbecause of the limited economic opportunities for black men, manyof them will turn to drug dealing as a way to make a living andthen, with the first stint in jail their future is formed. Blackmen who have been to prison are virtually permanentlyunemployable, so they return to the streets and act as bad rolemodels for the kids. {{}}Legalization will flood the market place with cheaperdrugs --thats the box I want to keep the lid on. Interestingarticle in the _Journal of Drug Issues_ (Spring 1993) analyzesthe issue on the basis of dynamic simulation modeling andconcludes: "The model suggests that elimination of drugseizures by itself would pose little risk of increasedprevalence, but neither would it alleviate the load on thecriminal justice system. A policy of reduced arrests at theretail level probably would reduce the criminal justice load, butwould also lead to a relative increase in cocaine use andaddiction by a factor of two or three or more. A more sweepingpolicy that eliminates both seizures and arrests would certainlyreduce the criminal justice load, but would lead to a relativeincrease in cocaine use and addiction by a factor of four toeight or more."}} So, under the worst circumstances they cite, there would beperhaps 10,000 to 20,000 deaths per year from cocaine (4 to 8times the current 2,500), compared to more than 400,000 fortobacco, and more than 100,000 for alcohol. For heroin thenumbers would be similar, and for marijuana 4 to 8 times zero isstill zero. On the other hand, we would not have an expensive andfutile policy to put millions of people in prison. In fact, forthe same money that it took to put one person in prison we couldprovide treatment for about one hundred. Relative to your earlier statements on treatment, perhaps youmissed the recent study that said that treatment saves sevendollars in related social costs for every dollar spent ontreatment. On the other hand, prison costs an additional fifteendollars for every dollar spent on prison. {{ I've seen you in these discussions before, and peoplehave gone over the fiscal issues for addicts ad nauseam. Try itagain; maybe you'll make more sense this time.}} OK, let's start out with the simple aspects. How many peopledo you think we ought to throw in prison? }} And why do they steal money to buy drugs?}} Because the drugs are illegal and therefore higher priced. {{ I do have an interesting book here, called _Living WithHeroin_ which studied the drug situation in the English town ofWirral. On page 99, there is a report which shows that, . . . The'extra' crime Wirral has experienced in recent years appears tobe closely related to the community's heroin 'epidemic.'"}} Liverpool found that their addiction and crime went up asdrug enforcement went up. They found it just about disappearedwhen they took their current approach. It may also interest youto know that the British Association of Chiefs of Police and thehead of Interpol have both come out for decriminalization.Apparently they know something you don't. {{ What about the legalized prescription-narcotics?Doctors are getting burned out .. .}} Not so in Liverpool. The doctors report a high rate ofsuccess with their patients, perhaps because they base theprescription on the addicts continued good behavior. {{ Junkies just are not good patients. Actually, theyaren't really "patients" at all. . . .}} Yeah? I could have guessed that. I also find most of thempersonally distasteful. That still does not mean that the bestapproach to the problem is to try to throw them all in prison. {{According to the 1992 report of the Bureau of JusticeStatistics, the number of individuals surveyed (18-25 age group)who reported using an illicit drug in the past month hasdramatically decreased:}} Do you thnk it may have anything to do with the surveyprocess? For example, with increasing penalties, and increasingpublicity about the penalties, they call people up at random andask them if they have used any illegal drugs (committed a felony)in the last month. I know what I would tell you, regardless ofthe truth. From what I have seen of that age group (having fourdaughters in that age group) the use habits are not terriblydifferent than they were in the 60's -- but none of them wouldadmit it to a telephone interviewer, either. {{ The United States unfortunately has a far higher crimerate than other nations; this accounts for the higherincarceration rate.}} That was not true until the war on drugs went into high gearand it is currently true only because of the war on durgs. {{ Most prisoners are not convicted of drug-relatedoffenses. }} Correct, but the largest single portion are and nearly all ofthe rise in prison population over the last fifteen years can beattributed to drug offenses. {{ The high rate of recidivism is not due to the weaknessof the prison system, but the broader failures of Americansociety. Poverty, poor education, the lack of family support, theprevalence of narcotics and a tradition of violence combine toproduce a high crime rate, which is not susceptible to any easysolution.}} Perhaps you did not see the 60 Minutes piece on Pelican Bay.They showed a series of convicts being released from California'stoughest prison. They were put out at the bus stop with $200 (outof which they had to buy their only civilian clothes) with noinstructions, help, advice, or anything else. They had no jobskills, little education, and no real chance at employment anywaybecause of their prison record. What do you expect they would do? {{* To begin with, heroin is one of the most powerfuldrugs known to man. The effect of a heroin dose is to flood thebody with endorphins. This is incapacitating in the short run andcan lead to long term personality changes.}} Wrong. I can cite a whole long list of internationallyrecognized medical experts in the field who state that, exceptfor the fact that heroin produces addiction, otherwise it is"harmless". Their words, not mine. Can you tell me whoDr. William Halsted is? {{* Heroin is also extremely addictive.}} True, but no more than alcohol or tobacco {{The overwhelming majority of heroin users becomeaddicts.}} Absolutely false. There is no evidence to support thisnotion. {{* Heroin is incredibly dangerous. A dose that is normalfor one addict may kill another. Even a "normal" dose,to which an addict has long been accustomed, can kill him indifferent environmental circumstances.}} See above about "harmless." The doctors inLiverpool state that they have patients on "massivedoses" with no risk of overdose. They say "heroin isnot a dangerous drug" and they prescribe it every day. Thenumber of people killed by heroin in the US runs about 2,000 ayear or about one half of one percent of the number killed bytobacco. Aspirin also kills about 2,000 people a year. TheConsumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs investigatedthe issue of heroin "overdoses" and did not find asingle instance which they believed could be attributed to a true"overdose". Nearly all of the "overdoses",they said, had symptoms which were fundamentally incompatiblewith an overdose, such as instant death, or pulmonary edema. Theysaid their research showed that the most probable cause of thesedeaths was the impurities mixed with the heroin, not the her oinitself. As the doctors in England put it, if an addict is buyingheroin on the black market which is 10 percent heroin and 90percent cement, it does not take a genius to figure out what isgoing to cause the most problems. The low number of deaths from heroin is all the moreremarkable because it is usually taken in the most dangerousmanner possible. {{* Tolerance for heroin declines rapidly afterwithdrawal. A junkie who abstains for only a short time can killhimself with a "normal" dose when he resumes.}} False. See above. {{* Even if the addict takes a "normal" dose ina stable environment, the lethal dose is not much greater thanthe effective dose, so the chances of a fatal miscalculationremain high.}} False again. See above. {{* Beyond that is the effect of withdrawal, includingchills, runny nose, aching, abdominal cramps, vomiting anddiarrhea. Insomnia and irritability may persist for weeks.}} My mother-in-law gets that when she gives up her morningcoffee. Should we put her in prison to improve her mood? {{* Withdrawal symptoms may be reoccur long after the drugis withdrawn if the addict experiences environmental cues relatedto his former drug experience.}} Same is true with any other addictive drug. Talk toex-smokers. {{* Street heroin is likely to contain impurities,anything from quinine to rat poison.}} True, which is why every major study of the issue said thatProhibition causes more problems than it solves. {{* Self-administered injections are also dangerous, oftenleading to septisemia, endocarditis, damaged veins, hepatitis orAIDS.}} More reasons why the doctors in Liverpool decided to take theapproach they did and why the cities of Los Angeles and SanFrancisco have decided to openly violate state drug laws (at theurging of the medical community) to properly address the issue. {{* The addict lifestyle is unhealthy. Doing heroin is notconducive to balanced diets, regular exercise, safe sex norregular check-ups. Addicts often experience health problems notdirectly related to drugs.}} So let's throw them in prison to improve their health? Doesnot make sense. {{ The drug policy of the United States is to punishdealers severely. However, *users* face little or no punishment.}} There are tens of thousands of people now in prison who knowyou are wrong. One woman got a mandatory minimum of ten years,even though she was not a user or a dealer. {{ Hence, demand remains high. Economic theory predictsthat where there is a high demand, there *will* be a supply . . .The principle effect of our enforcement policy is to raise theprice.}} Now that doesn't sound like a very effective approach, doesit? We might have done just as well by taxing it. {{ Strict drug laws have practically eliminated narcoticsin Singapore and Turkey, which were once important centers of thedrug trade.}} Actually, no. And these countries kill more people than thedrugs do. Is that what you want? {{}}Sixty Minutes corroborated Schaeffer's version.Wouldn't be the first time they screwed up. Did you see theepisode on Dungeons & Dragons?}} As I said in another message -- we talked to the docto rsinvolved personally. Those doctors confirmed that 60 Minutes wasaccurate. {{ My point was, when Americans moved from a loose-drugenvironment (Viet Nam) to a tight-drug environment (the U.S.)they gave up the habit. }} As stated before, the studies of this phenomenon found it hadnothing to do with availability because all the returningsoldiers reported that they could get heroin any time they wantedin the US, they just did not want it anymore. {{ Holland is a very small country, with a culturesignificantly different from the United States. In any case, youhave not provided any figures to support your contention thatdrug use didn't increase in Holland after legalization.}} I offered to put you in touch with the Dutch authorities soyou can ask them yourselves. One of them volunteered to come tothe United States to speak for us because he wanted to stop thiskind of disinformation. {{ I don't have that study (of over 20 years ago) here,but I'm old enough to remember that Nixon was greatly embarrassedwhen his commission recommended decriminalizing marijuana. It didnor recommend legalizing narcotics.}} You may also remember that the commission was composedentirely of Nixon's handpicked law and order conservatives andthey refused to even hear testimony from anyone who supportedlegalization or decriminalization. Still, they concluded therewas no real choice in the matter. As they said, the real drugproblem is not heroin, or cocaine, or marijuana. The realproblem, they said, is the ignorance of our public officials whohave never bothered to read the evidence. Nixon refused to evenread his own report. {{ But you apparently do not understand the differencebetween marijuana and narcotics. Allow me to explain. Marijuanais a herbaceous plant which grows wild in the United States andis easily cultivated. It is not highly toxic nor highlyaddictive.}} Then maybe you can explain to me how hemp became illegal. {{ Narcotics are derived from the opium poppy or from thecoca plant, which are not grown in the United States, and whichmuch be subjected to an elaborate refining process beforeconsumption. Narcotics take various forms, all of them far moretoxic and addictive than marijuana.}} Nothing derived from the coca plant is a"narcotic". It is defined that way in law, but alwayshas been incorrect. Seeing as how there has never been a recorded human death dueto marijuana, almost anything would be more toxic. {{ While young and naive people may easily leap to theconclusion that all drugs are the same, this is simply not thecase.}} True, alcohol and tobacco are far more dangerous than most ofthe illegal drugs. {{ None of your "credible studies" support thepoint you are trying to make. Not one advocates legalizingnarcotics.}} Which ones have you read, and what did they say? (I will betI get a short answer, or none at all, to that question.) ((Note: When I pressed my opponent on this point, heultimately admitted he had never read any of them.)) {{ This program was only recently adopted, so we don'tknow yet how well it works, but it certainly is not simply"being locked ia a cage."}} Check that again. Most prisons are so overcrowded that thereare no rehabilitation efforts of any kind. Those words on paperthat you sent are nice, but they don't mean s**t in the realityof today's prisons. {{ The experience of a recovering alcoholic may be similarto that of a heroin addict, but the fact is that mostalcohol-users never become alcoholics. Most heroin-users dobecome addicts.}} False. See the references cited earlier. {{ The error of our present drug policy is that we punishthe dealers, but fail to effectively punish the users. Dealingdrugs is a high- risk activity; using them is low-risk.Therefore, there continues to be a demand for drugs. The maineffect of our policy is to raise the price.}} There are thirty million drug users. How many millions do youthink we ought to throw in prison? {{I assume you are not just being cute, and therefore youdo not propose legalizing drugs. Excuse me for misreading you. Iam glad you want to keep them illegal. }} I did not say that either. Please read my other message toyou. }}So how many people actually die from drugs each year,anyway? {{Good question! I haven't a clue. But neither do you. Inyour stats on drug caused deaths, what is included? If a heroinaddict gets so run down he dies of pneumonia, is that listed asheroin caused? }} The official Federal figures, which have been prettyconsistent for a long time show the following approximate annualdeath rate: Tobacco -- 400,000 Alcohol - 100,000 Sidestream tobacco smoke --- 3,000 to 50,000 Prescription drugs - at least 10,000 All illegal drugs combined -- 4,500 Cocaine - 2,500 Aspirin -- 2,000 Heroin - 2,000 Marijuana - No recorded deaths in human history. The above figures do not include pneumonia type deaths. TheAMA published figures recently which stated that the total of allsuch deaths for illegal drugs was about 20,000, still only asmall fraction of the damage caused by alcohol and tobacco. As Ihave pointed out in other messages, there is a good deal ofresearch to suggest that making drugs illegal increases thehazards of drugs -- such as impure bathtub gin duringprohibition. {{There were approximately 25,000 deaths on the highwaylast year in which at least one driver was drunk. Were thoselisted as alcohol caused deaths? }} No, they were not listed as such in figures I gave above. {{ I don't know the numbers, but I know that your figuresare low. }} Then how do you know my figures are low? {{ I also know that any drug caused death is a waste of alife. You keep asking, over and over, how many people do we haveto throw in prison. Let me ask you - how many deaths will it takefor you to cry "Enough!"}} Enough what? At the current rate we can't enforce this law nomatter how many people it kills. There just aren't enough jailcells available to solve the problem this way and there is no waywe can build them. It doesn't matter what you want to do, it is amatter of what you can do -- and there is no way we can solve thedrug problem with prison. The reason I keep asking this question is a simple one. Youcan figure out yourself what a good policy would be if you willjust seriously address this question. There are thirty milliondrug users out there. We are currently working on putting an evenmillion of them in prison, with no perceivable difference in theproblem on the streets. Should we put five, ten, or twentymillion people in prison? Just tell me what the most reasonablenumber is and you will have figured out why this policy cannotwork. {{ Naturally, the people who were running the program gavean objective account of the results, and of course a message froman e-mail friend in Liverpool settles the issue. There is reallyno need to read any academic studies from Liverpool University;you can learn everything you need to know just by watchingtelevision.}} Well, no, actually you would be better off to go to Liverpooland talk to both the medical and police authorities there -- as afew of my close personal friends are doing right now. One, by theway, is a member of the Board of Directors of the CaliforniaAcademy of Family Physicians. But, he has already talked with thedoctors and other officials there and confirmed that the 60Minutes show is an accurate portrayal. {{ If you want it compared, then it's practicallyidentical, otherwise it's "utterly different."}} Kinda sums up your attitude about comparing us with othercountries, doesn't it? Singapore and Turkey are good comparisonsbut the Netherlands is not. {{ Surprise! The study I have been referring too comesfrom Wirral, which happens to be a suburb of Liverpool. Youinsist, without having seen it, that this study is mistaken.However the information from Liverpool, which you know about froma 15-minute television episode, must be good and also relevant tothe situation in America.}} Then why did the British Association of Chiefs of Police --including the Liverpool Chief of Police -- vote fordecriminalization? As I said above, members of our group are overthere right now - - for the second time -- talking with theofficials there. {{ You don't see any danger, then, from extrapolating froma small, homogenous country to a large, unhomogenous one?}} Considering the same thing is happening all over Europe, thatkind of equates to a large, unhomogenous one, doesn't it? And, bythe way, what is the exact difference which would keep theirapproaches from producing benefits here? That is, assuming youknow enough about what is happening over there to know thedifference. {{ They "go to jail" quite frequently; theydon't do much prison time unless they deal or commit some othercrime.}} There are at least 52 Federal judges who disagree with you. Iwill take their word, and the word of the New York StateCorrections Commissioner, over yours. {{ Prescript ion was a miserable failure in England,according to _Living With Heroin_.}} Check again, and this time talk to some of the peopleactually involved, as we have done. {{ By and large, the Legalizers are disturbed, unhappypeople who have friends and loved ones who are in prison orstrung out. The aim of the Legalizers is simply to spread themisery around as much as possible. The more druggies there are,the more "normal" it is. The farther the web ofdestruction spreads, the better. The more people they can ruinand destroy, they happier they will be. The driving force behindlegalization is Revenge.}} Now we come down to the real driving force behind drugprohibition -- bigotry and ignorance. Do you really think that itis the desire of such organizations as the British Association ofChiefs of Police? {{ To advocate legalizing narcotics isn't politicalsuicide (the surgeon general did it) . . . but it is incrediblydumb.}} No she did not. I suppose then, that the British Associationof Chiefs of Police, the head of Interpol, and the ColombianAttorney General, as well as the California Medical Association,the California Society of Addiction Medicine, etc., etc., etc.,etc., are incredibly dumb? (I could go on with a list of about 40pages of such people, but why belabor the point?) {{ If I were strung out, it's entirely possible my ownfamily would turn me in. Lots of druggies get turned in by theirown families; it's the only way to ensure treatment.}} Judge Gray was on a radio show one night and one of thecallers was a heroin addict who wanted help to get off drugs. Hesaid he had called the police to ask for help but they just threwhim in jail when he was desperately ill (with things other thandrugs), he got a criminal conviction and no help at all. The pity is that people who think they ought to throw peoplein jail "for their own good" hardly ever get the samefavor granted to them. {{ Interesting study. The fact that everyone is doingdrugs has "nothing to do with drug availability."Presumably, then, they would do just as much if there were nodrugs to be found . . . clever.}} That is not going to happen, so why worry about it? {{ Even the most strung-out junkie still wants to gethigh. They keep increasing their dosage, every chance they get.Higher dosage -}more drug tolerance -} fewer highs -} higherdosage. It's a vicious circle.}} So the solution is to throw millions of people in prison? {{ Heh, half of all drug arrests are for minors. How doyou propose to legalize drugs for adults and keep them away fromthe kids?}} You admit it is not happening under the current system, sowhat's the difference? You can't think of anyone who couldcontrol the sales to children better than the current people whosell drugs, right? {{ "Worth more" means more expensive. Moreexpensive means less demand . . . even if one assumes that peoplein prison have just as to spend as those outside . . .}} More expensive means more profits -- enough to corrupt entirelaw enforcement agencies, like the LA County Sheriffs who went toprison. {{Perhaps you are correct in saying the vast majoritywouldn't become addicted. Perhaps. But then, I didn't like iteither, and I did become an addict. Was one for about 12 years.}} It is as illegal as it can be and that didn't stop you, didit? What makes you think it stops anyone else? Our policy, as itis, does not seem to have benefited you. Would your life have been improved if you had spent twentyyears in prison? By what you are recommending, you still probablywould not be out on the streets to engage in this conversation.And, couldn't you still get your drugs if you decided you wantedto? {{ I don't believe a non addict ever truly understandswhat it is like.}} On the other hand, maybe it is the addict who does notunderstand. In general, I don't believe that becoming an addictgives anyone any great insights into national policy. That isgiving more credit to drugs than they deserve. {{ When you and Mona say that it isn't magical, you don'tknow what you are talking about. When the first buzz of the drughits me, I become alive, and feel that I have become reallyhuman. When straight, I do not have that feeling. }} That is not my experience with any of the drugs I have triedand it is not the experience of the majority of people I know. Ifyou do not have the feeling of being human when you are straightthen it seems the problem is there whether you have the drug ornot. I (and most people I know) feel alive all the time so thereis not much need for drugs of any sort. {{ I continued using while convinced that I would die fromit. }} So prison, by comparison, would not do nearly as much todissuade you, would it? {{ However - I very rarely drove while high, because offear of getting caught. Addiction is _not_ logical. }} Another good reason why stiff penalties are unlikely todissuade addicts from using. Their behavior is not logical. {{ If it is legalized, there will be folks who will justtry it to see what it is like, and will never be straight again.You do not account for those people. }} Yes I do. I don't like their behavior but I don't pretendthat putting them in prison is the proper approach to theirproblem, either. {{Drugs _are_ magical to the addict. }} Lots of things are magical to the addict. The addicts I haveknown used drugs of all types without regard for much ofanything. If they could not get heroin they would do other thingssuch as sniff gasoline, or inject coffee (quite a rush, they tellme). That still does not mean that it is a good idea to throwthem in prison. {{}}As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noblegoal. Sarcasm does not become you. If you never want to inflictpain, then never raise a child. Never become a supervisor. Neverperform any function where you have the responsibility to modifysomeone's behaviour. Pain, whether it be a swat on the butt, awritten reprimand, or a jail term, is an integral part ofbehaviour modification.}} I don't believe in inflicting pain to the point where itrenders someone permanently unemployable and submits them tothings like gang rape, for trivial causes. Punishment, when used,should be corrective, not destructive. {{I issue a mild protest over your figures on black maledrug use. You said 50% go to prison for drug abuse. Now you say50% go to prison period, with drug use the single biggest cause.But it is not a big point - I was just very shocked at your stat.}} No, you misinterpreted. I am very careful about what I say onthis subject, because I have been saying it for a long time tolots of people. {{The two most dangerous? Do you think smoking a cigaretteis as dangerous as free basing cocaine? C'mon Cliff! Sure, a lotmore people die from tobacco, but that is because a whole lotmore people use that. Tobacco is legal and marketed. That issomething I want to avoid for cocaine.}} Compare the death rates. The death rate, per user, forcocaine is less than that for tobacco. And, just for interest, Iquote from a study done in 1967 - "Cigarette smoking isunquestionably more damaging to the health than heroin." --Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie Nyswander, Rockefeller Univ. {{What do you think about increasing educational efforts?Teach school kids more about it. Pound home what it can do, andwhat help is available. }} As all of the major studies have said, most of theeducational efforts have been based around ridiculous scaretactics which the kids soon discovered were hokey anddisregarded. The main problem is a massive lack of accurateinformation by the people teaching the courses. {{What about more money to help folks get straight? Ithink it would be poetic to increase the taxes on tobacco andalcohol to pay for this. }} A recent Rand study showed that every dollar spent ontreatment saved seven dollars in related social costs. How aboutjust increasing the taxes on alcohol and tobacco until they paytheir own costs? {{Judge Gray's idea is intriguing. If we were to go tolegalization, that would be a much better way to handle it thenjust turning it over to the market. Of course, that would makethe government our pushers. Sounds a little scary. }} His basic thought is that drugs are here anyway, so we shouldnot kid ourselves that we are stopping them. The truth is that wecurrentlyinflict smaller losses (percentage-wise) on the drugdealers than K-Mart suffers from shoplifters. As you probablyknow, shoplifters are not about to put K-Mart out of business.Given the fact that they will be here forever, let's at leastguarantee that there are pure, reliable sources which will notmake the related problems worse, and which will provide a taxbasis for providing treatment. Keep in mind that Judge Gray is a former prosecutor withnumerous drug convictions. He has also sentenced more than hisshare of people to prison for drug offenses, and is not regardedas lenient. When he first came out for a change in policy a little overtwo years ago, he was vilified by all kinds of people. He justgot back from the State Bar Convention and reported that theatmosphere has changed completely. He says he is getting more andmore support from other judges and law enforcement officials.They don't all agree on what would be a better response, but theyagree that our current policy is a failure and should beabandoned. {{As to your repeated mentioning of the Netherlands andLiverpool, I am reminded of another drug success story. Accordingto reports, we had found a way to successfully combat heroinabuse. It was low cost, and supplied free to addicts. Amreferring to the methadone program. It took us a long time torealize what a horrible waste it was. But all the reports wereglowing..... }} The medical authorities I have talked to, and the research Ihave read (see the list) have indicated that the methadoneprograms were a major improvement. Not perfect, but a majorimprovement. Of the authorities I have talked to they have allsaid that the biggest problems with the methadone program werecreated by the government itself. First, they said, was aconsistent pattern of lies about the results. The Europeanauthorities have reported the same thing about what the USGovernment says about their programs. Second, there wererestrictions on methadone which, in effect, granted monopolies tocertain people and allowed them to abuse the situation. It wouldbe much better, they said, if addicts could go to their regulardoctors for prescriptions, like any other medication. Also, many of them point to the methadone programs as proofthat the narcotics are not especially dangerous, becausemethadone is prescribed routinely without any significantoverdose problem. {{Let us look at some of your stats. You say the deathrate for tobacco is 400,000. For alcohol it is 100,000. Forcocaine it is 2,500. You then answer my question by saying the2,500 does not include pneumonia type deaths. What does itinclude? No doubt (correct me if I am wrong) it is a count ofthose who OD, and die. Probably from ER's. How many of the400,000 tobacco deaths are based on that criteria? }} As I said, the AMA published figures on this subject, andsaid that, using the same standards of classification for thedeaths, the comparable figure for illegal drugs is about 20,000,to tobacco's 400,000+. {{ Only way to die of an OD of tobacco is to be in atobacco wharehouse as it burns down. So, using that criteria, thedeath rate for tobacco is probably close to zero. }} Absolutely wrong. You must have missed the news shows thatreported on the problem of nicotine poisoning in people who workin the fields and pick tobacco. There are far more people whoreceive permanent nervous system damage (and even die) from thatthan from most of the illegal drugs. Nicotine, you may haveforgotten, is an insecticide. {{ Now if we include lung cancer, etc, with the tobaccodeaths, we must also include pneumonia, suicides, trafficaccidents, dehydration, AIDS, etc, in the cocaine deaths.}} The AMA's figures included those causes. Tobacco still killsat least 20 times as many people as the illegal drugs. {{ Many people become very aggresive on crack, and get infights - and get killed. That is a cocaine caused death.}} Wrong. A study done in NY during the height of the crackepidemic showed that, of 414 homicides, only three could betraced to the effects of cocaine in any form, and two of thesewere victim- precipitated. For example, in one case the murdervictim tried to rape someone who was high on crack and got killedin the process. The study showed the only drug with a realconnection to violence was alcohol. This was recently confirmedby the DOJ report "Psychoactive Substances andViolence." {{ In the same way, how many alcohol deaths are caused byOD? Maybe a few hundred?}} Wrong again. Alcohol overdose death is not at all uncommon,especially on college campuses. Former HEW Secretary JosephCalifano once estimated that about 40 percent of all hospitalcare in the US is due to alcohol related conditions, includingoverdoses. {{ It is not easy to OD on alcohol so badly you die. Youtend to pass out first.}} False. People are simply lucky if they pass out, but alcoholoverdose deaths are not at all uncommon. The main reason youdon't hear about them so much is because they are not news. {{ So your stats include liver disease, etc. I have met aheroin addict, who was unconscious, half in a gutter, on a coldnight. If he had died of exposure, he should have been listed asa heroin caused death. It, of course, wouldn't have been.}} So maybe we should adjust the death figures for heroindownward. As I said, even if you assume that, for whateverreason, the deaths from illegal drugs are grossly underestimated,you still don't get anywhere near the deaths caused by alcoholand tobacco. You should take a big clue from this. The reasonsfor the drug laws never did have anything to do with the reasonsyou are stating. When the laws were first passed, no medicalevidence was even presented to show that these drugs were harmfuland, in fact, the medical authorities in the US were opposed tothe laws. While we are on the subject of history, maybe you cantell me why hemp was outlawed? {{Please see the above. Also, your figures are nowcounting deaths only. Not fair for a discussion like this. Howmany messed up lives do cocaine and heroin cause? If a man issent to prison, it does not kill him, it messes up his life. So -lets compare like to like. }} So we take someone who already has a problem and mess up hislife some more? Interesting approach, but I fail to see how itprovides any benefit. {{You say there are approximately 1,000,000 people inprison for drug abuse. That is 1,000,000 messed up lives.According to your stats, that leaves 29,000,000 still abusingdrugs outside. That leaves 29,000,000 messed up lives. Now, tosave the 1,000,000 in prison, youwant to vastly increase the29,000,000. }} The first point you should recognize from these stats is thatit is folly to believe that anything is under control right now.So, basically, you are supporting a campaign that has no way toachieve your stated goals, even if it was a good idea. The livesmessed up in prison are messed up permanently. Black men (by farthe majority of those prosecuted for drug offenses) are virtuallypermanently unemployable once they have a prison record. They canrecover from a drug habit (and many do) but it is much moredifficult to recover from a stretch in prison. And, as for the other 29,000,000, the vast majority of themare not any more messed up than the average wine drinker. Thatmuch is self-evident, or the problem would be far worse than itis. {{Have you ever had a person you truly cared about who wasan addict? }} Sure, one of my aunts and a cousin I grew up with, amongothers. I deplore their behavior and I wish they would stop but,at the same time, I recognize that neither they nor society wouldbe better off if we spent a million dollars to put them inprison. {{What do I think is a reasonable number of people toimprison in order to stop drug abuse? Enough so that the overallwelfare of the country comes out ahead. }} I agree with that last part. So how many should we put inprison to come out ahead? Just tell me what the number is so wecan make plans to build that many prison cells. {{ I think we are a long way from passing the point wheremore people are messed up by the prison than by drug abuse. }} How would you know if you admit you don't know the stats ondeaths or people in prison? {{How many additional deaths, resulting from thelegalization of drug use, would it take for you to cry "Toomany!" }} What evidence do you have to show that there would beadditional deaths? Other than your own opinion, that is. All theevidence I have seen says that the death rate would probably godown with a more intelligent policy. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-53IA086-000619-B006-265http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/1600bc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034018 text/html 3184HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:40:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:12 GMTContent-length: 2967 Evidence Found of Ancient Marijuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research EVIDENCE FOUND OF ANCIENT MARIJUANA USE Albany (NY) Times Union, 20 May 1993 (attributed to Newsday) The first physical evidence that marijuana was used as amedicine in the ancient Mideast was reported Wednesday by Israeliscientists who found residue of the drug with the skeleton of agirl who apparently died in childbirth 1,600 years ago. The researchers said the marijuana probably was used by amid-wife trying to speed the birth, as well as ease the pain.Until now, the researchers wrote in a letter to the journalNature, "physical evidence of cannabis (marijuana) use inthe ancient Middle East has not yet been obtained." The seven researchers -- from Hebrew University, the IsraelAntiquities Authority and the National Police Headquartersforensic division -- said references to marijuana as a medicineare seen as far back as 1,600 B.C. in Egyptian, Assyrian, Greekand Roman writings. But physical evidence that the hemp weed,cannabis sativa, was used for that purpose has been missing. The researchers' examination of an undisturbed family tombnear Jerusalem dating to the fourth century AD indicated thegirl, about 14, died because her pelvis was too small to permitnormal birth. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Historical Research WT01-B40-54IA087-000632-B036-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/args3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070559 text/html 61464HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:05:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:17 GMTContent-length: 61246 25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate 25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate by Clifford A. Schaffer But there is a more pressing argument. I know human natureto at least some degree. People do things for many reasons, butprimarily because they get more pleasure than pain from thething. Your argument is that if you remove a whole lot of thepain from drug use, that people will not use drugs more. Are youtherefore saying that making heroin illegal causes people to wantto use it more? Why? Do people enjoy paying fines? Do they likeprison? Please provide me with some sensible reasons why youbelieve people would not use drugs more, or would use them less,if drugs were legal. The basic reason is the same simple reason that most peopledo not spend their days staggering around on booze. I tried itand realized that I enjoyed being sober a whole lot more. Thevast majority of the people are the same way. As I said before,there is nothing magical about these drugs which causes them tobe hypnotically attractive. As a matter of fact, I don't think Iwould like them much myself because one of the most commoneffects is to make users puke. Maybe it is hard for other peopleto understand, but I don't think that puking is much fun. As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noble goal.Take a group of people who are not well off anyway and make itour goal to inflict as much pain on them as we can. Let's consider a certain little statistical fact. The numberof people in prison is currently only a small fraction of thetotal number of users. Therefore, the current system cannotinflict pain on more than a small number of the users and must beseen as quite ineffective in your stated goal. Withoutconsidering the fact that our prisons are currently overloaded,just tell me how many more millions of people we should put inprison to inflict the proper amount of pain. Please also confirm your quote to me on the percentage ofblack men going to prison on drug charges. You said it was 50%.Is that accurate? If so, what percentage of black men, in total,abuse drugs? If 50% go to prison, total use must approach 100%.If not, what is the figure? (I guess this has one point in yourfavor. If 100% of black males now are drug abusers, legalizingdrugs would not cause the percentage to go up.) About half of all black men in America will be incarceratedat least once by the time they are thirty. The source of this isinformation extrapolated from the DOJ report The Prevalence ofImprisonment, and studies by the Sentencing Project that showthat about one-fourth of the black men under 30 are _currently_in prison, on probation, or parole. Drug offenses will be thesingle biggest cause for this. The figures on drug use throughthe population are about the same for whites as it is for blacks.The disproportionately high percentage of blacks arrested can beaccounted for by a number of factors. The first is that theselaws originally were intended to target minorities and thetactics used to enforce them tend to target minorities overwhites. For example, it is easier to pick up twenty streetdealers in a minority community than it is to get the same numberby busting middle class white houses. Also, the drug businessprovides a unique opportunity for young black men. These andother factors create a situation where, in certain inner cityneighborhoods, ninety percent of the black men have already beento prison at least once. Also, black men are more likely to beconvicted because of poor legal representation, and more likelyto be sentenced to prison when they are convicted. Okay!! Finally. What other options do you have in mind?This has the possibility of being a very productive thread. Nosnide insults or sarcasm. What other options are there? There are quite a few. The first point that I would make isthat we should have a consistent philosophy and approach to allrecreational drugs. That is, if you would not think it good for7-11 clerks to sell cocaine to children, then we should beequally tough about tobacco. At the same time, if you recognizethat throwing tobacco smokers in prison would becounterproductive, then it stands to reason that it would becounterproductive for other drugs. Figure out what would be agood policy for the two most dangerous drugs -- alcohol andtobacco -- and it will be easy to figure out what should be doneabout the others. Judge Gray has called for "regulated distribution".His idea is that drugs would be available at government regulatedstores of some sort at prices that would be low enough todiscourage the black market. Advertising would be prohibitedunder his idea and all drugs would be sold in plain wrappers withwarning information and, most importantly, a number to call toget help. The Netherlands has taken a different approach. They stillhave drug laws but make it a point not to enforce them except incases where there are bad drugs, or people are making themselvesobnoxious. Their primary purpose is to reduce the harm done bydrugs and part of their plan is to get people to come in fortreatment. In Liverpool, they are prescribing heroin and cocaine toaddicts as part of the public health service. Part of the priceof getting the prescription is that addicts must agree to stopcommitting crimes and to get their lives together. With some drugs, such as marijuana, it is doubtful whetherany sort of regulation is even desireable. The Dutch ignore it tothe point of allowing it to be sold openly in coffee shops and itdoes not seem to cause any problems. Now there are burglars in my neighborhood. Some of them dothe same crime for years - and will keep on doing it for more.Is, therefore, the threat of prison not relevant? Should weremove that threat? Should we legalize buglary, because prisononly makes it worse? I don't think so. You have indicated thatlegalizing hard drugs would lower the rate of drug abuse. Perhapsyou also believe legalizing burglary would lower that crime. Idisagree on both counts. The threat of prison is a deterrent topotential burglars, robbers, murderers, etc. I believe it is alsoa deterrent to potential drug abusers. Once addiction has beenreached, that threat is less powerful. But that does not mean weremove it. I get this tired, irrelevant argument a lot. First, burglaryis not the same as drug use so comparisons of the legal methodsfor controlling them are silly. Second, if we had thirty millionburglars (or criminals of any kind) we would have to find anothermethod of dealing with the problem just because the criminaljustice system could not handle the load. In this case it doesn'tmatter what you want to do, it is a matter of what you can do. You also indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drugaddict. I assume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, isrude.) Since I have now been sober for 13 years, and 15 days,prison is not called for. However, remember that drugs took 12years of my life. If I had been jailed in year two or three, andthat huge shock had persuaded me to stay sober, I would havegained 9-10 years of a productive life back. I, in retrospect,really wish that had happened. I miss those 12 years a lot. No, I was not being sarcastic, I was simply following thelogical conclusion of what you said. I would point out that,under the current laws you might have done a lot more than acouple of years in jail. And, when you got out, you would bevirtually unemployable (at anything decent, anyway) which wouldhave severely impacted your attempts at recovery. You again brought up several times that legalizing drugs(which you oppose) in other countries lowered the rate of drugabuse. Because of my knowledge of the way people act, I find thateither I do not understand what you mean, or your stats aresimply wrong. As I said above, if you made burglary legal, wouldthere be fewer of them? If you sold hamburgers for 10cents, wouldwe buy fewer? I just find the idea that making hard drugscontrolled, legal, and cheap would result in less use of them. My point again that you are not acquainted with all of thefacts on this issue. It is happening in Europe. As one Dutchofficial put it, junkies are their own worst advertisement andthey really don't need much in the way of education to persuadepeople that drug addiction is something they want to avoid. As I said before, I recommend that you read the CU Report,and see the A&E special which recently aired on this subject. You asked about your mother being unable to get the drugsshe needs. I do not know the situation at all. I believe that anydrug that would help your mother should be available to her,including marijuana and heroin. Of course, that is not the pointhere. Then you do not understand a whole lot about the drug war.The repression of medical use and research into these drugs wasan integral part of the whole campaign from the very beginning.When the laws were first passed the drug police jailed more than3,000 doctors, specifically aiming at those who were treatingaddicts, and those who voiced disagreement with the policy. Theyeffectively shut down all research into the medical uses and evenresearch into the causes and cures for drug addiction for overfifty years (and it is still difficult to do honest drug researchin this country). It was a deliberate, calculated reign of terroragainst the medical profession which is still intact today. If you will research this a little you will discover why thisreign of terror exists. That is, if these drugs are under theprovince of the medical profession where they really belong, thenthe whole drug prohbition will fall apart quite rapidly. As I said before, your assumptions about why these laws arehere are totally wrong. The reasons you have stated never didhave anything to do with the laws. We have discussed this. You play with stats to advanceyour point, regardless of the intellectual integrity. You have not presented any stats in contrast to mine, so Iwonder how you can say this. You also said that eight times the number that die from ODon drugs, die from that drug use for other reasons - pneumonia,for example. You ignored my point that many deaths would not beattributed to drug use because there was something else handy,such as exposure, or AIDS. No I didn't. I quoted the AMA figures on the subject. Youhave cited nothing but your own opinion in response. You have again cooked your figures. Lets say a policemanpulls over the car of a junkie tonight for erratic driving. Asearch shows five rocks in his pocket. He is arrested. Knowing heis busted, he pleads guilty. According to your figures, that cost$150,000. Balderdash. Aren't we deliberately missing some points here? For everyone which does what you suggested (and there are fewer of them asthe penalties go up) there are others who fight it all the way.The AVERAGE cost is what is being cited. They then build a cell - especially for him. They can'tuse the one that some burglar is now leaving. Well, yes they could. That is what is happening now --violent offenders are being released early so we can throw moredrug users in prison. That doesn't make a lot of sense, does it?Therefore, in order for the law not to cause more harm than good(by releasing another offender early) we have to build a newprison cell. No - that would mean you had to prorate the cost of thecell by everyone who uses it. Would be an honest way, but wouldnot boost your cause. Balderdash again. By what you are saying, the total number of people sent toprison would not increase beyond what it is today -- therefore nobeneficial effect from tougher penalties. An official in Oakland who desperatly wanted to show howmuch money was being saved by his drug program as opposed toprison, put the cost of prison at $20,000 per year. You say$30,000. Balderdash. No, the figures I used come from the Wall Street Journal andthe DOJ. The figures vary somewhat from jurisdiction tojurisdiction, and according to the type of prison but they areall in the same range. You can get the most current figuresyourself by calling the National Clearinghouse and Data Centerfor Drugs and Crime. In Phoenix they put folks in tents!! Its warm, and theyhave many cots like in the army, but it is cheap. And a gooddeterrent. Folks don't like it. So my guess for my addict aboveis about $2,000 to arrest and and convict, $1,500 for theprorated cost of the cell, and $10,000 for the six months hewould actually serve. Comes to $13,500, as opposed to your$450,000. But, of course, your guess is not any more informed than someof your other statements. Personally, I will take the testimonyof people like Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissionerof Corrections, before I would accept yours. I am developing a deep mistrust for your facts andfigures. Many of them _may_ be correct, but when I find some tobe in error, I know that you would deliberatly mislead if youfelt you could get away with it. So now I divide by two, an thendoubt. So go read the resources I have mentioned yourself. If youhad done that in the first place, we wouldn't be having thisdiscussion now. Drugs are not magical in a literal sense. They just have aprofound effect on the minds of some people, that some of thosepeople have compared to magic. I thought so. But, of course, either way it does not indicatethat prison is the correct approach. PatI ask you - how many more deaths, and destroyed lives,would it take before you said legalizing drugs was a bad idea?Will await your answer. Please make it public. Thanks. You have dodged this question about four times now. I amnot asking your opinion on whether you think legalizing drugswould have that effect. I am asking _If it did._ Please answer. Ithink the lurkers here deserve an answer. As I said, I never said I supported legalization, so thequestion is misdirected. If legalization is what you have statedthen I wouldn't support it whatever the figures are. The answer here depends upon what you mean by"legalizing drugs". If you mean that cocaine, heroin,etc., would be sold as freely as convenience store clerks selltobacco to children then it is possible that addiction and deathswould increase, although the evidence clearly shows that theywould still not approach the death rates imposed by alcohol andtobacco. So, even in that case, one has to wonder why the majorpush should not be against alcohol and tobacco first. But, of course, I am asking you if you have any evidence(besides your own opinion) that it would increase the deaths. Sofar, you have not responded to that. You said it is not okay with you if a junkie frys hisbrain, or dies, from drug abuse. Why not, if he chooses to takethe drug? I thought that was the core of your argument - that wehad no right to interfere with him, because he could choose whathe wanted, and endure the results. Where am I missing this? This point is not, and never was, the core of my arguments. Ireally don't care what you think about anyone's individual"right" to use recreational drugs, as long as yourecognize that prison is not the proper approach in any case. But, to get back to this point, let's consider a specificexample. My mother is desperately ill with severe chronic pain. Iwon't bore you with the medical history, so let it suffice to saythat she has been all over the US and talked to the nation;sleading medical experts on the subject. They have all said thatthe best medications for here condition are the narcotics -heroin and morphine. She cannot get either one because thedoctors are afraid they will be prosecuted over any questionedprescription. In these cases, don't you think that the people whoshould be making the decision on the medical use of drugs shouldbe the doctors, in consultation with their patients? Both the Dept. of Health and Human Services and theCalifornia Medical Association have issued reports stating thatthe undertreatment of pain in this country is a "nationaltragedy" and the only reasons for it are the fear andignorance created by the drug war. Can we at least agree that any policy which denies medicineto sick people has something seriously wrong with it -- bothmorally and practically? You said it was "tyranny" to send a person toprison for drug abuse, because we would be denying him his rightto make choices. Tyranny is a judgemental word. Is it tyranny toprohibit sexual harassment? I never used the word "tyranny". Who are yourquoting? ((Who are we to cram our views down the throat of somepoor, middle aged, overweight, pathetic, animal of a businessmanager? We are a society. We look out for each other. I won'tlet that manager hurt people if I can stop it. Why? Because Icare about the people he is hurting, more than I care about hispride. Would be willing to bankrupt him in a lawsuit, to stophim, and the others like him, from hurting people. That sameconcern is why I want drugs to remain illegal. I care about thepeople who are having their lives messed up by drugs. I want itto stop. Yes, prison is not a good way to do this, but it is thebest way I see available to us right now. I agree that you have a paternalistic attitude towardinterfering in other people's lives. I don't agree that prison isthe correct approach, even if your attitude was either moral orjustified. It is also obvious that you are not acquainted with all theways we might do this. Try reading some of the studies I havementioned. If you can come up with a way that will assuredly reducethe amount of human suffering because of drug abuse, please shareit. You know by now that I don't buy the "make it legal, andpeople will stop using it" argument. Okay - you don't buyprison is better than legalization. Do you have any other ideas??What can we brainstorm? Imagine you and I were co-dictators ofthis country. We could change any law, as long as we both agreed.What would we do about drug abuse?? A good point here, which is why I was one of the co-authorsof the Hoover Resolution. It is true that we can come to a bettersolution if we will all sit down, read the facts, and discussthem. The immediate problem here is that you are not yetacquainted with all the facts, or the possible options. First, Iwould recommend that you take a trip to the local library andread The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. Youwill find it fascinating, whatever your views may be. Or, you may just want to check out what they are doing inEurope. PatDo you think some adict who chokes to death on his ownvomit is not a victim? PeterHe "victimized" himself. PatYes, that is the core of the pro-legalization argument. Absolutely false. There is a lot here that you don'tunderstand. I say so what? He is just as dead. Don't you care? That_does_ make legalization seem much more attractive. If, say, anadditional 200,000 people die in the first year, the legalizerswould simply say they "victimized" themselves, andtherefore it is no big thing First, show me some evidence that this would happen. There isno evidence anywhere that I can find. For openers, you might tryreading some of the studies I have mentioned. Second, even if it did happen, there is even less evidencethat prison is the best approach to minimizing the problem. As Ihave said many times before, all the major studies said thatprison was the worst approach. Third, even if it did happen (which all major studies refute)all major studies agreed that abandoning prison would still be abetter approach. Fourth, as we have discussed before, legalization and prisonare not the only options. . Please see this point. Responding that you don't thinkmore peole would die is not addressing this. I am asking you"What if they _do_ die?" Is that even an issue to you? Sure it is. That's why I want to see an approach which worksa whole lot better than what we are doing now. Every major studyagreed that the current system kills people from a whole lot ofcauses. You referred back to Frank again, and said that Frank wasreferring to "responsible" freedom. I had wonderedwhether, if you were with Frank, drunk, and about to climb down acliff, whether he would smile and nod, or try to stop you bywhatever means necessary. Frank said "a situation in whichany outside authority can proscribe the actions of an individualagent, even if the motivation is to "protect" thatagent "from himself" is indefensible. It is a god-givenright to not only be wrong, but to also injury onself,overtly/intentionally or covertly/unintentionally." We have already established that tough laws and big prisonscould not stop you from harming yourself with drugs. Should weperhaps just attach a 24-hour bodyguard to you because you are aknown risk? How about isolation? Now, please, lets you and I get serious. Assumelegalization is _not_ an option. Can you think up options tolower the amount of suffering caused by drug abuse? Visits toLARC's by high school classes? How about producing a very long lasting drug that makescocaine and heroin not function? Antabuse does a similiar thingfor alcoholics, but only stays in the system for about a weekafter the last use. How about prison farms, where addicts areseperated from the general population, and spend most of theirtime in education and hard manual labor, for the duration oftheir sentence? Any ideas at all???? There are lots of ideas, some of which I have already sharedwith you. In Europe they are trying even more than we havediscussed here and nearly all of those programs are having betterresults than what we experience here. As for the prison farms and hard manual labor, I suggestagain that (assuming you are right) we should start with theaddicts we know -- namely you. What's wrong with that? It wouldimprove your life greatly, wouldn't it? So, our government is wasteful and inept. That doesn'tpreclude imprisonment as being a proper course of action. No, but the absolute futility of this approach, combined withthe fact that every major study of the issue says it does moreharm than good would preclude it as a proper course of action. I would also like to ask you exactly when prison became a"proper course of action" because no such fact was everestablished when these laws were first passed. I know of one who died from heroin. He was in my weddingparty. I know of another who died in an automobile wreck whileunder the influence of cocaine. He was my best man. They're theonly two statistics I need to be familiar with. Unfortunately Iknow more. Perhaps if they had been in jail, they would bestatistics. The obvious point here is that drugs are illegal as hell butthey did not stop either one of these tragedies. This makes itall the more curious why you would support a policy that didnothing for your friends. At the risk of sounding offensive, I dare say that untilyou have lived and shared in the misery associated drug addictionand abuse, you know absolutely nothing beyond the politicallyslanted statistics that you've read or have access to. Perhapsyou do know something about this misery, in which case you've letyour mind lead your heart. I hear this a lot and it is BS from beginning to end. First,let me assure you that I have a pretty fair amount of experiencewith addicts, as do all of the doctors and others listed inSigner.zip. I dare say that the experience of any one of themwould far outweigh the experience you have had. I don't think that knowing someone who was an addict or evenbeing an addict yourself provides any great insights into aproper national policy. That gives entirely too much credit todrugs. As for not knowing anything beyond the politically slantedstatistics, it is apparent that you have not been to the libraryand read the studies I have mentioned many, many times. If youhad, you would find that the statistics -- and theirinterpretation -- are quite clear to anyone who has bothered toread the evidence. As President Nixon's own commission said, thereal problem is the ignorance of our public officials who havenever bothered to read the evidence. Increased "incidence," not increased"reports." And yes, I expect that a 25% incidence ofnarcotics would indicate harm to society. Perhaps you are wrong here, because the major studies of theissue stated that, despite the widespread usage, it did not seemto be a major problem. Furthermore, even if it was, there was noevidence presented to Congress to show that the HarrisonNarcotics Act was an appropriate approach to the problem. Infact, as stated earlier, the medical officials in this countryfelt it was not the proper approach. Furthermore, if you willread the Consumers Union Report (which you seemed to have missedin your trips to the library) you will find that most members ofCongress did not realize that they were passing what would turnout to be a Prohibition law. Similarly, when hemp was outlawed in1937, most members of Congress did not realize that they wereoutlawing a commercial crop which was grown in virtually everystate in the US. you equate the social, economic, and political milieu of19th century China with that of modern day America I am not doing anything of the kind. It seems to me you were. But, regardless, the information youpresented did not support the stated conclusions. I suggest you write to the Bureau of Justice Statisticsand tell them that their figures are in error. I suggest you research your facts a little better. You havemissed most of the major research on this issue. Drug abuse imposes its own costs on society. True enough. The point is that there is no evidence thatprison does anything to reduce those costs. In fact, every majorstudy of the issue (which you missed on your trip to the library)said it only increases the costs. why we shouldn't help smokers and excessive drinkers kickthe habit Sounds like a good idea. It's the Christian thing to do. So let's get really Christian and throw them all in jail fortheir own good. If you are a Christian, let me ask you a simplequestion. If we gave this problem to Jesus, what would he do?Would he build bigger prisons, or would he build hospitals andschools? Would he punish people, or would he heal them? Beforeyou answer, please note that I have talked to a lot of members ofthe clergy and they all come back with the same answer. As onesaid, "Put that way, the answer is obvious." When the smokers start robbing me at gun point, I'll startto worry . . . Then you should start to worry the minute cigarettes comeunder drug Prohibition. If you had read the major studies of theissue you would know that tobacco users commit the same kinds ofanti-social behavior as other addicts when they are deprived oftheir drug of choice. I don't think you understand that drug addiction isphysically harmful. _American Academic Encyclopedia_:"Tolerance develops to most of the effects of these drugs,which means that the dose must be regularly increased to maintaina constant effect." This leads to a gradual physicaldeterioration which is generally obvious in long-time junkies. The statement by the American Academic Encyclopedia does notestablish any harm to the body other than increased craving. Yourstatement is easily proven wrong by the doctors I have talked to(listed in Signer.zip) who are the world's leading experts on thesubject. And, of course, I have been asking everyone on this board whoDr. William Halsted is and how he is relevant to this issue. But,of course, you don't know such basic facts as that, so thereain't much point in asking you, is there? There are only 15,000 - 20,000 hard drug users in theNetherlands. It's a small country. I have no figures onmortality. However, I would expect they have a similar proportionof OD cases to what we have here. In 1992 they had 28 deaths from heroin overdose in the entirecountry. This is all the more remarkable when you consider thatheroin is usually injected and thus bypasses all the bodiesdefenses against overdose. _Contemporary Drug Problems_ is not a "book" butan academic journal. In this case, the author of the article"Drugs and crime in an accommodating social context: thesituation in Amsterdam" was written by Martin Grapendaal, EdLeuw and Hans Nelen, who are introduced as follows: . . . If you would like some more direct information, I can put youin touch with Michael Hessing (former chief of police ofRotterdam), Robert Van der Hoeven, the DA, etc., etc., etc. To accuse someone of lying would be rude, and sonaturally, I have not done so. I merely express a healthy degreeof skepticism as to Cliff's statements. As to his motives, I donot care to speculate. Please read Signer.zip in library 13. I met with Friedman andothers on February 23, 1993 at the Hoover Institution and signedwhat became known as the Hoover Resolution. I have becomereasonably well known for this, having persuaded such people asWilliam Von Raab, Dear Abby, and others to support theResolution. If you like, I will send you the transcript of theradio show Hugh Downs did about me. I am fairly well known inthis field so, if you knew anything about it, you would runacross my name eventually. As to my motives, I have stated them quite clearly on anumber of occasions. My mother cannot get the medicine she needs. To begin with, there is no need to lock them all up, andcertainly not to imprison them all simultaneously. If you read"Narctics Reform," you understand that I neveradvocated locking up *all* heroin users. First-time offendersshould be allowed treatment + probation, provided they have notcommitted any other offense. Subsequent drug offenses would bepunished according to an accelerated schedule: Second-timeoffenders would be obliged to do some jail time, third-timeoffenders would get a longer sentence, and so on. Since therecidivism rate for drug offenses is only 30%, this would reducethe number of addicts requiring long-term confinement to arelative handful. So, let's try the question again. How many people should belocked up? Don't give me vague generalities, give me somenumbers. I have not expressed any opinion, pro or con, as to thelegalization or decriminalization of marijuana. However, elevenstates have already decriminalized simple possession ofmarijuana, without any obvious harmful results. Of course, you are not familiar with how hemp or any of theother drugs became illegal in the first place, are you? I believe that the difference between promoting thelegalization of narcotics and the use of narcotics is a very finedistinction. One leads to the other. Correct me if I am wrong, but I think we have alreadyestablished that you have never read the major research on theissue and therefore would not be quite qualified to make thisjudgment. As it turns out, those who are now recommendinglegalization are those who have spent decades trying to limitdrug abuse. You prefer being robbed at gunpoint? That is a falseeconomy. If someone commits a robbery, as my good friend Judge Graywill tell you, that is an entirely different issue and theyshould be brought before a court of law. Until then, however, itis pointless to try to control private drug use with criminallaw. With stubborn cases who refuse to reform, that may be theonly alternative. These represent only a small minority, however. So you still have not answered the simply question of howmany should go to jail. I bet you never thought about it, didyou? Child-molesting doesn't *necessarily* involve violence northreat of violence. In the case of teen prostitution, it's apurely commercial arrangement. It may interest you to know that Joseph Califano, in a reportto the governor of New York in 1980, estimated that 70 percent ofall child molestation and abuse cases are related to alcohol. Soit again brings up the question of why you aren't campaigning foralcohol prohibition. Well, er, no. Not quite. Cliff said exactly this --"Wait! You just convinced me that prison is the rightapproach! We ought to start by throwing the known drug addicts(that's you) into prison "for their own good." A goodtwenty year stretch in the pen will change your mind about howappealing these drugs are." I told you that any time you thought it would be a good ideafor you to spend ten years locked in a small room as some thug'ssexual plaything I would be more than happy to do what you thinkis the best thing for you. I thought he was being sarcastic, and replied "Youalso indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drug addict. Iassume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, is rude.)Since I have now been sober for 13 years and 15 days, prison isnot called for." Oh, but you are still a known risk for addiction aren't you?How else are we going to protect you from yourself? Dr. Andrew, Re the issue of comparative toxicity of drugs, the followingmight interest you. Marijuana is not included, of course, becausethere are no recorded deaths from marijuana in human history(source: DEA). Therefore, there would be little point inreporting the death rate from pot. Because the death rate isZERO, there seems to be even less point in jailing people for itsuse. Actually, I think these numbers might be understated withrespect to the number of users of heroin and cocaine. Otherfigures I have seen are somewhat higher and, as I mentioned, Ibelieve the survey method itself promotes underreporting of usersfor several reasons. Therefore, it seems quite possible that thedeath rates per user for heroin and cocaine may be somewhat lowerthan the figures stated below. With respect to the number of deaths by heroin, you mayrecall that the CU Report stated that they could not find anyheroin "overdose" death in which they believed themedical evidence supported the label of "overdose."Oooooops! Sorry! I forgot you haven't read the CU Report! By the reasoning that you have given before (what littleactual reasoning we have seen) we ought to throw people in jailfor (fill in the blank) because this drug can kill people. Bythose standards, the heaviest penalties ought to be for alcoholand tobacco. You are, of course, free to present any valid citableinformation which would conflict with these figures -- but youhaven't done it yet, so I don't expect you to start now. from: Thinking About Drug Legalization by James Ostrowski, Cato Institute Paper # 121, May 25, 1989$2.00 to order or for information, write Policy Analysis Cato Institute 224 Second St. SE Washington DC 20003 Estimated Per Capita Death Rates by Drugs ---------------------------------------------------------- Drug Users Deaths per Year Deaths per 100,000 ---------------------------------------------------------- Tobacco 60 million 390,000 (a) 650 alcohol 100 million 150,000 (b) 150 Heroin 500,000 400 (c) 80 (400) Cocaine 5 million 200 (c) 4 (20) ---------------------------------------------------------- (a) "Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking: 25 Years of Progress" Surgeon General's Report (1989). (b) Estimates vary greatly, depending upon whether all health consequences, or only those traditionally associated with alcoholism, are considered. The Fifth Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcoholism and Health from the Secretary of Health and Human Services contains two references indicating a death toll of 200,000: The report states, first, thatalcohol "plays a role in 10% of all deaths in the UnitedStates," which comes to about 200,000 deaths each year. P. vi. Itfurther states that present estimates of the death toll from alcohol abuse are as high as 93.2 per 100,000. Ibid., p. x. This ratio translates into a total of about 210,000. (c) These figures were determined as follows: Drug AbuseWarning Network (DAWN) heroin and cocaine fatalities for 1984, 1985, and 1986 were averaged. The number of suicides wassubtracted. The figures were discounted to account for deaths in which both heroin and cocaine played a role. Since DAWN covers about one-third of the nation's population but almost all major urban areas where drug use florishes, totals weredoubled to arrive at yearly estimates of 2,000 for heroin deaths and 1,000 for cocaine deaths. Finally, these figures were dis- counted by 80 percent in accordance with the analysispresented in the text. Cliff, I've been practicing medicine for 20+ yrs. I'm also active in medical politics (currentlypresident-elect of the medical staff of a major tertiary carehospital). We have a rich tradition of communicating and discussingamong ourselves all matters relevant to clinical practice,economics and ESPECIALLY governmental control. The communication is accomplished via formal (peerreviewed) journals as well as by a welter of "popular"medical periodicals. As I said before, I will be more than happy to compare yourcredentials on this subject against the credentials of thedoctors who made the statements. But let's start with the simplepoints first; The total amount of heroin you have prescribed in your careeris _______? Please fill in the blank. If you are an average US doctor you have never laid yourhands or eyes on medicinal heroin and certainly have neverprescribed it. Therefore, it would seem obvious that yourknowledge is inferior to the doctors I have talked to who haveactually worked with it. As I also said, I will be happy to putyou in touch with some of them. As I suggested to ForrestJohnson, you can call them yourself if you like. Try, forinstance, just calling the publich health service in Liverpooland ask to speak with the doctors in charge of their program. Iwould be interested to hear the response you get. If you were really knowledgeable about the subject (like someof the doctors I have talked to) you would also be able to tellme about the supplies of heroin in the US which are legal, howthey got here, and what they are used for. But, of course, youcan't even tell me who Dr. William Halsted is (even though youCLAIMED to have read the book which describes him in some detail)so we will not move on to the hard questions. Why is it that you have such a difficult time answeringsimple questions? What is the problem here anyway? NOWHERE AND AT NO TIME HAVE I RUN ACROSS ANY MENTION OFDOCTORS JAILED FOR TREATING PATIENTS OR VOICING DISAGREEMENT WITHANYTHING. As I said before, it is becoming increasingly apparent thatyou have not read the Consumers Union Report or any of the otherstudies I mentioned. If credibility is an issue, yours is fadingfast. Were you telling us all a big story when you said you readit? We have one journal (Medical Economics) that searches out,investigates and reports on ANY "sensational" aspect ofnon-clinical MD related activity. They would go nuts if they thought they were missing astory such as this. Again, I say that you have not read the materials you saidyou read. It did not happen last week, it happened immediatelyafter the laws were passed and had the effect of stopping alldrug research and treatment for several decades. (Did you perhapsmiss the part about "several decades"). But, to go on to more recent matters -- It is also apparentthat you have not read the reports issued by the Department ofHealth and Human Services about the undertreatment of pain, andyou are not familiar with the California Medical Association'srecent statements on the issue. Your communication is lacking.You can get a full copy of the HHS report by calling1-800-4CANCER. Also, as I stated previously, Dr. Harvey Rose of Sacramentowas prosecuted for giving Darvon to an 84-year old woman withcrippling arthritis. It almost destroyed his practice. I will putyou in touch with him if you like. As a result of his experience,he wrote California's Intractable Pain Treatment Act which seeksto give doctors some protection against this kind of arbitraryprosecution. Also, in 1992, the DEA sent two Chicago doctors to prison forprescribing Tylenol 3. As you may know (assuming you really are adoctor -- we have had some pretenders here before) Tylenol 3 isnot even a prescription drug except in the US and South Africa,and the US is the only country in the world which has ever jaileda doctor for prescribing it. You may also be interested in the case of Florida vs.Martinez which appeared on Court TV and has been repeated severaltimes because it was such an interesting trial. Mr. Martinez isan AIDS counselor who was handing out morphine to anyone whowould come in and ask for it. Mr. Martinez does not have any kindof medical training (other than OJT as a AIDS counselor) andfreely admitted that he was violating both state and Federal druglaws. His only defense was that his actions were a medicalnecessity because of the barbaric policies on drugs. Thetestimony was quite interesting. When the jury heard all of theevidence they voted unanimously for acquittal and stated that Mr.Martinez was a "hero". Also, my mother's doctors have stated that the specificreason that they will not give her morphine (or heroin) isbecause they are afraid of prosecution if they do. These doctorshave included the doctors at the Mayo Clinic, the National PainInstitute, the USC Pain Clinic, etc., etc., etc. As you recall, Iasked you if you would prescribe it for her and got the usualcop-out. Your credibility is lacking in more than one respect. Your inflammatory statement demands proof. As I have said before, your credibility is fatallyjeopardized by these sorts of wildly improbable statements. The proof demands that you actually read the things you saidyou read. Your credibility also hinges on whether you can answerany of the simple questions I have put to you. For example: Whowas Dr. William Halsted and why is his story relevant to thethings you have said? (He asked for the umpteenth time.) Frankly, I would think that anyone who had been in medicalpractice for more than 20 years would be able to answer thesequestions a whole lot easier. Why is it that a practicingphysician cannot answer simple questions on this issue when heclaims to be an expert? There was an article in my morning newspaper. . . .Itfirst reported that the heroin hitting the streets today is morepure, costs less, and is more lethal. Cliff and Mona please note- lethal means that heroin is not harmless. A newspaper article with an unsupported statement about drugs They also quoted Lee Brown, the country's drug policydirector, as saying that since some of the stigma has beenremoved, heroin is now more socially acceptable. It use isincreasing. He also said its use is increasing because you cannow get purer doses for less money. (That is fundamental economictheory coming out again. Please note, as it gets to be a morequality product, and the price goes down, its use goes up -despite the Netherlands.) Heroin is more socially acceptable? Who does he hang aroundwith? If quality is going up and price is going down, thenobviously the drug war is not having its desired effect. Thismuch seems obvious. He stated there are now 2.7 million hard-core, chronicdrug users in this country. That much is correct. How many of them do you want to put inprison? - Recognizing, of course, that jailing them would requireTRIPLING the size of every prison and jail which now exists inAmerica. Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., was quoted ast callingheroin a vicious drug that tempts its users into a lifetime of aliving hell. (Hmmmmmmm.... they don't, apparently, just stop thefirst time they vomit.) Charles Schumer -- Now there is an informed, intelligent,reliable, impartial source that you can rely on. (Being sarcastichere, in case you didn't catch it. This guy is famous for hisignorance of the subject.) Thomas Constantine, administrator of the DEA, who camethere from the New York State police, gave a short history on howthe quality and purity of heroin is increasing. Street heroinpurity has gone from 7% a decade ago to an average of 36% now. InNew York and Boston, it reaches 95%. So he said interdiction was not working. I think we coveredthat before. Opium production has quadrupled in the last decade. Ten years ago the DEA estimated that only one percent of theentire world's opium supply would be required to supply theentire demand in the US. Now I guess it is down to one-fourth ofone percent. End of article. It appears that heroin is not harmless,and as its quality goes up and its price goes down, its use goesup. Lets keep it illegal. It appears that you have a newspaper article with a bunch ofunsubstantiated statements. Of course, even assuming that heroinis as dangerous as stated, that still does not establish thatthrowing people in prison is the best approach to the problem.The example of alcohol is instructive in this regard. So, in conclusion, you have leaped from one unsubstantiatedstatement to a conclusion which would be a non-sequitir in anycase. You frequently take sentences one at a time, and respond,thereby answering points I am not making. Yes, because the points you made in those sentences cannot besubstantiated by an evidence I have found. You proceed from wronginformation to wrong conclusions. Let's get the information rightfirst, and then we might be able to move on to correctconclusions. Also, frequently your response is not responsive. If yousay "Heroin is harmless!" and I respond "Butaccording to your stats, 20,000 people a year die from it!"it is _not_ appropriate to then say "But putting them inprisons doesn't work." Please respond to the thought, orskip it. It is very hard to maintain a dialog when you jumparound. Please get it straight what I have said. I did not say that20,000 people die every year from heroin. (If you can't get thisstraight then there is all the more reason to question the otherthings you say). What I said was that the AMA estimated that 20,000 people diefrom ALL illegal drugs from ALL causes, including overdose,accidents, etc. Simply stating the number of people who die does not provideany support for the notion that prison is a beneficial approach.As I have stated previously, far more people die from alcohol andtobacco which, by your reasoning, would show that prison ought tobe an even better idea for these drugs. In order to show thatprison is a beneficial approach, it must be shown that the numberof deaths would decrease with more people put in prison -- insome proportion that would provide a real benefit in terms of thecost. (You know, a simple cost-benefit analysis -- which you havestated previously you have never even seriously considered.) Perhaps not. The post was addressed to Mona, not you.Please pay attention. You stated that a junkie's right to fry his own brains wasthe core of the arguments for (for lack of a better word)"legalization". I pointed out that you are wrong. Youcan take those arguments away entirely and prison is still not agood idea. Okay, you are being cute. Since your true position appearsto be in favor of legalizing drugs, I will attribute that to you,and simply ignore any more comments like the above. If I amwrong, state your position on legalization. We have been over this ground before. My position is that weshould have one consistent philosophy and approach to allrecreational drugs. That would require re-thinking our approachto not only heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, but alcohol andtobacco as well. You cannot have everything both ways, Cliff. If you arenot being sarcastic, then you really do believe that I should beimprisoned. For twenty years. Because I am an addict. Of course,that thought is contrary to your beliefs most of the time. So doyou _really_ want me in prison because I am an _uppity_ addict?The only things your really know about me are that I am an addict(whom, you believe, should not be imprisoned), and I disagreewith you on this policy (and I should be imprisoned.) Or, of course, maybe there is some hypocrisy in yourbelief system. You are the first addict I have run across who believes thatspending ten years in a small cell as someone's girlfriend (hopehe doesn't have AIDS) would improve his life. If you reallybelieve it, I am willing to grant it. I don't see any other waythat we could protect you against all the harmful things youmight do to yourself. It is a common failure of those who get frustrated in adiscussion to take their opponents view, and change it tosomething else, and then oppose that. Please stop doing that. That's called setting up a straw man. You might want to takeyour own advice here. I am truly dismayed. If an additonal 200,000 people diedin the first year alone, you would still say that your "noprison" policy is best. Good grief, Cliff, how many would ittake? I was trying to pick a number high enough so you would say"If that many more people died, of course I would change mymind about legalization." You didn't. That many deathswouldn't be enough. Am not sure what I can say. Doesn't make muchsense to keep raising the ante until you do say Enough. As I said, since I don't agree with the policy you are askingabout in the first place, then it doesn't make much sense toanswer such a question. And, you seem to have missed the question that I have beenasking of everyone. What evidence do you have to show that this(or any number of increased deaths) would happen? As I said, allthe evidence I have run across says the opposite -- and I havenamed that evidence. Do you have any evidence? (Apparentlynothing besides your own opinion, right?) Can we at least agree that any policy which deniesmedicine to sick people has something seriously wrong with it --both morally and practically? I agree wholeheartedly. See, we do agree on some things. Now let's proceed to thenext point. Why is this happening when everyone I talk to seemsto agree that it is wrong? Ok, an example. You state it costs an average of $450,000to imprison someone for drug abuse. Part of that cost, accordingto you, is $150,000 for building the cell. This implies thatevery drug offender has to have a new cell built for him. Allmust be in one man cells, and none of them are reused upon therelease of the drug abuser. This is clearly absurd. You stick byit. I don't have to provide a stat for what the prorated use of acell would cost to see that. It is obvious. When I see you cookstats like that, I then doubt all of your stats because of aperceived lack of intellectual integrity. Those are the costs stated by people such as Thomas Coughlin,the New York State Commissioner of Corrections. I will believehim before I believe you, particularly when you have notpresented any evidence to back up your statements. The cells may indeed be reused on the release of the drugabuser, but you seem to miss the major point here. It would seemobvious that we have not put enough of them in prison to stop theproblem. Sending a drug abuser (or better yet, a violentcriminal) out the back door when another drug abuser comes in thefront door does not accomplish anything. Therefore, the prisonpopulation will have to increase significantly before this policybecomes effective. The question is, at what level of prisonpopulation will this program have a real effect? As you havestated, you don't have a clue what the answer to that one is, soit really doesn't matter what numbers I cite. Cliff, you clearly don't understand what addiction islike. You don't understand how people become addicts. You don'tseem to be very concerned over messed up lives, or deaths, thatcould be caused by legalizing drugs. If messed up lives, anddeaths, are not the issue, than what is? If those are not theissue, than is it only the money angle? Is it the pride of yourposition? What is your motivation? Aside from the fact that you seem to have missed my positionon this issue: As I have stated, I have relatives who are addicts, includingone that I grew up with like a brother. As I have stated, while Ideplore their behavior I have to recognize that prison would notbenefit them or society. My objective is to make them wholeagain, not to destroy them by turning them into someone'sgirlfriend in a small steel room for ten or twenty years. You maylike that and think that is beneficial for you, but I do notaccept that as an appropriate remedy for the people I know. My motivation is that I would like to a) change the laws so my mother can get the medicine sheneeds. Even you have agreed that denial of medicine is wrong.(Now you need to understand why it is happening.) b) develop a policy which helps people instead of destroyingthem. c) Destroy the mythology which surrounds this issue, whichwas the original basis for these laws in the first place. It isincreasingly apparent that you do not understand how the lawscame about, and therefore have an incorrect understanding ofwhere we are today. You have asked a number of people about imprisoning30,000,000 drug abusers. I believe that all the serious folks Iknow of say they are willing to imprison enough to lower thesuffering rate. I know of no one who believes that would take30,000,000. Am not sure how many it would take. That is exactly my point. The people who support this policy(including you) have never bothered to answer (or even ask) suchbasic questions as this. THAT IS THE PROBLEM. Don't feel lonesomehere, because I have asked every government official that I haverun across and all I ever get in response is a rather stupidexpression on their face. How good can this policy be if no onehas ever thought about where we are going with it? If I ever see that the rate of human misery is, overall,going up because of putting drug abusers in prison, I would lookinto overturning at least some of the laws. Then look again, and do it more closely. I know you have rejected my descriptions of addiction, andhow addicts act. Not so. I believe you completely. As I said, that is thereason that the CU Report and others have said that drugprohbition will not work -- because the addicts do not respondrationally and, therefore, the laws don't mean much to them interms of deterrence. Obviously, the laws did not deter you. But please consider what I told Cliff (when he told me hethought I should be thrown in prison). I was a practicing addictfor 12 years, and those years are now lost forever. If you hadthrown me in prison, for the typical sentence for a first timepossessor, I _might_ have been so rattled that I would havesought help, and stopped. If you had done that in year two of thetwelve, you would have given me ten years of life back. Mona, Ireally would like those years back. Prison would have been very,very worth it. I have no doubt that you would like those years back. Wetried everything we could with law enforcement to give them toyou and our efforts did not succeed. That's why I think we shouldhave thought about it a little better and developed a plan whichmight have helped you more than this one did. As far as I cansee, the only thing this policy did for you was to make treatmentless available because all the money is being spent on prisons. Yes, we might have given you ten years of life back (assumingyou would respond to jail when you admit that the thought of yourown death did not deter you). You would have spent that ten yearslocked in a small steel and concrete room playing the role ofsomeone's girlfriend. I don't know your personal sexual tastesbut, for the addicts I have known, I would not consider that asan acceptable remedy to their problem. Most of the ones I haveseen who went through something like that wound up considerablymore screwed up than when they went in. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-55IA087-000628-B025-207http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/seeley-2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122060830 text/html 30486HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:08:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:05:59 GMTContent-length: 30270                2. Under any analysis or "level of scrutiny," the           plaintiff should prevail.     The "privileges and immunities" clause couldn't be more straightforward:       No law shall be passed granting to any citizen, class of        citizens, or corporation other than municipal, privileges        or immunities which upon the same terms shall not equally        belong to all citizens, or corporations.Wash. Const. art. 1  12.     The plaintiff's situation regarding medicinal marijuana may be phrased in several ways which invoke the clause:The plaintiff is denied the privilege of ending his suffering by the   use of a therapeutic drug while others are granted the privilege   of ending their suffering with access to far more harmful and   addictive drugs, such as morphine, cocaine, amphetamines,   barbiturates and opium.  Additionally, patients who need THC and   may absorb it effectively through their gastro-intestinal tract   have the privilege of the relief of their suffering, while the   plaintiff, whose GI tract is not functioning when he needs THC,   is denied the privilege.Other citizens are granted immunity from arrest for possession of   therapeutic but potentially harmful drugs by virtue of   prescriptions, while the plaintiff is denied that immunity.     Whatever "level of scrutiny" the Court deems appropriate, the plaintiff's right to be free of discrimination by his own government is being violated, in that the plaintiff is being made to suffer physically for reasons which serve no legitimate government purpose.THE DISCRIMINATION INVOLVES A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT AND IS ENTITLED TO   STRICT SCRUTINY.     As set forth in State v. Smith, supra, if government discrimination or classification involves a "fundamental right," the courts must apply "strict scrutiny," and uphold the classification only if it is "necessary to accomplish a compelling state interest."  Id.  The Washington Supreme Court has found that a physician has a fundamental right to freely practice medicine.  Bering v. Share, 106 Wn.2d 212, 721 P.2d 918 (1986).  Clearly, it is no stretch to state the corollary -- that a patient has a fundamental right to the aid of his physician to relieve suffering.  In any event, the court in Bering held that the state has a "substantial interest in ensuring its citizens unimpeded access to necessary medical care."  Id. at 225.  That decision dealt with access to abortions; it is difficult for the plaintiff to see how that might be more "necessary" than ending the suffering of chemotherapy-induced, uncontrolled nausea and diarrhea.     If the court finds that a fundamental right is involved and applies strict scrutiny, the state must justify maintaining marijuana in Schedule I as "necessary to accomplish a compelling state interest."  Frankly, the plaintiff is at a loss to anticipate what sort of argument the state might put forward, if the attorneys involved intend to keep straight faces while addressing the Court.     What is the "compelling state interest" in having the plaintiff lying on the floor retching and defecating on himself when he could be sleeping peacefully?  What "compelling state interest" justifies forcing the plaintiff to endure 14-hour "highs" in an attempt to relieve his suffering with synthetics?  What is the "compelling state interest" to force the plaintiff to pay $5 per THC tablet, many of which disappear down the toilet undissolved?     Or is the "compelling state interest" the larger one of controlling marijuana as a recreational drug?  If so, why is it not "necessary" to place cocaine, opium, morphine, barbiturates, and amphetamines also in Schedule I?  Note that the penalty for manufacture or possession with intent to deliver a Schedule I or II drug is exactly the same. RCW 69.50.401.  Clearly, the legislature attaches no symbolic or exemplary difference between the two crimes.  Thus, any contention by the Attorney General that placing marijuana in Schedule II and permitting its prescriptive, medicinal use will "send a signal" that recreational use of the drug is condoned should be given the merit it deserves -- none.     In short, the classification of marijuana in Schedule I violates a fundamental right of the plaintiff, and the state cannot show a necessary reason for the classification that accomplishes a compelling state interest.  Therefore, the plaintiff's motion for declaratory relief should be granted.IF THE COURT DOES NOT FIND THAT A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT HAS BEEN   VIOLATED, THE LAW SHOULD STILL BE STRUCK DOWN UNDER "INTERMEDIATE   SCRUTINY."     "Heightened" or "intermediate" scrutiny should apply even if "strict scrutiny" does not, because the classification involves an "important right," and because the plaintiff is in a class for which he cannot be held accountable -- he did not choose to be a cancer patient, or to have his physician place him on chemotherapy in an attempt to save his life.  State v. Smith, supra.     The test is that the law must be seen as "furthering a substantial interest of the state."  As analyzed above, no state interest, substantial or otherwise, is not equally well served by placing marijuana in Schedule II.EVEN UNDER MINIMAL SCRUTINY, THE PLAINTIFF MUST PREVAIL, BECAUSE THE   CLASSIFICATION IS PURELY ARBITRARY.     Absent strict or heightened scrutiny, the test is whether a "rational relationship" exists between the challenged classification and a legitimate state interest.  What is the "legitimate" state interest in denying an end to the plaintiff's physical suffering?     The classification must be "purely arbitrary" to overcome the presumption of constitutionality.  State v. Smith, supra at 279.  In fact, the classification is purely arbitrary.  As stated by Judge Young after taking hundreds of hours of testimony, reviewing thousands of pages of documents, and issuing a 68-page report:       It would be unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious for the        DEA to continue to stand between those sufferers and the        benefits of this substance [marijuana] in light of the        evidence in this record.Judge Young's report, supra at 68 (emphasis added).     Thus, even under the "minimal scrutiny" test, the state can show no rational relationship between the classification and a legitimate state interest, and this court should find that the classification is purely arbitrary, and grant the declaratory relief requested.     C. THE PLAINTIFF IS ENTITLED TO THE RELIEF REQUESTED UNDER         ARTICLE I  32, THE "FREQUENT RECURRENCE TO FUNDAMENTAL         PRINCIPLES" CLAUSE OF THE WASHINGTON CONSTITUTION.               1. Gunwall factors analyzed.     The "Gunwall factors" have come to be, in Gunwall's progeny, required analysis and briefing at the superior court level in order for the Supreme Court to consider whether personal liberties are protected to a greater extent by the state's constitution, compared to the U.S. Constitution.  See, e.g., State v. Wethered, 110 Wn.2d 466, 472, 755 P.2d 787 (1988); In re Mota, 114 Wn.2d 465, 472, 788 P.2d 538 (1990).  The plaintiff adopted Justice Utter's analysis concerning the Privileges and Immunities clause, above, and here provides the Gunwall analysis of the "Frequent Recurrence to Fundamental Principles" clause:     1. The textual language of the state constitution.       The text of the state constitution may provide cogent        grounds for a decision different from that which would be        arrived at under the federal constitution. It may be more        explicit or it may have no precise federal counterpart at        all.Gunwall at 61. Article 1  32 of the Constitution of the State of Washington reads in total:       A frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is        essential to the security of individual right and the        perpetuity of free government.     Since no "precise federal counterpart" exists, the Court may find greater protection under this factor, and the plaintiff argues strenuously that it should.     2. Significant differences in the texts of parallel provisions of the federal and state constitutions.          Such differences may also warrant reliance on the state        constitution.  Even where parallel provision of the two        constitutions do not have meaningful differences, other        relevant provisions of the state constitution may require        that the state constitution be interpreted differently.Id.  Since no parallel provision may be found in the federal constitution, this factor does not seem to apply to either find or not find greater protection under the state constitution.     3. State constitutional and common law history.           This may reflect an intention to confer greater        protection from state government than the federal        constitution affords from the federal government. The        history of the adoption of a particular state        constitutional provision may reveal an intention that will        support reading the provision independently of federal law.Id.  The constitutional history of Section 32 remains somewhat of a mystery.  The constitutions of Wisconsin, New Hampshire and Illinois contained clauses referencing fundamental principles, but the connection to individual rights was unique to Washington.  Brian Snure, "A Frequent Recurrence to Fundamental Principles: Individual Rights, Free Government, and the Washington State Constitution," 67 Wash. L. Rev. 669 (1992) at 676.     The original proposed constitution by W. Liard Hill contained only 31 sections to Article 1.  Section 32 was proposed by George Turner, whose later speeches as a U.S. Senator lead to the conclusion that Turner, like others of his day, believed that constitutional interpretation often required a return to natural law principles beyond the four corners of the constitution.  Snure, Id. at 674, citing 32 Cong. Rec. 783, 785, 789 (1899)(statement of Sen. Turner against United States imperialism in the Philippines).     The signers of Washington's constitution had witnessed a hundred years of what happens when power is concentrated in either government (federal) or private (corporate) bodies, and they clearly didn't like what they saw.  Thus, we have a clause in our "freedom to bear arms" clause stating that "nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing individuals or corporations to organize, maintain or employ an armed body of men."  Wash. Const. art. 1  24; and the mention of "corporations, except municipal" in the Privileges and Immunities clause, discussed above.     In the decade before the Washington Constitutional Convention, the territory had grown from a virtual wilderness of 75,000 settlers cut off from the nation's capital by a month's travel time, to a state of 350,000 citizens who could reach the east coast by a three-day train ride.  Snure, supra, citing Dorothy Johnson, "Empire of the Columbia," (2d ed., 1967).  Most of the influx of settlers had experienced legislative abuse elsewhere, and in Washington as well.  Snure, Id. at 671.  For example, during the 1862-63 territorial legislative session, the legislature passed no general laws, but enacted more than 150 pieces of general legislation for the benefit of "private interests against the general welfare."  Id.     Nor did the delegates trust the other branches of government.  Governors abused their patronage powers, and judges were appointed from afar and often absent.  Id., citing, inter alia, Charles H. Sheldon, "A Century of Judging: A Political History of the Washington Supreme Court," (1988).  Mining companies amassed armed guards to thwart unions activities, and railroads charged excessive rates to farmers.  Id., citing Gordon B. Ridgeway, "Populism in Washington," 39 Pac. N.W. Hist. Q. 284-91 (1948).      All of these infringements on personal liberties came about despite the guarantees of liberty and democratic government found in the U.S. Constitution.     It is noteworthy that Washington's Declaration of Rights is not couched in terms of the federal Bill of Rights, which contains the repeated phrase "Congress shall make no law. . ."  Rather, rights are stated affirmatively:  "The right of petition. . .shall never be abridged," Art. 1  4; "Every person may freely speak, write and publish on all subjects. . ."  Art. 1  5.     It is also noteworthy that Washington's constitution contains checks and balances on power missing from the federal constitution.  The federal government now comprises four branches, the fourth being federal agencies created by Congress but accountable to nobody.  This has been especially true since the U.S. Supreme Court decided INS V. Chadha 462 U.S. 919 (1982), which eliminated the "legislative veto."  Prior to that, Congress could set up agencies to administer programs, then oversee progress by way of committee or single-house vote.  In what constitutional scholar and University of Seattle Law School Prof. David Skover calls "the second most inane decision ever handed down," the U.S. Supreme Court virtually guaranteed the sort of petty tyranny that has resulted in this lawsuit.  (The Chadha decision did away with the "legislative veto," on the theory that not only must the enabling legislation withstand bicameral majority vote and presentment for veto, but each subsequent "fine-tuning" of the agency must be done the same way -- clearly an administratively impossible task.)     Washington's constitutional delegates may not have had Chadha as an example, but they had seen where government power was headed.  In Washington, the fourth branch of government is the people: agency heads such as the Attorney General, Secretary of State, Treasurer, Auditor, Superintendent of Public Instruction and Commissioner of Public Lands are elected, not appointed.  Judges, likewise, are elected.     The framers had also seen the concept of "natural law" twisted until it faced the direction opposite any original concept; originally a guarantee of personal liberty (for example, as set forth in the Declaration of Independence as "inalienable rights"), under the influence of the robber barons of the 19th century "natural law" was the justification for imposition of laessez-faire economics, i.e., natural law prohibited the courts from interfering with the right of a laborer to contract for his labor, and never mind that the laborer starves while the company owner thrives.     Thus, the mention of "a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles" being linked (uniquely at the time) to individual liberty, and the lack of any reference to "natural law" along with the absence of a separation-of-powers clause in Washington's constitution has led at least one scholar to argue persuasively that the phrase amounts to retaining the notion that natural law should be considered when protecting individual rights, but not when invoking natural law to prevent adherence with social or safety legislation.       Section 32 designates extra-constitutional fundamental        principles as essential to the security of individual        right. Snure, supra, note 30, page 687.  Again, it is no stretch to extend the right to be free from unjust action when it originates from a federal agency as opposed to originating from a corporation or other state entity.     4. Preexisting state law.       Previously established bodies of state law, including        statutory law, may also bear on the granting of distinctive        state constitutional rights.  State law may be responsive        to concerns of its citizens long before they are addressed        by analogous constitutional claims.  Preexisting law can        thus help to define the scope of a constitutional right        later established.Gunwall, supra, 106 Wn.2d at 61, 62.     Much of the preexisting law leading to the "fundamental principles" clause is discussed above.  As for laws preexisting the state constitution regarding the use of marijuana, medically or otherwise, there were none.  Inhaling opium and operating a house where inhaling opium took place were made illegal by the territorial laws of 1881, seven years before the signing of the Washington constitution.  The earliest reference the plaintiff could find to marijuana ("cannabis") was in the Laws of 1951.  As discussed in Section II B 1 above, marijuana was widely and legally used in the last century and the early decades of this century, prohibited by neither state nor federal law.     5. Differences in structure between the federal and state constitutions.       The former is a grant of enumerated powers to the federal        government, and the latter serves to limit the sovereign        power which inheres directly in the people and indirectly        in their elected representatives.  Hence the explicit        affirmation of fundamental rights in our state constitution        may be seen as a guaranty (sic) of those rights rather than        as a restriction on them.Gunwall, id.     The plaintiff simply asks the Court to take these words at their face value, and look to fundamental principles, as required by Article I  32, to do justice.     6. Matters of particular state interest or local concern.       Is the subject matter local in character, or does there        appear to be a need for national uniformity?  The former        may be more appropriately addressed by resorting to the        state constitution.     The plaintiff's physician is licensed to practice by the state.  The plaintiff has undergone his cancer treatment in a state-owned and -regulated facility.  The state legislature has given the state Board of Pharmacy the power to place drugs in Schedules different from the federal government's determination, in RCW 69.50.201(e).  And the state's constitution requires a "frequent recurrence to fundamental principles," which the federal constitution does not.  All of these and more make clear that the plaintiff's access to medicine is an issue of local significance; Washington's citizens should not be made to suffer by bureaucratic fiat from 2,000 miles away.               2. Fundamental principles in Washington case law.     The state constitution requires a "frequent recurrence to fundamental principles," which raises the question, "What principles are fundamental?"     Run the phrase "fundamental principles" through Westlaw or Lexis, and a sampling looks like this:It is a fundamental principle that the imposition of business and   occupation tax liability must be as equitable as possible.   Fidelity Title Company v. State of Washington, Department of   Revenue, 49 Wn. App 662, 745 P.2d 530 (1987).  Reynolds Metal Company v. State, 65 Wn.2d 882, 400 P.2d 310.  Appeal   dismissed 382 US 1.60 (1965).  A fundamental principle of contract damages:  An insured should be   put in only as good  a position as he would have occupied had the   contract not been breached.  Greer v. Northwestern National   Insurance Company, 109 Wn.2d 191, 743 P.2d 1244 (1987).  Fundamental principles of community property law dictate that each   spouse should upon his or her death have the right to dispose of   his or her one-half interest in community property.  Standard   Insurance Company v. Schwalbe, 47 Wn.  App 639, 737 P.2d 667   (1987).  It is a fundamental principle that penal statutes will be strictly   construed as a means of assuring fairness to persons subjected to   the law by giving clear and unequivocal warning in language that   people generally would understand concerning actions that would   expose them to liability for penalties and what those penalties   would be.  State v. Enloe, 47 Wn. APp 165, 172, 734 P.2d 520   (1987). Law against discrimination (RCW 49.60) is not rooted in tort law,   but grows out of the fundamental principle that every citizen   deserves equal treatment without regard to race, color, religion,   sex or handicap.  Reese v. Sears Roebuck and Company, 107 Wn.2d,   563, 572, 731 P.2d 497 (1987).To admit irrelevant, prejudicial evidence which would invite   speculation in a jury is contrary to the fundamental principles   of fairness and due process upon which our criminal justice   system is based.  State v. Smith, 106 Wn.2d 772, 780, 725 P.2d   951 (1986).Fundamental principles applicable to a request for an injunction are   1) the proceeding is equitable and addressed to the sound   discretion of the trial court,  2)  The trial court is vested   with broad discretionary power to shape and fashion injunctive   relief to fit the particular facts, circumstances, and equities   of the case before it, and 3)  One of the essential criteria for   an injunctive relief is actual and substantial injury sustained   by the person seeking the injunction.  Brown v. Voss, 105 Wn.2d   366, 372, 715 P.2d 514 (1986).General warrants and writs of assistance were "The worst instrument   of arbitrary power, the most destructive of English liberty and   the fundamental principles of law, that ever was found in an   English law book," and so far as they place "the liberty of every   man in the hands of every petty officer."  State v. Crandall, 39   Wn. APp 849, 855, 697 P.2d 250 (1985).  Citing the works of John   Adams 523-24(Chaz. F. Adams ed. Boston 1850; see also T. Taylor   Two Studies in Constitutional Interpretation 41 (1969)).It is a fundamental principle regarding the attorney client   relationship that a fiduciary relationship exists as a matter of   law between an attorney and a client.  Estate of Larson, 103   Wn.2d 517, 520, 694 P.2d 1051 (1985).There is a fundamental principle that every competent citizen is   under an obligation to further the administration of justice as a   matter of public policy when summoned by due process of law to   give evidence.  State v. Dibley, 38 Wn. APp 824, 828, 691 P.2d   201 (1984).       The fundamental principle that "the required criminal        conduct must have existed when the conduct at issue        occurred" must apply to bar retroactive criminal        prohibitions emanating from courts as well as legislators.         State v. Gore, 101 Wn.2d 481, 489, 681 P.2d 227 (1984).Fundamental principle of Washington Electoral Law is that in a   partisan contest there should be only one nominee from each   political party.  Democratic Party of Washington v. Spellman, 101   Wn.2d 94, 97, 675 P.2d 1222 (1984).       It is a fundamental principle that no state may impose a        tax which discriminates against interstate commerce by        providing a direct commercial advantage to local business.         Department of Fisheries v. DeWatto Fish Company, 34 Wn.        APp 135, 146, 660 P.2d 298 (1983).       It is a fundamental principle that when the state        condemns land for public use, no greater estate or        interest should be taken than reasonably necessary for        contemplated public necessity or use.  State v. McDonald,        98 Wn.2d 521, 530, 656 P.2d 1043 (1983).     Clearly, case law analysis shows that "fundamental principles" may be found outside and in addition to the clear statements contained in documents such as the Bill of Rights.               3. Fundamental principles and the plaintiff's case.              Three cases citing Article I  32 bear on the case at bar:The doctrine of stare decisis should not result in outmoded 19th   century precedents being forced to resolve 20th century disputes   -- automobiles should not be governed by horse and buggy laws.    Foote v. Grant, 55 Wn.2d 797, 806-7, 350 P.2d 870 (1960).Likewise, in a case involving the "taking" of property by creating   loud jet noise in the airspace over it, the Supreme Court of   Washington held:       The invention of the airplane and the development of modern        air transportation . . . have occurred somewhat        subsequently to the development of the legal concepts        emphasized in formulating early common law theories of        liability.  An awareness of these changes makes it        incumbent upon us to heed the advice of the framers of the        Washington constitution when they said: "A frequent        recurrence to fundamental principles is essential to the        security of individual right and the perpetuity of free        government."Ackerman v. Port of Seattle, 55 Wn.2d 400, 407, 348 P.2d 664 (1960)(citation omitted).  In both of the above cases, the correlation to the case at bar is clear: Times change, new information becomes known, and legal theories adequate in times past should be changed to do justice.     As a direct parallel, it is a fundamental principle that a drug prohibited when it was believed to have no medicinal use should not remain prohibited after it is shown that it is beneficial, and indeed unique in its ability to relieve suffering.In a much more recent case, the Supreme Court held that while   massive, intrusive searches of apartment buildings may in fact   enhance public safety,       it is often when government is most eagerly pursuing what        it perceives to be the public interest that it is most        likely to sidestep constitutional safeguards or to        denigrate constitutional liberties.  For precisely such        reasons, our constitution wisely counsels us:          A frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is        essential to the security of individual right and the        perpetuity of free government. . .          We therefore cannot permit these warrants to be        executed, regardless of Seattle's pressing (and undoubtedly        laudable) desire to see its housing codes enforced.City of Seattle v. McCready, 123 Wn.2d 260, 281, 868 P.2d 134 (1994) (citation omitted).     This is precisely the case now before the Court.  The government "is most eagerly pursuing what it perceives to be the public interest" in retaining a valuable therapeutic drug in a prohibited category, and in doing so is violating the fundamental right of its citizens to be free of needless physical suffering.     Other fundamental principles which the plaintiff asks the Court to consider, and recur to as the constitution requires, are these:It is a fundamental principle that irrational laws breed disrespect   for the rule of law.  It is irrational to prohibit physicians   from prescribing marijuana while permitting them to prescribe   opium and cocaine.  It is irrational to force the plaintiff and   others in his situation to choose between physical suffering and   undertaking a criminal act.Citizens of Washington who have a medical need for marijuana are   immune, under State v. Diana, supra, from prosecution.  It is a   fundamental principle that if a citizen foreseeably will not be   prosecuted, he should not be arrested, jailed, and put to the   expense, humiliation and vexation of dealing with criminal   charges.  This is especially true when, as is the case, the very   conditions which render them immune from prosecution make them   some of society's most helpless citizens, least able to deal with   such legal intrusions in their lives with any grace or dignity.It is a fundamental principle that a physician should have access to   proven therapeutic drugs to relieve the suffering of his or her   patients.It is a fundamental principle that the government of Washington   should not deny therapeutic drugs to its weakest and most   afflicted citizens merely to "match statutes" with federal laws   which are driven by political and irrational decisions, made by   bureaucrats who corrupt the process set forth in the enabling   statutes created by Congress.It is a fundamental principle that the federal government should not   be permitted to withhold valuable medicine from Washington   citizens by first claiming that no scientific evidence supports   the therapeutic value of the medicine, then denying permission to   gather the scientific evidence to prove (or perhaps disprove) the   therapeutic value.                        IV. CONCLUSION     This Court, sitting in equity, should exercise its statutory and constitutional power to declare that the placing of marijuana in Schedule I, RCW 69.50.204, is a violation of the plaintiff's rights and liberties secured by Article I  12 and 32 of  the Constitution of the State of Washington.     SIGNED AND DATED this ___ day of ____________, 1995.                         By: __________________________                               RALPH SEELEY, WSBA 22469                               (pro se)WT01-B40-56IA031-000655-B032-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/args3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110427 text/html 61464HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:04:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:17 GMTContent-length: 61246 25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate 25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate by Clifford A. Schaffer But there is a more pressing argument. I know human natureto at least some degree. People do things for many reasons, butprimarily because they get more pleasure than pain from thething. Your argument is that if you remove a whole lot of thepain from drug use, that people will not use drugs more. Are youtherefore saying that making heroin illegal causes people to wantto use it more? Why? Do people enjoy paying fines? Do they likeprison? Please provide me with some sensible reasons why youbelieve people would not use drugs more, or would use them less,if drugs were legal. The basic reason is the same simple reason that most peopledo not spend their days staggering around on booze. I tried itand realized that I enjoyed being sober a whole lot more. Thevast majority of the people are the same way. As I said before,there is nothing magical about these drugs which causes them tobe hypnotically attractive. As a matter of fact, I don't think Iwould like them much myself because one of the most commoneffects is to make users puke. Maybe it is hard for other peopleto understand, but I don't think that puking is much fun. As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noble goal.Take a group of people who are not well off anyway and make itour goal to inflict as much pain on them as we can. Let's consider a certain little statistical fact. The numberof people in prison is currently only a small fraction of thetotal number of users. Therefore, the current system cannotinflict pain on more than a small number of the users and must beseen as quite ineffective in your stated goal. Withoutconsidering the fact that our prisons are currently overloaded,just tell me how many more millions of people we should put inprison to inflict the proper amount of pain. Please also confirm your quote to me on the percentage ofblack men going to prison on drug charges. You said it was 50%.Is that accurate? If so, what percentage of black men, in total,abuse drugs? If 50% go to prison, total use must approach 100%.If not, what is the figure? (I guess this has one point in yourfavor. If 100% of black males now are drug abusers, legalizingdrugs would not cause the percentage to go up.) About half of all black men in America will be incarceratedat least once by the time they are thirty. The source of this isinformation extrapolated from the DOJ report The Prevalence ofImprisonment, and studies by the Sentencing Project that showthat about one-fourth of the black men under 30 are _currently_in prison, on probation, or parole. Drug offenses will be thesingle biggest cause for this. The figures on drug use throughthe population are about the same for whites as it is for blacks.The disproportionately high percentage of blacks arrested can beaccounted for by a number of factors. The first is that theselaws originally were intended to target minorities and thetactics used to enforce them tend to target minorities overwhites. For example, it is easier to pick up twenty streetdealers in a minority community than it is to get the same numberby busting middle class white houses. Also, the drug businessprovides a unique opportunity for young black men. These andother factors create a situation where, in certain inner cityneighborhoods, ninety percent of the black men have already beento prison at least once. Also, black men are more likely to beconvicted because of poor legal representation, and more likelyto be sentenced to prison when they are convicted. Okay!! Finally. What other options do you have in mind?This has the possibility of being a very productive thread. Nosnide insults or sarcasm. What other options are there? There are quite a few. The first point that I would make isthat we should have a consistent philosophy and approach to allrecreational drugs. That is, if you would not think it good for7-11 clerks to sell cocaine to children, then we should beequally tough about tobacco. At the same time, if you recognizethat throwing tobacco smokers in prison would becounterproductive, then it stands to reason that it would becounterproductive for other drugs. Figure out what would be agood policy for the two most dangerous drugs -- alcohol andtobacco -- and it will be easy to figure out what should be doneabout the others. Judge Gray has called for "regulated distribution".His idea is that drugs would be available at government regulatedstores of some sort at prices that would be low enough todiscourage the black market. Advertising would be prohibitedunder his idea and all drugs would be sold in plain wrappers withwarning information and, most importantly, a number to call toget help. The Netherlands has taken a different approach. They stillhave drug laws but make it a point not to enforce them except incases where there are bad drugs, or people are making themselvesobnoxious. Their primary purpose is to reduce the harm done bydrugs and part of their plan is to get people to come in fortreatment. In Liverpool, they are prescribing heroin and cocaine toaddicts as part of the public health service. Part of the priceof getting the prescription is that addicts must agree to stopcommitting crimes and to get their lives together. With some drugs, such as marijuana, it is doubtful whetherany sort of regulation is even desireable. The Dutch ignore it tothe point of allowing it to be sold openly in coffee shops and itdoes not seem to cause any problems. Now there are burglars in my neighborhood. Some of them dothe same crime for years - and will keep on doing it for more.Is, therefore, the threat of prison not relevant? Should weremove that threat? Should we legalize buglary, because prisononly makes it worse? I don't think so. You have indicated thatlegalizing hard drugs would lower the rate of drug abuse. Perhapsyou also believe legalizing burglary would lower that crime. Idisagree on both counts. The threat of prison is a deterrent topotential burglars, robbers, murderers, etc. I believe it is alsoa deterrent to potential drug abusers. Once addiction has beenreached, that threat is less powerful. But that does not mean weremove it. I get this tired, irrelevant argument a lot. First, burglaryis not the same as drug use so comparisons of the legal methodsfor controlling them are silly. Second, if we had thirty millionburglars (or criminals of any kind) we would have to find anothermethod of dealing with the problem just because the criminaljustice system could not handle the load. In this case it doesn'tmatter what you want to do, it is a matter of what you can do. You also indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drugaddict. I assume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, isrude.) Since I have now been sober for 13 years, and 15 days,prison is not called for. However, remember that drugs took 12years of my life. If I had been jailed in year two or three, andthat huge shock had persuaded me to stay sober, I would havegained 9-10 years of a productive life back. I, in retrospect,really wish that had happened. I miss those 12 years a lot. No, I was not being sarcastic, I was simply following thelogical conclusion of what you said. I would point out that,under the current laws you might have done a lot more than acouple of years in jail. And, when you got out, you would bevirtually unemployable (at anything decent, anyway) which wouldhave severely impacted your attempts at recovery. You again brought up several times that legalizing drugs(which you oppose) in other countries lowered the rate of drugabuse. Because of my knowledge of the way people act, I find thateither I do not understand what you mean, or your stats aresimply wrong. As I said above, if you made burglary legal, wouldthere be fewer of them? If you sold hamburgers for 10cents, wouldwe buy fewer? I just find the idea that making hard drugscontrolled, legal, and cheap would result in less use of them. My point again that you are not acquainted with all of thefacts on this issue. It is happening in Europe. As one Dutchofficial put it, junkies are their own worst advertisement andthey really don't need much in the way of education to persuadepeople that drug addiction is something they want to avoid. As I said before, I recommend that you read the CU Report,and see the A&E special which recently aired on this subject. You asked about your mother being unable to get the drugsshe needs. I do not know the situation at all. I believe that anydrug that would help your mother should be available to her,including marijuana and heroin. Of course, that is not the pointhere. Then you do not understand a whole lot about the drug war.The repression of medical use and research into these drugs wasan integral part of the whole campaign from the very beginning.When the laws were first passed the drug police jailed more than3,000 doctors, specifically aiming at those who were treatingaddicts, and those who voiced disagreement with the policy. Theyeffectively shut down all research into the medical uses and evenresearch into the causes and cures for drug addiction for overfifty years (and it is still difficult to do honest drug researchin this country). It was a deliberate, calculated reign of terroragainst the medical profession which is still intact today. If you will research this a little you will discover why thisreign of terror exists. That is, if these drugs are under theprovince of the medical profession where they really belong, thenthe whole drug prohbition will fall apart quite rapidly. As I said before, your assumptions about why these laws arehere are totally wrong. The reasons you have stated never didhave anything to do with the laws. We have discussed this. You play with stats to advanceyour point, regardless of the intellectual integrity. You have not presented any stats in contrast to mine, so Iwonder how you can say this. You also said that eight times the number that die from ODon drugs, die from that drug use for other reasons - pneumonia,for example. You ignored my point that many deaths would not beattributed to drug use because there was something else handy,such as exposure, or AIDS. No I didn't. I quoted the AMA figures on the subject. Youhave cited nothing but your own opinion in response. You have again cooked your figures. Lets say a policemanpulls over the car of a junkie tonight for erratic driving. Asearch shows five rocks in his pocket. He is arrested. Knowing heis busted, he pleads guilty. According to your figures, that cost$150,000. Balderdash. Aren't we deliberately missing some points here? For everyone which does what you suggested (and there are fewer of them asthe penalties go up) there are others who fight it all the way.The AVERAGE cost is what is being cited. They then build a cell - especially for him. They can'tuse the one that some burglar is now leaving. Well, yes they could. That is what is happening now --violent offenders are being released early so we can throw moredrug users in prison. That doesn't make a lot of sense, does it?Therefore, in order for the law not to cause more harm than good(by releasing another offender early) we have to build a newprison cell. No - that would mean you had to prorate the cost of thecell by everyone who uses it. Would be an honest way, but wouldnot boost your cause. Balderdash again. By what you are saying, the total number of people sent toprison would not increase beyond what it is today -- therefore nobeneficial effect from tougher penalties. An official in Oakland who desperatly wanted to show howmuch money was being saved by his drug program as opposed toprison, put the cost of prison at $20,000 per year. You say$30,000. Balderdash. No, the figures I used come from the Wall Street Journal andthe DOJ. The figures vary somewhat from jurisdiction tojurisdiction, and according to the type of prison but they areall in the same range. You can get the most current figuresyourself by calling the National Clearinghouse and Data Centerfor Drugs and Crime. In Phoenix they put folks in tents!! Its warm, and theyhave many cots like in the army, but it is cheap. And a gooddeterrent. Folks don't like it. So my guess for my addict aboveis about $2,000 to arrest and and convict, $1,500 for theprorated cost of the cell, and $10,000 for the six months hewould actually serve. Comes to $13,500, as opposed to your$450,000. But, of course, your guess is not any more informed than someof your other statements. Personally, I will take the testimonyof people like Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissionerof Corrections, before I would accept yours. I am developing a deep mistrust for your facts andfigures. Many of them _may_ be correct, but when I find some tobe in error, I know that you would deliberatly mislead if youfelt you could get away with it. So now I divide by two, an thendoubt. So go read the resources I have mentioned yourself. If youhad done that in the first place, we wouldn't be having thisdiscussion now. Drugs are not magical in a literal sense. They just have aprofound effect on the minds of some people, that some of thosepeople have compared to magic. I thought so. But, of course, either way it does not indicatethat prison is the correct approach. PatI ask you - how many more deaths, and destroyed lives,would it take before you said legalizing drugs was a bad idea?Will await your answer. Please make it public. Thanks. You have dodged this question about four times now. I amnot asking your opinion on whether you think legalizing drugswould have that effect. I am asking _If it did._ Please answer. Ithink the lurkers here deserve an answer. As I said, I never said I supported legalization, so thequestion is misdirected. If legalization is what you have statedthen I wouldn't support it whatever the figures are. The answer here depends upon what you mean by"legalizing drugs". If you mean that cocaine, heroin,etc., would be sold as freely as convenience store clerks selltobacco to children then it is possible that addiction and deathswould increase, although the evidence clearly shows that theywould still not approach the death rates imposed by alcohol andtobacco. So, even in that case, one has to wonder why the majorpush should not be against alcohol and tobacco first. But, of course, I am asking you if you have any evidence(besides your own opinion) that it would increase the deaths. Sofar, you have not responded to that. You said it is not okay with you if a junkie frys hisbrain, or dies, from drug abuse. Why not, if he chooses to takethe drug? I thought that was the core of your argument - that wehad no right to interfere with him, because he could choose whathe wanted, and endure the results. Where am I missing this? This point is not, and never was, the core of my arguments. Ireally don't care what you think about anyone's individual"right" to use recreational drugs, as long as yourecognize that prison is not the proper approach in any case. But, to get back to this point, let's consider a specificexample. My mother is desperately ill with severe chronic pain. Iwon't bore you with the medical history, so let it suffice to saythat she has been all over the US and talked to the nation;sleading medical experts on the subject. They have all said thatthe best medications for here condition are the narcotics -heroin and morphine. She cannot get either one because thedoctors are afraid they will be prosecuted over any questionedprescription. In these cases, don't you think that the people whoshould be making the decision on the medical use of drugs shouldbe the doctors, in consultation with their patients? Both the Dept. of Health and Human Services and theCalifornia Medical Association have issued reports stating thatthe undertreatment of pain in this country is a "nationaltragedy" and the only reasons for it are the fear andignorance created by the drug war. Can we at least agree that any policy which denies medicineto sick people has something seriously wrong with it -- bothmorally and practically? You said it was "tyranny" to send a person toprison for drug abuse, because we would be denying him his rightto make choices. Tyranny is a judgemental word. Is it tyranny toprohibit sexual harassment? I never used the word "tyranny". Who are yourquoting? ((Who are we to cram our views down the throat of somepoor, middle aged, overweight, pathetic, animal of a businessmanager? We are a society. We look out for each other. I won'tlet that manager hurt people if I can stop it. Why? Because Icare about the people he is hurting, more than I care about hispride. Would be willing to bankrupt him in a lawsuit, to stophim, and the others like him, from hurting people. That sameconcern is why I want drugs to remain illegal. I care about thepeople who are having their lives messed up by drugs. I want itto stop. Yes, prison is not a good way to do this, but it is thebest way I see available to us right now. I agree that you have a paternalistic attitude towardinterfering in other people's lives. I don't agree that prison isthe correct approach, even if your attitude was either moral orjustified. It is also obvious that you are not acquainted with all theways we might do this. Try reading some of the studies I havementioned. If you can come up with a way that will assuredly reducethe amount of human suffering because of drug abuse, please shareit. You know by now that I don't buy the "make it legal, andpeople will stop using it" argument. Okay - you don't buyprison is better than legalization. Do you have any other ideas??What can we brainstorm? Imagine you and I were co-dictators ofthis country. We could change any law, as long as we both agreed.What would we do about drug abuse?? A good point here, which is why I was one of the co-authorsof the Hoover Resolution. It is true that we can come to a bettersolution if we will all sit down, read the facts, and discussthem. The immediate problem here is that you are not yetacquainted with all the facts, or the possible options. First, Iwould recommend that you take a trip to the local library andread The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. Youwill find it fascinating, whatever your views may be. Or, you may just want to check out what they are doing inEurope. PatDo you think some adict who chokes to death on his ownvomit is not a victim? PeterHe "victimized" himself. PatYes, that is the core of the pro-legalization argument. Absolutely false. There is a lot here that you don'tunderstand. I say so what? He is just as dead. Don't you care? That_does_ make legalization seem much more attractive. If, say, anadditional 200,000 people die in the first year, the legalizerswould simply say they "victimized" themselves, andtherefore it is no big thing First, show me some evidence that this would happen. There isno evidence anywhere that I can find. For openers, you might tryreading some of the studies I have mentioned. Second, even if it did happen, there is even less evidencethat prison is the best approach to minimizing the problem. As Ihave said many times before, all the major studies said thatprison was the worst approach. Third, even if it did happen (which all major studies refute)all major studies agreed that abandoning prison would still be abetter approach. Fourth, as we have discussed before, legalization and prisonare not the only options. . Please see this point. Responding that you don't thinkmore peole would die is not addressing this. I am asking you"What if they _do_ die?" Is that even an issue to you? Sure it is. That's why I want to see an approach which worksa whole lot better than what we are doing now. Every major studyagreed that the current system kills people from a whole lot ofcauses. You referred back to Frank again, and said that Frank wasreferring to "responsible" freedom. I had wonderedwhether, if you were with Frank, drunk, and about to climb down acliff, whether he would smile and nod, or try to stop you bywhatever means necessary. Frank said "a situation in whichany outside authority can proscribe the actions of an individualagent, even if the motivation is to "protect" thatagent "from himself" is indefensible. It is a god-givenright to not only be wrong, but to also injury onself,overtly/intentionally or covertly/unintentionally." We have already established that tough laws and big prisonscould not stop you from harming yourself with drugs. Should weperhaps just attach a 24-hour bodyguard to you because you are aknown risk? How about isolation? Now, please, lets you and I get serious. Assumelegalization is _not_ an option. Can you think up options tolower the amount of suffering caused by drug abuse? Visits toLARC's by high school classes? How about producing a very long lasting drug that makescocaine and heroin not function? Antabuse does a similiar thingfor alcoholics, but only stays in the system for about a weekafter the last use. How about prison farms, where addicts areseperated from the general population, and spend most of theirtime in education and hard manual labor, for the duration oftheir sentence? Any ideas at all???? There are lots of ideas, some of which I have already sharedwith you. In Europe they are trying even more than we havediscussed here and nearly all of those programs are having betterresults than what we experience here. As for the prison farms and hard manual labor, I suggestagain that (assuming you are right) we should start with theaddicts we know -- namely you. What's wrong with that? It wouldimprove your life greatly, wouldn't it? So, our government is wasteful and inept. That doesn'tpreclude imprisonment as being a proper course of action. No, but the absolute futility of this approach, combined withthe fact that every major study of the issue says it does moreharm than good would preclude it as a proper course of action. I would also like to ask you exactly when prison became a"proper course of action" because no such fact was everestablished when these laws were first passed. I know of one who died from heroin. He was in my weddingparty. I know of another who died in an automobile wreck whileunder the influence of cocaine. He was my best man. They're theonly two statistics I need to be familiar with. Unfortunately Iknow more. Perhaps if they had been in jail, they would bestatistics. The obvious point here is that drugs are illegal as hell butthey did not stop either one of these tragedies. This makes itall the more curious why you would support a policy that didnothing for your friends. At the risk of sounding offensive, I dare say that untilyou have lived and shared in the misery associated drug addictionand abuse, you know absolutely nothing beyond the politicallyslanted statistics that you've read or have access to. Perhapsyou do know something about this misery, in which case you've letyour mind lead your heart. I hear this a lot and it is BS from beginning to end. First,let me assure you that I have a pretty fair amount of experiencewith addicts, as do all of the doctors and others listed inSigner.zip. I dare say that the experience of any one of themwould far outweigh the experience you have had. I don't think that knowing someone who was an addict or evenbeing an addict yourself provides any great insights into aproper national policy. That gives entirely too much credit todrugs. As for not knowing anything beyond the politically slantedstatistics, it is apparent that you have not been to the libraryand read the studies I have mentioned many, many times. If youhad, you would find that the statistics -- and theirinterpretation -- are quite clear to anyone who has bothered toread the evidence. As President Nixon's own commission said, thereal problem is the ignorance of our public officials who havenever bothered to read the evidence. Increased "incidence," not increased"reports." And yes, I expect that a 25% incidence ofnarcotics would indicate harm to society. Perhaps you are wrong here, because the major studies of theissue stated that, despite the widespread usage, it did not seemto be a major problem. Furthermore, even if it was, there was noevidence presented to Congress to show that the HarrisonNarcotics Act was an appropriate approach to the problem. Infact, as stated earlier, the medical officials in this countryfelt it was not the proper approach. Furthermore, if you willread the Consumers Union Report (which you seemed to have missedin your trips to the library) you will find that most members ofCongress did not realize that they were passing what would turnout to be a Prohibition law. Similarly, when hemp was outlawed in1937, most members of Congress did not realize that they wereoutlawing a commercial crop which was grown in virtually everystate in the US. you equate the social, economic, and political milieu of19th century China with that of modern day America I am not doing anything of the kind. It seems to me you were. But, regardless, the information youpresented did not support the stated conclusions. I suggest you write to the Bureau of Justice Statisticsand tell them that their figures are in error. I suggest you research your facts a little better. You havemissed most of the major research on this issue. Drug abuse imposes its own costs on society. True enough. The point is that there is no evidence thatprison does anything to reduce those costs. In fact, every majorstudy of the issue (which you missed on your trip to the library)said it only increases the costs. why we shouldn't help smokers and excessive drinkers kickthe habit Sounds like a good idea. It's the Christian thing to do. So let's get really Christian and throw them all in jail fortheir own good. If you are a Christian, let me ask you a simplequestion. If we gave this problem to Jesus, what would he do?Would he build bigger prisons, or would he build hospitals andschools? Would he punish people, or would he heal them? Beforeyou answer, please note that I have talked to a lot of members ofthe clergy and they all come back with the same answer. As onesaid, "Put that way, the answer is obvious." When the smokers start robbing me at gun point, I'll startto worry . . . Then you should start to worry the minute cigarettes comeunder drug Prohibition. If you had read the major studies of theissue you would know that tobacco users commit the same kinds ofanti-social behavior as other addicts when they are deprived oftheir drug of choice. I don't think you understand that drug addiction isphysically harmful. _American Academic Encyclopedia_:"Tolerance develops to most of the effects of these drugs,which means that the dose must be regularly increased to maintaina constant effect." This leads to a gradual physicaldeterioration which is generally obvious in long-time junkies. The statement by the American Academic Encyclopedia does notestablish any harm to the body other than increased craving. Yourstatement is easily proven wrong by the doctors I have talked to(listed in Signer.zip) who are the world's leading experts on thesubject. And, of course, I have been asking everyone on this board whoDr. William Halsted is and how he is relevant to this issue. But,of course, you don't know such basic facts as that, so thereain't much point in asking you, is there? There are only 15,000 - 20,000 hard drug users in theNetherlands. It's a small country. I have no figures onmortality. However, I would expect they have a similar proportionof OD cases to what we have here. In 1992 they had 28 deaths from heroin overdose in the entirecountry. This is all the more remarkable when you consider thatheroin is usually injected and thus bypasses all the bodiesdefenses against overdose. _Contemporary Drug Problems_ is not a "book" butan academic journal. In this case, the author of the article"Drugs and crime in an accommodating social context: thesituation in Amsterdam" was written by Martin Grapendaal, EdLeuw and Hans Nelen, who are introduced as follows: . . . If you would like some more direct information, I can put youin touch with Michael Hessing (former chief of police ofRotterdam), Robert Van der Hoeven, the DA, etc., etc., etc. To accuse someone of lying would be rude, and sonaturally, I have not done so. I merely express a healthy degreeof skepticism as to Cliff's statements. As to his motives, I donot care to speculate. Please read Signer.zip in library 13. I met with Friedman andothers on February 23, 1993 at the Hoover Institution and signedwhat became known as the Hoover Resolution. I have becomereasonably well known for this, having persuaded such people asWilliam Von Raab, Dear Abby, and others to support theResolution. If you like, I will send you the transcript of theradio show Hugh Downs did about me. I am fairly well known inthis field so, if you knew anything about it, you would runacross my name eventually. As to my motives, I have stated them quite clearly on anumber of occasions. My mother cannot get the medicine she needs. To begin with, there is no need to lock them all up, andcertainly not to imprison them all simultaneously. If you read"Narctics Reform," you understand that I neveradvocated locking up *all* heroin users. First-time offendersshould be allowed treatment + probation, provided they have notcommitted any other offense. Subsequent drug offenses would bepunished according to an accelerated schedule: Second-timeoffenders would be obliged to do some jail time, third-timeoffenders would get a longer sentence, and so on. Since therecidivism rate for drug offenses is only 30%, this would reducethe number of addicts requiring long-term confinement to arelative handful. So, let's try the question again. How many people should belocked up? Don't give me vague generalities, give me somenumbers. I have not expressed any opinion, pro or con, as to thelegalization or decriminalization of marijuana. However, elevenstates have already decriminalized simple possession ofmarijuana, without any obvious harmful results. Of course, you are not familiar with how hemp or any of theother drugs became illegal in the first place, are you? I believe that the difference between promoting thelegalization of narcotics and the use of narcotics is a very finedistinction. One leads to the other. Correct me if I am wrong, but I think we have alreadyestablished that you have never read the major research on theissue and therefore would not be quite qualified to make thisjudgment. As it turns out, those who are now recommendinglegalization are those who have spent decades trying to limitdrug abuse. You prefer being robbed at gunpoint? That is a falseeconomy. If someone commits a robbery, as my good friend Judge Graywill tell you, that is an entirely different issue and theyshould be brought before a court of law. Until then, however, itis pointless to try to control private drug use with criminallaw. With stubborn cases who refuse to reform, that may be theonly alternative. These represent only a small minority, however. So you still have not answered the simply question of howmany should go to jail. I bet you never thought about it, didyou? Child-molesting doesn't *necessarily* involve violence northreat of violence. In the case of teen prostitution, it's apurely commercial arrangement. It may interest you to know that Joseph Califano, in a reportto the governor of New York in 1980, estimated that 70 percent ofall child molestation and abuse cases are related to alcohol. Soit again brings up the question of why you aren't campaigning foralcohol prohibition. Well, er, no. Not quite. Cliff said exactly this --"Wait! You just convinced me that prison is the rightapproach! We ought to start by throwing the known drug addicts(that's you) into prison "for their own good." A goodtwenty year stretch in the pen will change your mind about howappealing these drugs are." I told you that any time you thought it would be a good ideafor you to spend ten years locked in a small room as some thug'ssexual plaything I would be more than happy to do what you thinkis the best thing for you. I thought he was being sarcastic, and replied "Youalso indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drug addict. Iassume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, is rude.)Since I have now been sober for 13 years and 15 days, prison isnot called for." Oh, but you are still a known risk for addiction aren't you?How else are we going to protect you from yourself? Dr. Andrew, Re the issue of comparative toxicity of drugs, the followingmight interest you. Marijuana is not included, of course, becausethere are no recorded deaths from marijuana in human history(source: DEA). Therefore, there would be little point inreporting the death rate from pot. Because the death rate isZERO, there seems to be even less point in jailing people for itsuse. Actually, I think these numbers might be understated withrespect to the number of users of heroin and cocaine. Otherfigures I have seen are somewhat higher and, as I mentioned, Ibelieve the survey method itself promotes underreporting of usersfor several reasons. Therefore, it seems quite possible that thedeath rates per user for heroin and cocaine may be somewhat lowerthan the figures stated below. With respect to the number of deaths by heroin, you mayrecall that the CU Report stated that they could not find anyheroin "overdose" death in which they believed themedical evidence supported the label of "overdose."Oooooops! Sorry! I forgot you haven't read the CU Report! By the reasoning that you have given before (what littleactual reasoning we have seen) we ought to throw people in jailfor (fill in the blank) because this drug can kill people. Bythose standards, the heaviest penalties ought to be for alcoholand tobacco. You are, of course, free to present any valid citableinformation which would conflict with these figures -- but youhaven't done it yet, so I don't expect you to start now. from: Thinking About Drug Legalization by James Ostrowski, Cato Institute Paper # 121, May 25, 1989$2.00 to order or for information, write Policy Analysis Cato Institute 224 Second St. SE Washington DC 20003 Estimated Per Capita Death Rates by Drugs ---------------------------------------------------------- Drug Users Deaths per Year Deaths per 100,000 ---------------------------------------------------------- Tobacco 60 million 390,000 (a) 650 alcohol 100 million 150,000 (b) 150 Heroin 500,000 400 (c) 80 (400) Cocaine 5 million 200 (c) 4 (20) ---------------------------------------------------------- (a) "Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking: 25 Years of Progress" Surgeon General's Report (1989). (b) Estimates vary greatly, depending upon whether all health consequences, or only those traditionally associated with alcoholism, are considered. The Fifth Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcoholism and Health from the Secretary of Health and Human Services contains two references indicating a death toll of 200,000: The report states, first, thatalcohol "plays a role in 10% of all deaths in the UnitedStates," which comes to about 200,000 deaths each year. P. vi. Itfurther states that present estimates of the death toll from alcohol abuse are as high as 93.2 per 100,000. Ibid., p. x. This ratio translates into a total of about 210,000. (c) These figures were determined as follows: Drug AbuseWarning Network (DAWN) heroin and cocaine fatalities for 1984, 1985, and 1986 were averaged. The number of suicides wassubtracted. The figures were discounted to account for deaths in which both heroin and cocaine played a role. Since DAWN covers about one-third of the nation's population but almost all major urban areas where drug use florishes, totals weredoubled to arrive at yearly estimates of 2,000 for heroin deaths and 1,000 for cocaine deaths. Finally, these figures were dis- counted by 80 percent in accordance with the analysispresented in the text. Cliff, I've been practicing medicine for 20+ yrs. I'm also active in medical politics (currentlypresident-elect of the medical staff of a major tertiary carehospital). We have a rich tradition of communicating and discussingamong ourselves all matters relevant to clinical practice,economics and ESPECIALLY governmental control. The communication is accomplished via formal (peerreviewed) journals as well as by a welter of "popular"medical periodicals. As I said before, I will be more than happy to compare yourcredentials on this subject against the credentials of thedoctors who made the statements. But let's start with the simplepoints first; The total amount of heroin you have prescribed in your careeris _______? Please fill in the blank. If you are an average US doctor you have never laid yourhands or eyes on medicinal heroin and certainly have neverprescribed it. Therefore, it would seem obvious that yourknowledge is inferior to the doctors I have talked to who haveactually worked with it. As I also said, I will be happy to putyou in touch with some of them. As I suggested to ForrestJohnson, you can call them yourself if you like. Try, forinstance, just calling the publich health service in Liverpooland ask to speak with the doctors in charge of their program. Iwould be interested to hear the response you get. If you were really knowledgeable about the subject (like someof the doctors I have talked to) you would also be able to tellme about the supplies of heroin in the US which are legal, howthey got here, and what they are used for. But, of course, youcan't even tell me who Dr. William Halsted is (even though youCLAIMED to have read the book which describes him in some detail)so we will not move on to the hard questions. Why is it that you have such a difficult time answeringsimple questions? What is the problem here anyway? NOWHERE AND AT NO TIME HAVE I RUN ACROSS ANY MENTION OFDOCTORS JAILED FOR TREATING PATIENTS OR VOICING DISAGREEMENT WITHANYTHING. As I said before, it is becoming increasingly apparent thatyou have not read the Consumers Union Report or any of the otherstudies I mentioned. If credibility is an issue, yours is fadingfast. Were you telling us all a big story when you said you readit? We have one journal (Medical Economics) that searches out,investigates and reports on ANY "sensational" aspect ofnon-clinical MD related activity. They would go nuts if they thought they were missing astory such as this. Again, I say that you have not read the materials you saidyou read. It did not happen last week, it happened immediatelyafter the laws were passed and had the effect of stopping alldrug research and treatment for several decades. (Did you perhapsmiss the part about "several decades"). But, to go on to more recent matters -- It is also apparentthat you have not read the reports issued by the Department ofHealth and Human Services about the undertreatment of pain, andyou are not familiar with the California Medical Association'srecent statements on the issue. Your communication is lacking.You can get a full copy of the HHS report by calling1-800-4CANCER. Also, as I stated previously, Dr. Harvey Rose of Sacramentowas prosecuted for giving Darvon to an 84-year old woman withcrippling arthritis. It almost destroyed his practice. I will putyou in touch with him if you like. As a result of his experience,he wrote California's Intractable Pain Treatment Act which seeksto give doctors some protection against this kind of arbitraryprosecution. Also, in 1992, the DEA sent two Chicago doctors to prison forprescribing Tylenol 3. As you may know (assuming you really are adoctor -- we have had some pretenders here before) Tylenol 3 isnot even a prescription drug except in the US and South Africa,and the US is the only country in the world which has ever jaileda doctor for prescribing it. You may also be interested in the case of Florida vs.Martinez which appeared on Court TV and has been repeated severaltimes because it was such an interesting trial. Mr. Martinez isan AIDS counselor who was handing out morphine to anyone whowould come in and ask for it. Mr. Martinez does not have any kindof medical training (other than OJT as a AIDS counselor) andfreely admitted that he was violating both state and Federal druglaws. His only defense was that his actions were a medicalnecessity because of the barbaric policies on drugs. Thetestimony was quite interesting. When the jury heard all of theevidence they voted unanimously for acquittal and stated that Mr.Martinez was a "hero". Also, my mother's doctors have stated that the specificreason that they will not give her morphine (or heroin) isbecause they are afraid of prosecution if they do. These doctorshave included the doctors at the Mayo Clinic, the National PainInstitute, the USC Pain Clinic, etc., etc., etc. As you recall, Iasked you if you would prescribe it for her and got the usualcop-out. Your credibility is lacking in more than one respect. Your inflammatory statement demands proof. As I have said before, your credibility is fatallyjeopardized by these sorts of wildly improbable statements. The proof demands that you actually read the things you saidyou read. Your credibility also hinges on whether you can answerany of the simple questions I have put to you. For example: Whowas Dr. William Halsted and why is his story relevant to thethings you have said? (He asked for the umpteenth time.) Frankly, I would think that anyone who had been in medicalpractice for more than 20 years would be able to answer thesequestions a whole lot easier. Why is it that a practicingphysician cannot answer simple questions on this issue when heclaims to be an expert? There was an article in my morning newspaper. . . .Itfirst reported that the heroin hitting the streets today is morepure, costs less, and is more lethal. Cliff and Mona please note- lethal means that heroin is not harmless. A newspaper article with an unsupported statement about drugs They also quoted Lee Brown, the country's drug policydirector, as saying that since some of the stigma has beenremoved, heroin is now more socially acceptable. It use isincreasing. He also said its use is increasing because you cannow get purer doses for less money. (That is fundamental economictheory coming out again. Please note, as it gets to be a morequality product, and the price goes down, its use goes up -despite the Netherlands.) Heroin is more socially acceptable? Who does he hang aroundwith? If quality is going up and price is going down, thenobviously the drug war is not having its desired effect. Thismuch seems obvious. He stated there are now 2.7 million hard-core, chronicdrug users in this country. That much is correct. How many of them do you want to put inprison? - Recognizing, of course, that jailing them would requireTRIPLING the size of every prison and jail which now exists inAmerica. Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., was quoted ast callingheroin a vicious drug that tempts its users into a lifetime of aliving hell. (Hmmmmmmm.... they don't, apparently, just stop thefirst time they vomit.) Charles Schumer -- Now there is an informed, intelligent,reliable, impartial source that you can rely on. (Being sarcastichere, in case you didn't catch it. This guy is famous for hisignorance of the subject.) Thomas Constantine, administrator of the DEA, who camethere from the New York State police, gave a short history on howthe quality and purity of heroin is increasing. Street heroinpurity has gone from 7% a decade ago to an average of 36% now. InNew York and Boston, it reaches 95%. So he said interdiction was not working. I think we coveredthat before. Opium production has quadrupled in the last decade. Ten years ago the DEA estimated that only one percent of theentire world's opium supply would be required to supply theentire demand in the US. Now I guess it is down to one-fourth ofone percent. End of article. It appears that heroin is not harmless,and as its quality goes up and its price goes down, its use goesup. Lets keep it illegal. It appears that you have a newspaper article with a bunch ofunsubstantiated statements. Of course, even assuming that heroinis as dangerous as stated, that still does not establish thatthrowing people in prison is the best approach to the problem.The example of alcohol is instructive in this regard. So, in conclusion, you have leaped from one unsubstantiatedstatement to a conclusion which would be a non-sequitir in anycase. You frequently take sentences one at a time, and respond,thereby answering points I am not making. Yes, because the points you made in those sentences cannot besubstantiated by an evidence I have found. You proceed from wronginformation to wrong conclusions. Let's get the information rightfirst, and then we might be able to move on to correctconclusions. Also, frequently your response is not responsive. If yousay "Heroin is harmless!" and I respond "Butaccording to your stats, 20,000 people a year die from it!"it is _not_ appropriate to then say "But putting them inprisons doesn't work." Please respond to the thought, orskip it. It is very hard to maintain a dialog when you jumparound. Please get it straight what I have said. I did not say that20,000 people die every year from heroin. (If you can't get thisstraight then there is all the more reason to question the otherthings you say). What I said was that the AMA estimated that 20,000 people diefrom ALL illegal drugs from ALL causes, including overdose,accidents, etc. Simply stating the number of people who die does not provideany support for the notion that prison is a beneficial approach.As I have stated previously, far more people die from alcohol andtobacco which, by your reasoning, would show that prison ought tobe an even better idea for these drugs. In order to show thatprison is a beneficial approach, it must be shown that the numberof deaths would decrease with more people put in prison -- insome proportion that would provide a real benefit in terms of thecost. (You know, a simple cost-benefit analysis -- which you havestated previously you have never even seriously considered.) Perhaps not. The post was addressed to Mona, not you.Please pay attention. You stated that a junkie's right to fry his own brains wasthe core of the arguments for (for lack of a better word)"legalization". I pointed out that you are wrong. Youcan take those arguments away entirely and prison is still not agood idea. Okay, you are being cute. Since your true position appearsto be in favor of legalizing drugs, I will attribute that to you,and simply ignore any more comments like the above. If I amwrong, state your position on legalization. We have been over this ground before. My position is that weshould have one consistent philosophy and approach to allrecreational drugs. That would require re-thinking our approachto not only heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, but alcohol andtobacco as well. You cannot have everything both ways, Cliff. If you arenot being sarcastic, then you really do believe that I should beimprisoned. For twenty years. Because I am an addict. Of course,that thought is contrary to your beliefs most of the time. So doyou _really_ want me in prison because I am an _uppity_ addict?The only things your really know about me are that I am an addict(whom, you believe, should not be imprisoned), and I disagreewith you on this policy (and I should be imprisoned.) Or, of course, maybe there is some hypocrisy in yourbelief system. You are the first addict I have run across who believes thatspending ten years in a small cell as someone's girlfriend (hopehe doesn't have AIDS) would improve his life. If you reallybelieve it, I am willing to grant it. I don't see any other waythat we could protect you against all the harmful things youmight do to yourself. It is a common failure of those who get frustrated in adiscussion to take their opponents view, and change it tosomething else, and then oppose that. Please stop doing that. That's called setting up a straw man. You might want to takeyour own advice here. I am truly dismayed. If an additonal 200,000 people diedin the first year alone, you would still say that your "noprison" policy is best. Good grief, Cliff, how many would ittake? I was trying to pick a number high enough so you would say"If that many more people died, of course I would change mymind about legalization." You didn't. That many deathswouldn't be enough. Am not sure what I can say. Doesn't make muchsense to keep raising the ante until you do say Enough. As I said, since I don't agree with the policy you are askingabout in the first place, then it doesn't make much sense toanswer such a question. And, you seem to have missed the question that I have beenasking of everyone. What evidence do you have to show that this(or any number of increased deaths) would happen? As I said, allthe evidence I have run across says the opposite -- and I havenamed that evidence. Do you have any evidence? (Apparentlynothing besides your own opinion, right?) Can we at least agree that any policy which deniesmedicine to sick people has something seriously wrong with it --both morally and practically? I agree wholeheartedly. See, we do agree on some things. Now let's proceed to thenext point. Why is this happening when everyone I talk to seemsto agree that it is wrong? Ok, an example. You state it costs an average of $450,000to imprison someone for drug abuse. Part of that cost, accordingto you, is $150,000 for building the cell. This implies thatevery drug offender has to have a new cell built for him. Allmust be in one man cells, and none of them are reused upon therelease of the drug abuser. This is clearly absurd. You stick byit. I don't have to provide a stat for what the prorated use of acell would cost to see that. It is obvious. When I see you cookstats like that, I then doubt all of your stats because of aperceived lack of intellectual integrity. Those are the costs stated by people such as Thomas Coughlin,the New York State Commissioner of Corrections. I will believehim before I believe you, particularly when you have notpresented any evidence to back up your statements. The cells may indeed be reused on the release of the drugabuser, but you seem to miss the major point here. It would seemobvious that we have not put enough of them in prison to stop theproblem. Sending a drug abuser (or better yet, a violentcriminal) out the back door when another drug abuser comes in thefront door does not accomplish anything. Therefore, the prisonpopulation will have to increase significantly before this policybecomes effective. The question is, at what level of prisonpopulation will this program have a real effect? As you havestated, you don't have a clue what the answer to that one is, soit really doesn't matter what numbers I cite. Cliff, you clearly don't understand what addiction islike. You don't understand how people become addicts. You don'tseem to be very concerned over messed up lives, or deaths, thatcould be caused by legalizing drugs. If messed up lives, anddeaths, are not the issue, than what is? If those are not theissue, than is it only the money angle? Is it the pride of yourposition? What is your motivation? Aside from the fact that you seem to have missed my positionon this issue: As I have stated, I have relatives who are addicts, includingone that I grew up with like a brother. As I have stated, while Ideplore their behavior I have to recognize that prison would notbenefit them or society. My objective is to make them wholeagain, not to destroy them by turning them into someone'sgirlfriend in a small steel room for ten or twenty years. You maylike that and think that is beneficial for you, but I do notaccept that as an appropriate remedy for the people I know. My motivation is that I would like to a) change the laws so my mother can get the medicine sheneeds. Even you have agreed that denial of medicine is wrong.(Now you need to understand why it is happening.) b) develop a policy which helps people instead of destroyingthem. c) Destroy the mythology which surrounds this issue, whichwas the original basis for these laws in the first place. It isincreasingly apparent that you do not understand how the lawscame about, and therefore have an incorrect understanding ofwhere we are today. You have asked a number of people about imprisoning30,000,000 drug abusers. I believe that all the serious folks Iknow of say they are willing to imprison enough to lower thesuffering rate. I know of no one who believes that would take30,000,000. Am not sure how many it would take. That is exactly my point. The people who support this policy(including you) have never bothered to answer (or even ask) suchbasic questions as this. THAT IS THE PROBLEM. Don't feel lonesomehere, because I have asked every government official that I haverun across and all I ever get in response is a rather stupidexpression on their face. How good can this policy be if no onehas ever thought about where we are going with it? If I ever see that the rate of human misery is, overall,going up because of putting drug abusers in prison, I would lookinto overturning at least some of the laws. Then look again, and do it more closely. I know you have rejected my descriptions of addiction, andhow addicts act. Not so. I believe you completely. As I said, that is thereason that the CU Report and others have said that drugprohbition will not work -- because the addicts do not respondrationally and, therefore, the laws don't mean much to them interms of deterrence. Obviously, the laws did not deter you. But please consider what I told Cliff (when he told me hethought I should be thrown in prison). I was a practicing addictfor 12 years, and those years are now lost forever. If you hadthrown me in prison, for the typical sentence for a first timepossessor, I _might_ have been so rattled that I would havesought help, and stopped. If you had done that in year two of thetwelve, you would have given me ten years of life back. Mona, Ireally would like those years back. Prison would have been very,very worth it. I have no doubt that you would like those years back. Wetried everything we could with law enforcement to give them toyou and our efforts did not succeed. That's why I think we shouldhave thought about it a little better and developed a plan whichmight have helped you more than this one did. As far as I cansee, the only thing this policy did for you was to make treatmentless available because all the money is being spent on prisons. Yes, we might have given you ten years of life back (assumingyou would respond to jail when you admit that the thought of yourown death did not deter you). You would have spent that ten yearslocked in a small steel and concrete room playing the role ofsomeone's girlfriend. I don't know your personal sexual tastesbut, for the addicts I have known, I would not consider that asan acceptable remedy to their problem. Most of the ones I haveseen who went through something like that wound up considerablymore screwed up than when they went in. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT01-B40-57IA087-000628-B025-177http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/seeley-1.html 206.61.184.43 19970122060810 text/html 32639HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:07:57 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:06:07 GMTContent-length: 32423               SUPERIOR COURT OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON                          COUNTY OF PIERCERALPH SEELEY,                              No. 94-2-11862-1          Plaintiff,                 PLAINTIFF's BREIF SUPPORTING                                    SUMMARY JUDGMENT OF DECLARATION     vs.                            "SCHEDULE I" UNDER RCW 69.50.204                                    IS A VIOLATION OF THE WASHINGTONTHE STATE OF WASHINGTON,                      CONSTITUTION          Defendant.                   NOTED FOR AUGUST 25, 1995________________________________             The first casualty when war comes is truth.                                   -- Hiram Warren Johnson                                        Senate speech, 1917                          I. INTRODUCTION     Plaintiff Ralph Seeley, a lawyer, brought this action pro se, seeking a declaration that the placing of marijuana in "Schedule I" in RCW 69.50.204 is a violation of the liberties guaranteed by the Washington constitution.  The plaintiff has standing to sue because he is a cancer patient, facing ongoing treatment for his disease, who has a legitimate need for marijuana to relieve suffering, and cannot legally obtain it.     The plaintiff contends that two sections of Article I of the Washington constitution should protect him from the withholding of a valuable therapeutic herb.  In brief:Persons who need opium, cocaine, morphine, barbiturates or   amphetamines have the privilege of using the drugs and immunity   from arrest with a doctor's prescription; the plaintiff needs   cannabis in its vegetable state (marijuana), and has neither   privilege nor immunity available to him.  Article I  12, the   "privileges and immunities" clause, specifically prohibits such   arbitrary classification.Article 1  32 states in full, "A frequent recurrence to fundamental   principles is essential to the security of individual right and   the perpetuity of free government."  Prohibiting physicians from   providing needed medicine to sick people has created legal and   social consequences which should be changed as a matter of   fundamental principle.     The parties agreed to the procedural course now undertaken -- to file for summary judgment with simultaneous briefs, with the losing party to seek direct review by the Supreme Court.                             II. FACTS          A. FACTS REGARDING THE PLAINTIFF'S MEDICAL HISTORY AND USE OF         MARIJUANA.     The plaintiff was diagnosed with chordoma, a rare form of bone cancer, in 1986.   He has undergone eight surgeries on his spine, two lung surgeries (including the removal of one lung), neutron radiation, electron radiation, and several bouts of chemotherapy.  Declaration of Ernest Conrad, Exhibit A; Declaration of Ralph Seeley, Exhibit B.     In the course of chemotherapy, the plaintiff became so violently ill that he considered discontinuing the treatment and allowing the disease to run its course.  At the suggestion of one of his physicians, and after discussion with other cancer patients, he smoked marijuana before the next injection of chemicals.  The result was overwhelming.  Without smoking marijuana, the plaintiff's suffering from chemotherapy included hours of agony ending with minutes of helplessly lying in his own vomit and excrement on the floor, unable to summon the energy to pull the "nurse call" cord inches away.  After smoking marijuana, the same regimen of chemotherapy resulted in a mildly uncomfortable hour followed by a restful night's sleep.  Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B.     With synthetic THC (Marinol or dronabinol) and other antiemetics, the relief was not as effective, and the side effects were much more troubling.  There are three principal problems with legal, synthetic THC as opposed to illegal, vegetable-state marijuana:The synthetic drug takes a long time to take effect -- from two to   four hours.  Smoking marijuana brings results in five to ten   minutes.The synthetic drug dose is impossible to "titrate," or adjust, and   the lowest dosage supplied results in a more debilitating "high"   than smoking marijuana.The "high" from the legal synthetic lasts about 14 hours, while it   is typically gone in four to five hours with smoked marijuana.Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B; Declaration of Grinspoon, Exhibit C.     To stay legal, then, a patient must take the synthetic drug at least two hours before the chemotherapy; then plan on at least 14 hours of being "out of commission."  If you don't take the drug two hours before the chemotherapy, the violent nausea takes over.  Id.     In the two to four days following weekly chemotherapy, the plaintiff would undergo unpredictable onsets of violent nausea and diarrhea. Trying to take the prescribed synthetic THC was futile, because the tablets were vomited up whole.  Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B.     It cannot be over-emphasized that chemotherapy-induced nausea is not "an upset tummy."  It is violent, unrelenting retching and gagging, often accompanied by an uncontrollable release of bowel control.  The plaintiff underwent adriamycin/cysplatin chemotherapy at the University of Washington, one of the most sophisticated cancer-care facilities in the nation.  Yet with legal THC, he still wound up on the treatment room floor, as described above.     The non-medical realities for the plaintiff during chemotherapy were these:During his first bout of chemotherapy, he used legal antiemetics.    He was in the second  semester of the first year of law school,   and wrote barely passing grades.During the second bout of chemotherapy (same chemo regimen), he   smoked marijuana instead of or in addition to taking prescribed   medications.  The chemotherapy lasted most of the law-school   semester, and he smoked marijuana virtually every day.  He made   the Dean's List, as well as winning an AmJur award for what his   professor stated was "the best evidence exam I have ever seen."During the first chemotherapy, the THC tablets cost 84 cents each.    Later, the cost went to more than $5 each, from the same   pharmacy.  (The plaintiff will produce the pharmacy vials at oral   argument.)  This cost increase of ___ percent coincides with the   timing of the end of a federal program for supplying sick people   with vegetable-state marijuana.  The plaintiff paid nothing for   the vegetable-state marijuana, which was donated.  (Vegetable-  state marijuana is typically free to sick people, since it costs   virtually nothing -- other than risk of imprisonment -- to   produce, and numerous people grow it for the exclusive use of   sick people.)     B. FACTS REGARDING THE LEGAL HISTORY OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA.              1. Marijuana as medicine, pre-prohibition.     As summarized from Grinspoon, Marijuana, the Forbidden Medicine, pp 1-23 (attached to Declaration of Grinspoon, Exhibit C):     Cannabis has been used as a soporific (sleep-inducement), analgesic (pain reduction), for constipation, to relieve headaches and nausea and numerous other health problems in various cultures throughout the world for more than 5,000 years.  In all those centuries, there has never been a death recorded as a result of overdose, making it one of the safest, if not the safest chemicals ever ingested in human beings for healing purposes.     The first Western physician to take notice of the plant was an English doctor who observed its use in India, and concluded that it was safe and helpful.  In a report published in 11839, he wrote that it was an effective analgesic, and that its muscle relaxant properties made it "an anticonvulsive remedy of the greatest value."     Cannabis was considered a routine part of the physician's pharmacopea in this country and others in the 18th and 19th centuries; it was even prescribed for Queen Victoria by her court physician.  It was listed in the United States Dispensatory in 1854.  Commercial cannabis preparations could be bought in drug stores.     Numerous favorable reports on the drug were published in the second half of the last century, remarking on how the drug differed from narcotics such as opium by not causing debilitating side effects such as loss of appetite and constipation, not causing addiction, and not requiring higher doses to be effective over time.     Several developments led to the discontinuance of marijuana as medicine.     First, the advent of the hypodermic syringe led to quicker results in pain relief by injection of narcotics -- not possible with cannabis because it is not soluble in water.  Next, the invention of synthetic drugs such as aspirin, chloral hydrate and barbiturates in the early part of this century had two results: First, as a plant, marijuana/hemp can't be patented, so profits drove pharmaceutical companies toward synthetics; and second, the dose could not be determined as specifically as with something such as an aspirin tablet.  (It should be noted that between 500 and 1,000 people die of aspirin-induced bleeding every year in America, and barbiturates are, of course, even more dangerous.  Thus, in hindsight, we may question the wisdom of replacing cannabis with synthetics.)     Thus, when Congress was considering the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, few voices in the medical community were raised in protest, because it appeared that no problems would be created; the act was aimed at recreational users.  The film Reefer Madness may be a joke to sophisticated people today, but it was a genuine effort on the part of the government to sway the public about "dangerous and addictive" marijuana at the time.     The effect of the Act was to make obtaining marijuana for medicinal use so administratively burdensome that its use fell off to virtually nonexistent, and the drug was removed from the United States Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary in 1941.              2. Marijuana as medicine, post-prohibition.     Two social forces converged in the 1960s which have led to reconsideration of marijuana as medicine.  One was the "coming out of the closet" of recreational marijuana users, which led to the discovery by some ill, recreational users that smoking it helped more and cost less than prescribed medicines.  This led to a fund of "anecdotal evidence" that marijuana was effective in the treatment of glaucoma and spasticity from diseases such as multiple sclerosis.  The other social force was the advent of chemotherapy for the attempted cure of cancer.  (Since the plaintiff has standing as a cancer patient, this brief will primarily deal with that aspect of the issue.)     Chemotherapy is, in a word, poison.  Nurses who administer the chemicals wear protective clothing, face shields, and doubled rubber gloves, then inject the chemical directly into the patient's blood.  Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B.     The concept of the treatment (roughly the same as radiation) is that the poison kills faster-dividing cells before it kills normally-growing cells.  Since tumors are virtually defined by their characteristic runaway, uncontrolled growth, theoretically an amount of poison can be administered which kills the tumor but not the "host organism" (in this case, the plaintiff).  The patient can only withstand a given amount of the therapy before dying of the cure, and in the process, the patient gets very sick, as described above, and tends to lose appetite and the ability to hold down food and digest it just when doing so to maintain strength and fight off the effects of the poison is most critical.     A study by the Institute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences released in 1981 noted the potential for therapeutic use and recommended further research:       Until 10 or 15 years ago, there was virtually no        systematic, rigorously controlled research on the human        health-related effects of marijuana and its major        constituents.  Even now, when standardized marijuana and        pure synthetic cannabinoids are available for experimental        studies, and good qualitative methods exist. . .well-       designed studies on human beings are relatively few.                             * * *       Our major recommendation is that there be a greatly        intensified and more comprehensive program of research into        the effects of marijuana on the health of the American        people."Marijuana and Health," U.S. Institute of Medicine, Washington D.C., prepared for National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MD, Dec. 1981, pages 4-5.     Despite such recommendations by such a prestigious body of scientists, little research has been done, and the federal government has erected one roadblock after another to prevent the gathering of legitimate, scientific evidence, discussed further below.     From the scientific studies available despite the efforts of the federal government, smoked marijuana has been shown to be an extremely effective and inexpensive remedy to counter the truly horrific effects of undergoing cancer chemotherapy.  Affidavit of Grinspoon, Exhibit C.  It is, however, illegal.              3. State statutory law.     Washington adopted the Uniform Controlled Substances Act in 1971, under which drugs are listed in "schedules," allegedly depending upon their therapeutic value and the potential safety.  RCW 69.50.  The "scheduling" of the drugs is allegedly done by the Board of Pharmacy.  However, this is largely a fiction, since the schedules simply follow the federal model, as provided under RCW 69.50.201(a)(2); 201(e).  If any drug has been scheduled differently in Washington than by the federal government, it remains mysterious to this plaintiff as to what that drug might be.     Marijuana is listed as a "Schedule I" drug, meaning that (1) it has no currently accepted therapeutic use, (2) has a high potential for abuse, and (3) is not safe to use under medical supervision.  RCW 69.50.203.  (It is listed for some mysterious reason as a ""hallucinogenic substance." RCW 69.50.204(c)(14)).  Synthetic THC, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, morphine and opium are Schedule II drugs, meaning they have "high potential for abuse," "currently accepted medical use,", and "the abuse of the substance may lead to severe psychological or physical dependence."   RCW 69.50.205, 206.  Barbiturates are Schedule III drugs.  RCW 69.50.208.  In simple terms, doctors may prescribe synthetic THC, cocaine, morphine, amphetamine, methamphetamine, barbiturates and opium, but may not prescribe marijuana.     Numerous states, including Washington, enacted legislation to provide marijuana to medically certified patients as a combination of experimental and compassionate legislation.  The Washington Controlled Substances Therapeutic Research Act became law in 1979 (RCW 69.51), stating       The legislature finds that recent research has shown that        the use of marijuana may alleviate the nausea and ill        effects of cancer chemotherapy and glaucoma.  The        legislature further finds that there is a need for further        research and experimentation regarding the use of marijuana        under strictly controlled circumstances.      The statute created a board of physicians to administer the program, in conjunction with federal agencies.  It was amended in 1989 for "housekeeping" reasons (changing "department" to "board" and so forth), but long before, in 1981, for reasons that defy explanation on the surface, the legislature killed the program by not funding it.  Exhibit D, letter to plaintiff from Donald Williams, Executive Director, Board of Pharmacy.     The alleged reason is that the research proved that THC was effective, and THC was synthesized and marketed as dronabinol or Marinol, therefore no further need for vegetable-state "smokeable" marijuana was required.     For reasons set forth in Section A above, and in the Declaration of Grinspoon, Exhibit C, the contention is absurd.               4. State case law.     When Samuel Diana was arrested in 1977 for possession of a small amount of marijuana, he argued that it helped him cope with his multiple sclerosis better than prescribed medications.  The Court of Appeals held that necessity is always a potential defense to a crime, and remanded the case for determination, by a preponderance of the evidence, whether (1) the defendant reasonably believed his use of marijuana was necessary to minimize the effects of his disease; (2) whether the benefits derived from the drug's use are greater than the harm sought to be prevented by the controlled substance law; and (3) that no other drug is as effective in minimizing the effects of the disease. State v. Diana, 24 Wn. App. 908, 604 P.2d 1312 (1979).      With the current state of the literature on the subject, (especially since the release of the report of the DEA's Chief Administrative Law Judge in 1988, discussed further below), any person with glaucoma, multiple sclerosis (or other spasticity problems), chemotherapy-induced nausea or the AIDS "wasting syndrome" has no problem whatsoever meeting the first and third of those, leaving judges only to grapple with the issues of relative harm.  The result is that described in the Declaration of Andrew Subin, Exhibit E: Persons who need cannabis for medicinal purposes end up using it quasi-legally, after being arrested, posting bail, paying an attorney, and having their supply confiscated and not returned.  See also, State v. Cole, 74 Wn. App. 571, ___ P. 2d ___ (1994), in which (1) Division II specifically adopted the legal reasoning of Division III in State v. Diana, (2) the court held that a marijuana user's own testimony is more than a "scintilla" of evidence, and requires the issue of his reasonableness in using the drug to go to the jury, and (3) in the "facts" section of the opinion, it is established that a superior court judge stated, "I hope they get you a prescription for marijuana if that's the only thing that works. . .[y]ou cannot in the future grow marijuana for your own consumption without a prescription."  Cole at 573.  This demonstrates the sort of misunderstanding among judges exemplified in the Declaration of Subin, Exhibit E, and which results in unintentional but real injustice on sick and helpless people.           This bizarre state of affairs is a keystone to the legal arguments below concerning both the privileges and immunities clause and the "frequent recurrence to fundamental principles."              5. The federal farce.     The history of medical marijuana and federal law over the past three decades has resulted in untold unnecessary suffering among some of society's most sick and helpless individuals and their families; has diminished respect for the rule of law; and has resulted in appointed bureaucrats corrupting the system Congress set in place.     The suborning of the rule of law to the hysteria of the "war on drugs" reads like Franz Kafka interpreting  "Through the Looking Glass."  It goes approximately like this:1972: The National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws   (NORML) petitioned the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs   (precursor to the DEA) to reclassify medical marijuana.  The   agency refused to act on the petition.  NORML appealed to the   U.S. Court of Appeals, District of Columbia Circuit.1974: The court held that the agency's position had no merit, and   that the petition should be processed.  NORML v. Ingersoll, 497   F.2d 654 (D.C. Cir. 1974).1975: The DEA (replacing the BNDD) dismissed the petition without   hearing testimony.  NORML appealed.1977: The Court of Appeals reversed the dismissal, criticizing the   DEA for not providing scientific and medical evaluations as   required by law, which were to be provided by the Department of   Health, Education and Welfare (HEW).  NORML v. DEA, 559 F.2d 735   (DC Cir. 1977).1979: Unreasonable delays resulted in NORML filing motions to   compel, against both DEA and HEW.  Facing sanctions, HEW produced   a response.  DEA then dismissed the petition once again with no   hearings.  NORML appealed again.1980: The Court of Appeals for the third time reprimanded the DEA   and affirmed NORML's right to a "full and fair" hearing. 1981: NORML filed another motion to compel.  Within three days the   agencies announced the approval of synthetic THC   (Marinol/dronabinol), and promised a "legislative type hearing"   would be forthcoming.       1982: With no hearing yet held, NORML filed yet another        motion to compel.  The Court of Appeals issued a Mandatory        Progression Order requiring the DEA and HEW to provide        them with 90-day progress notes.1986: Hearing procedures were finally set.1987: Written affidavits, evidence and exhibits filed.  Hearings   were held in New Orleans and San Francisco.1988: Further evidentiary hearings were held in Washington, D.C.    Oral arguments were held before the DEA's Chief Administrative   Law Judge, Francis L. Young.  In September, Judge Young issued   the 68-page "Opinion And Recommended Ruling, Findings Of Fact,   Conclusion Of Law And Decision Of Administrative Law Judge In The   Matter Of Marijuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket No. 86-22, U.S.   Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration."    (Hereinafter, "Young Opinion.") Judge Young concluded:       The evidence in this record clearly shows that marijuana        has been accepted  as capable of relieving the distress of        great numbers of very ill people, and doing so with safety        under medical supervision.  It would be unreasonable,        arbitrary and capricious for the DEA to continue to stand        between those sufferers and the benefits of this substance        in light of the evidence in this record.  Young Opinion, page 68.  Judge Young recommended unequivocally   that marijuana be rescheduled as a Schedule II therapeutic drug.    Id.1989: The head bureaucrat at the DEA rejected Judge Young's   recommendation and refused to reclassify marijuana,   characterizing its medical use as "a cruel and dangerous hoax."    54 Federal Register 53767-53785, Dec. 29, 1989, p. 53784.  NORML   and the Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics immediately appealed.1991: The Court remanded the case to the DEA, noting the circularity   of the alleged logic: The DEA administrator refused to reschedule   the drug because, inter alia, it did not meet the requirement for   "general availability of the substance" and "recognition of its   clinical use in generally accepted pharmacopoeia, medical   references, journals and textbooks," and for "recognition and use   of the substance by a substantial segment of the medical   practitioners in the United States."  The court pointed out the   impossibility of showing that a drug enjoys "availability" or   "use" when it is illegal for doctors to obtain it by virtue of it   being a Schedule I drug.  Likewise, the drug is not going to show   up in any manual or pharmacopoeia if it is illegal to prescribe   and illegal to possess.  Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics v.   DEA, 930 F.2d 936 (DC Cir. 1991).1992: DEA head bureaucrat Robert Bonner issued a new Denial of   Petition leaving out the circular logic, but asserting boldly and   in direct contradiction of his Chief Administrative Law Judge's   opinion, that his response was based on common sense:       Smoking causes lung cancer and other deadly diseases.         Americans take their medicines in pills, solutions, sprays,        shots, drops, creams and sometimes suppositories, but never        by smoking.  Final Rule, Denial of Petition for Marijuana Rescheduling, March   18, 1992.     In summary: Congress created an agency with the power to "schedule" drugs and to change the scheduling as new information became available; the agency refused to follow the mandates of Congress by investigating new information until forced by citizens to do so through court action over a span of two decades; the recommendation to make the change based on research and information was ignored by a bureaucrat relying on his own belief, superstition, or other imponderable reality.     During most of the above-described decades, the federal government had in place a program by which some qualified sick people could obtain marijuana on a compassionate/experimental basis.  It was discontinued, and no new applicants are permitted to obtain the drug.1995 - The final irony:     Through the decades, the feds have been citing a "lack of scientific evidence," especially since the approval of synthetic THC -- i.e., "there is no scientific evidence that the benefits of smoked marijuana are superior to those of synthetic THC."  (This Court may expect virtual litany of such nonsense from opposing counsel as these briefs are written and filed.)     Dr. Donald Abrams of the University of California San Francisco spent three years obtaining the approval of the Food and Drug Administration for a study on that exact issue, regarding the effect of the two regimens (smoked versus oral) on the AIDS "wasting syndrome."  In April of this year, the federal government rejected the proposal by refusing to supply the marijuana for the experiment.  Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F.     Thus, the government contends that the prohibition of marijuana as medicine is justified based on lack of scientific evidence, while prohibiting the gathering of scientific evidence. This circular and cynical manipulation of logic and legal argument at the expense of suffering and helpless people is another cornerstone of the "fundamental principles" argument set forth below.                    III. LAW AND LEGAL ARGUMENT     The plaintiff is petitioning this Court for equitable relief, by way of a declaration that his right to be free of suffering is being unreasonably withheld in violation of the "privileges and immunities" clause of the Washington Constitution, the "frequent recurrence to fundamental principles" clause, or both.     The Court's power to issue such a declaration is set forth in Article 4,  6 of the Constitution of the State of Washington, and RCW 7.24, the Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act.     A. THE WASHINGTON CONSTITUTION CONTAINS SAFEGUARDS TO        INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY NOT FOUND IN THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION.     It is well-established law that the U.S. Constitution's Bill of Rights, tacked on as an afterthought years after the Constitution itself was ratified, protects individual liberty to a lesser extent than Washington's constitution, in which the "Declaration of rights" is the first section.  Article I  1 states unequivocally that       All political power is inherent in the people, and        governments. . .are established to protect and maintain        individual rights.     The Supreme Court of Washington has held that even where the language of the two constitutions is similar, greater protection may be found under the state's constitution.  State v. Gunwall, 106 Wn.2d 54, 720 P.2d 808 (1986).     The plaintiff asks no more than to have this Court protect his individual right to be free of needless physical suffering, now being caused by his own government.     B. THE PLAINTIFF IS ENTITLED TO A DECLARATORY JUDGMENT UNDER         ARTICLE 1  12 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE OF         WASHINGTON, WHICH PROHIBITS SPECIAL PRIVILEGES AND         IMMUNITIES.               1. Washington's "privileges and immunities" clause is           entitled to a more liberal interpretation to protect           individual rights than the federal constitution's           counterpart.     The "privileges and immunities" clause of the state's constitution is analyzed in the same manner as the "equal protection" clause of the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. State v. Smith, 117 Wn.2d 263, 814 P.2d 652 (1991).  That three-prong analysis involves "levels of scrutiny" which are typically determinative of outcome, outlined in Smith at pages 277-79:"Strict scrutiny" is required when a statute affects a "suspect   class or a fundamental right."  A law may be upheld only if it is   "necessary to accomplish a compelling state interest.""Heightened" or "intermediate" scrutiny typically applies to gender-  based classifications, but has been held to apply when the   challenged law affects both an important right(such as liberty)   and a semi-suspect class not accountable for its status (such as   the poor).  The test is that the law must be seen as "furthering   a substantial interest of the state."Minimal scrutiny is applied absent any reason for applying the   higher levels.  The test is whether a "rational relationship"   exists between the challenged classification and a "legitimate   state interest."  The classification must be "purely arbitrary"   to overcome the presumption of constitutionality.     In State v. Gunwall, supra., the Washington Supreme Court set out what have become known as "the Gunwall factors," six areas of analysis required to be raised and briefed before the state's Supreme Court will consider invoking higher standards of personal liberty protection under the state constitution, compared to that provided by the U.S. Constitution.      In State v. Smith, supra, Justice Utter's concurring opinion provided a complete analysis of the state's privileges and immunities clause as contrasted to the 14th Amendment analysis above, and concluded that all six Gunwall factors were met, requiring an independent analysis to determine whether a challenged law violates Article 1,  12.  While the majority rejected his analysis based on Oregon constitutional analysis (our privileges and immunities clause was derived from Oregon's), there was no statement by the majority that Washington's privileges and immunities clause does not provide a higher level of protection for individual rights than the 14th Amendment, only that "several recent decisions hold[] that the privileges and immunities clause and the equal protection clause are substantially identical and considered by this court as one issue.  We decline to interpret Const. art 1  12 independently of the Fourteenth Amendment in this decision as well."     The plaintiff adopts Justice Utter's analysis by incorporation, and has attached a copy of the opinion for the convenience of the Court, as Exhibit G. Click here for part 2